Tuesday, 12 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I hope you used the weekend to touch base with the electorate.

I have two matters to communicate. One is that I have received some complaints that some of the committees are not conducting themselves courteously with regard to people who have been invited to meet them. Sometimes these people have to wait for long periods. I would advise that if the committee is not ready to meet those they have invited, they should let them know so that they do not come to wait for many hours. I also appeal to the members to really be courteous to other citizens in the conduct of our work.

Secondly, I would like to inform the House that I have temporarily requested the Public Accounts Committee to hold on with issues of the audit report on the Office of the Prime Minister. I received a letter from the Director of Public Prosecutions, especially concerning when the drivers came here. Maybe I should read the letter to you so that you understand the context in which we are working. It is dated 6 February 2013:

“I have read an article in today’s newspaper on page 5 under the headline, ‘OPM drivers deny taking Shs 6 billion fuel’...” - it is underlined - “According to the article, MPs on the Public Accounts Committee have been hearing testimonies from witnesses Salim Ssebyala, David Munchigi, Hussein Katumwa and others. The two drivers mentioned in the article are witnesses in the case quoted above, which is before the Chief Magistrate at the Anti-Corruption Division, Her Worship Irene Akankwasa, and is set for hearing on April 16 2013. We have, however, made an application to court to have the hearing date readjusted to a nearer date.

The same article also goes ahead to state that one Hussein Katumwa, manager of New Caltex Ntinda Petrol Station, appeared before the same committee. Katumwa Hussein is accused No.4 in the same case above.

I am of the opinion that our witnesses and accused persons appearing before the committee on the same case, which is already before court, is highly prejudicial to our case. The witnesses are giving the same evidence they are to give in court and the same goes to the accused. The effect of the accused persons giving their defence before the committee will greatly affect our case as well.

For ease of reference, I have attached the charge sheet of the case before the Chief Magistrate. I have also attached the indictment and summary of the case for the case before Justice Wangutusi where hearing is proceeding. Eight witnesses have so far testified. The case is adjourned to 14th and 15th February for prosecution to call the last four witnesses.

According to the same article, the handwriting expert’s report that we have as part of our evidence was being discussed. The Director of CID has since received a letter from hon. Mwiru, the Vice-Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, formally asking for the same handwriting expert’s report. Attached is a copy of the letter.

Rt Hon. Speaker, as you know, proceedings before the Public Accounts Committee of an on-going criminal court case will certainly be prejudicial to the prosecution case that we are handling in court. I am informed by Prisons authorities that the same committee has summoned accused No. 1 in the same case, one Kazinda, to also appear before the committee.

I write to request you, Rt Hon. Speaker, to guide the committee not to continue proceedings that are clearly prejudicial to our on-going court criminal proceedings. It should be left to the courts to determine cases instead of having parallel hearings.
The fight against corruption will be successful if we coordinate our operations, avoid prejudicial overlaps and allow the different institutions to play their roles.”

It is signed by Richard Butera, DPP and copied to the Attorney-General, the Chairperson Public Accounts Committee, Commissioner-General of Prisons, IGP and Director of CID.

I did also ask my office to check whether the hearings were actually taking place and they presented me with a court list for hearings on 13th, 14th and so on. My view is that we temporarily hold on until these hearings are completed. I hope they will be heard this week as they have indicated, then we can resume. Otherwise, really, I think that the matters would be sub judice in the circumstances. Therefore, I wanted to inform the House about the action I have taken and request the committee to hold on and not to have further proceedings on that report of the Auditor-General. I am asking the Clerk to lay this for me on the Table so that Members can look at it.

2.57
THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I start by wishing you a happy new year. I do not think we have met. We have only crisscrossed to find that you have come from this other place and people are telling us, “greetings from your Speaker; we have been together in Monrovia.” I received the greetings.

I just want to seek your guidance on the procedural matter that you have updated Parliament about, more particularly your letter which was received by my office yesterday, containing the same statement that you have read. In your advice, you did guide that we hold on until the courts have expedited and disposed of the cases. 

The type of procedural guidance I would like to seek from you, Madam Speaker, is: what will be the essence after courts of law have pronounced themselves to continue with work here? At the end of the day, I imagine that if the courts of law have acquitted the suspects or they have been convicted, all the other work that the Public Accounts Committee will do will be frivolous. So, there will be no need for us to really to proceed.

What will be the essence of our proceeding if we make recommendations and part of our recommendations to the Executive is to investigate and take the matter to the Judiciary for arbitration and they will have already done that? Wouldn’t it be proper that we just take it that the matter is sub judice and for the time being we forget about it and we continue with other business without even thinking about what we will do after courts have pronounced themselves? I find that we will be in a very difficult situation after courts have pronounced themselves. That will be the end really of that particular probe by the Public Accounts Committee.

I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when I was sending that report to you, I had given you two weeks and I asked you to act expeditiously so that we do not get into this problem. So, I had really wanted to finish our side quickly so that we leave other bodies to their work. I am caught by the Rules of Procedure now. People have been charged and the cases are on-going; what do I do? This is what the Rules of Procedure tell me.

MR WILFRED NIWAGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Constitutional Court - sometime I think in 2005; I do not have the quotation here - literally outlawed a criminal trial by ambush. Now in a criminal trial, counsel for the accused person is allowed to get not only statements of witnesses the State intends to adduce to bring in a criminal trial but also look at the exhibits and the like. So, there is no more trial by ambush. 

Now, in view of your position and guidance, since whatever is before the court now and in police custody can be accessed by the defence lawyers of the accused person, what prejudice would it cause to have proceedings in PAC parallel with the proceedings in court in view of that position?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you can amend the rules and remove the sub judice rule, I would be happy. That is the rule we have. What do you want me to do about it? These are our rules. It says that if people have been charged and proceedings have begun, that is sub judice; it is in black and white.

3.02
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the dilemma you are in. It is all about what seems to be a conflict between our Rules of Procedure and the way we work. However, I would like to raise an issue. 

When you look at Article 164 (1) of the Constitution, which I imagine is superior to any other law including our Rules of Procedure, it says, “The Permanent Secretary or the accounting officer in charge of a Ministry or department shall be accountable to Parliament for the funds in that Ministry or department.” This is a constitutional mandate. 

The Auditor-General’s reports are reports to Parliament but what is happening is that the Police grab the Auditor-General’s report, which is a report of Parliament, and before Parliament disposes it off, it uses it as its material for investigation. So, do the Police have powers to use our material and therefore hinder our constitutional mandate when we are performing our duties under the Constitution? All the reports that the Auditor-General issued are the ones being used for purposes of investigation by the Police, which reports have not been disposed of by us and they are our material. 

So, Madam Speaker, I would suggest that maybe you need to have a few heads together - the legal heads in the department and others - to see how you can sort out this problem. If the trend is that when Parliament is trying to perform under the Constitution then somebody runs to court and then it will be sub judice, this Parliament will not do any work. In fact, they will even come up with civil cases. (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, the Shadow Attorney-General. I would like to inform this House that the Public Accounts Committee had scheduled to begin a probe into financial impropriety involving Shs 10 billion under the Presidential Initiative on Markets. However, if you read today’s New Vision on page 5, the Police is already sniffing into the same matter. That, therefore, means it is a no-go area for us. That really ties our hands. That is the information I wanted to share with you.

MR KATUNTU: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the matter is going to get worse. (Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the lawyer and MP. In matters of crime, what takes precedence - parliamentary procedure or criminal procedure? If somebody is involved in a crime, must the crime investigators wait for Parliament to do its business? 

MR KATUNTU: Really, I think there should be a substantive Attorney-General who should answer those questions. (Interruption)

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, I want some guidance and clarification from the Shadow Attorney-General because he has mentioned something very important for this House. He said if we begin on a report, for example today we have the Dura report before us, and somebody goes to court, it becomes sub judice. We need to be guided; if a matter has begun in Parliament, can court now take on that matter? It is like first come first served basis. Is it that if Parliament is discussing an issue then court should not come in, or if a matter is in court then Parliament should not come in? What is the procedure?

MR KATUNTU: As I said, I perform the functions of the Shadow Attorney-General but in case there is a problem the other side, I think we should be guided by the Constitution. The Constitution is the supreme law of the land and any other law, which includes our Rules of Procedure, if they are inconsistent with the Constitution then they are null and void to the extent of that inconsistency.

The Constitution has mandated Parliament under Article 164 that accounting officers, permanent secretaries of ministries and departments are accountable to Parliament and Parliament is carrying out its constitutional mandate. The Rules of Procedure cannot limit the constitutional mandate of Parliament. That is why when you read our Rules of Procedure, they say “in the opinion of the Speaker”. So, the Speaker should be able to use her discretionary powers to balance interests - public interests, private interests - and direct or guide accordingly. It is not that the sub judice rule is cast in stone. For the DPP to write and say that once other organs are doing their job Parliament should not do its job, I think is wrong because we are not subordinate to the office of the DPP.

Madam Speaker, what I would request is that we seek to balance both interests such that both our mandates are achieved and maybe we protect the interests of those who could run to court? To answer hon. Kabwegyere, the sub judice rule does not only apply to criminal matters; it also applies to civil matters. Assuming anybody is mentioned in this report or in the Auditor-General’s report and the first thing he does is to run to court, what happens? If you are to interpret that rule literally, then that matter will be sub judice and Parliament will never perform its duties under the Constitution if we are to proceed like that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know where the Police gets their investigations from. I do not know whether it is from the Auditor-General or not, but let me read for you our Rules of Procedure.

Rule 64(1): “Subject to sub-rule (5) of this rule, a Member shall not refer to any particular matter... 

(2) A matter shall be considered sub-judice if it refers to active criminal or civil proceedings and in the opinion of the Speaker, the discussion of such matter is likely to prejudice its fair determination

(3) In determining whether a criminal or civil proceeding is active, the following shall apply-
(a) criminal proceedings shall be deemed to be active when a charge has been made or a summons to appear has been issued by court;
(b) criminal proceedings shall be deemed to have ceased to be active when they are concluded by verdict and sentence or charges have been withdrawn...”

What do you want me to do? They have been charged and they are in court. I have a hearing notice and I have the cause list. So, if you want to review the rules, I think we may have to sit as a rules committee and review them but for now, I am caught by this. So, temporarily, hold on.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW US$ 34,050,000 FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (IDB) FINANCING ENHANCED NATIONAL FOOD SECURITY THROUGH INCREASED RICE PRODUCTION PROJECT

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMINC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table a proposal by Government to borrow US$ 34,050,000 from the Islamic Development Bank to finance  enhanced national food security through increased rice production project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Request is sent to the Committee on National Economy to peruse and report back.

REQUEST TO BORROW US$ 12,000,000 FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) AND ANOTHER US$ 15,000,000 FROM THE OPEC FUND FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (OFID) TO FINANCE THE MASAKA – BUKAKATA ROAD PROJECT


3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMINC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on behalf of Government a proposal to borrow US$ 12,000,000 from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa and another US$ 15,000,000 from the OPEC Fund for International Development to finance the Masaka-Bukakata road project. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: The request is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO US$ 9.75 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT (IDB) TO SUPPORT THE SCALING UP AND REPLICATION OF MILLENIUM VILLAGES PROJECT (MVP) IN UGANDA

3.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMINC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a proposal to borrow up to US$ 9.75 million from the Islamic Development Bank to support the scaling up and replication of the Millennium Villages Project in Uganda. I beg to lay.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I happen to have been in this House one time when we were dealing with these loan requests. The Minister for Education wanted to borrow money and we raised issues about some loans which were obtained by some ministries and actually, they were not put to use. 

I remember you ruled that Government comes up with a status of all the loans which had been granted. You ruled very clearly that before we pass other loans requests -  because we had refused that loan request - we should actually receive that status report. However, I see the same trend ever since we resumed Parliament. We seem just to be on the same trend before they comply with your ruling, Madam Speaker. So, I am seeking your guidance whether it is proper for us to proceed before we get the report on the status of the loans. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think we can receive them but decline to handle them until then. Chairman of National Economy, can you report.

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Stephen Mukitale): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, it was actually our committee report before Christmas which requested that the Minister of Finance comes on the Floor to own the report she attached on the Budget of the performance of loans and grants. We further pursued this and the books were delivered here before Christmas. Unfortunately, the different ministries did not come to present why different loans, close to US$ 3.5 million, were committed and not disbursed. So, that has not come. 

The booklet, for those who did not get it, is still at the reception. I would like to request that this matter is given urgency and that all ministries and not only Ministry of Finance should explain themselves. For us as a committee, what we are doing is what we call the debt sustainability report, which we think we are going to have in less than two weeks from now, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Chairman, what is that booklet you are talking about?

MR MUKITALE: We requested, and it is part of procedure, that every time the Minister of Finance presents the Budget she must also give us a performance of loans report. So, that booklet is called “Performance of Loans, Grants and Guarantees” and it was actually issued by the minister, hon. Maria Kiwanuka. 

Unfortunately, it is not enough to just give us that booklet. It is important that every ministry mentioned should go ahead and explain. It was laid on the Table but not presented. So, what we need is a detailed presentation to allow every ministry to present but also Members to debate and then we can discuss it.

THE SPEAKER: Who is supposed to present it?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Your ruling was to the effect that there were loans - I gave an example; Parliament approved money in 2007/2008 for the construction of Napier Market and Kimaka Market but there were no markets which were constructed. The money disappeared within the ministry. When we raised it, we agreed that they give us all loan requests which have been passed by Parliament from that time but you seem to be talking about just one financial year. May I get some clarification in respect of that?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, the report I am talking about is about all the loans; it does exist and a few minutes from now, I am going to get a copy from the reception. What I would like to insist is that Ministry of Finance, working with all sectors mentioned there, is requested to account as to why they are delaying the different implementation of different loans. [Mr Nandala-Mafabi: “Performance is different”] Possibly! The Leader of the Opposition is not audible when he is not on the microphone. 

What I am saying is that it is important, it is critical and we requested for this report before I went for recess but it did not come out. So, what we are doing as a committee, because it was not brought we are trying to analyse the debt portfolio and see if it is sustainable. However, it would have been proper for the ministries to come and report to us.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to sympathise with the minister in charge of borrowing because this is a serious matter. Arising from your guidance that for now we can receive these loan requests but decline to handle them later, at the same time we have committed these loan requests to the Committee on National Economy, may I know whether the minister can give us a timeframe within which to come up with the status of all the previous loans before you can come again to start presenting anything new? Such a timeframe would then determine when this new loan request can be handled. I think we need to get a real timeframe from Government as to when we shall get such a detailed report on the status of the previous loans, grants and guarantees.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we first started, the Committee on Appointments had come here with a proposal to create a committee on implementation of loans but it was rejected. These are some of the things we had in mind. Minister, when are you bringing the performance of the loans because we directed you?

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, within four weeks from today. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. There is a difference between the performance of the loan and the real results. You can get all the money from the World Bank and it gets over and that means the loan has performed 100 per cent, but the real results are not there. We have a case of the fisheries, for example, where we borrowed US$ 34 million for landing sites and other issues; the money was finished but there are no landing sites. So, from what you are talking about, they will tell you the loan performed 100 per cent when there is nothing on the ground. So, we need both of them.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have now given an assurance that in one month, you are going to bring the report on the performance of the loans.

Honourable members, let us remit the request to the Committee on National Economy but minister, you should know that the sooner you bring that information, the better because it will also activate this.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I have an additional request. Accompanying the three loan requests, I received a copy of a letter from the Ministry of Finance withdrawing the Spanish radar loan. The Committee on National Economy went to receive this loan request. We had problems with it, not because Spain belittled Uganda but because we found out that the Ministry of Defence and Meteorology Department were not reconciling with Civil Aviation Authority and Works. So, they have formally written to withdraw. 

I want to request through you, Madam Speaker, that the Clerk avails it space on the Order Paper so that it is formally withdrawn. Right now, it looks like it is business in Parliament when actually it is not. So, it should also have been brought here so that Ministry of Finance withdraws it formally because we have no business with it.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, thank you. Honourable members, join me in welcoming pupils and teachers of Teletubbies Nursery and Primary School from Konge, Makindye Division. Please stand up. They are represented by hon. Kyanjo and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. Thank you. (Applause) There is another group but I do not know who they are. I will let you know.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO UPHOLD THE COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (CPA) AS AN ORGANISATION FOR THE PROMOTION OF DEMOCRACY, DEVELOPMENT AND INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION

3.24
MRS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to uphold the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) as an organisation for the promotion of democracy, development and international co-operation. I am moving this under rule 47 of our Rules of Procedure.

“WHEREAS the CPA is an organisation of Commonwealth Parliamentarians which, irrespective of gender, race, religion or culture, is united by a common interest, respect for the rule of law, individual rights and freedoms and pursuit of the positive ideals of parliamentary democracy;

AND WHEREAS the CPA promotes the advancement of parliamentary democracy by enhancing knowledge and understanding of democratic governance and seeks to build an informed parliamentary community able to deepen the Commonwealth democratic commitment and to further co-operation among parliaments and legislatures;

AWARE that the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association programmes provide the sole means of regular consultation among Commonwealth members, foster co-operation and understanding and promote the study of and respect for good parliamentary practices;

ALSO AWARE that Uganda is an active member of the Commonwealth including organs like the CPA, which was significant in hosting the CPA Conference in 1967, CHOGM in 2007, IPU in 2012 and hosting many other regional meetings of the Commonwealth; 

CONSIDERING that as part of the initiative to enhance the work and status of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, it was proposed by the CPA Executive Committee at its meeting in Sri Lanka in September that on or near the Commonwealth Day, which is 11th March, each branch of the CPA should be encouraged to hold a debate in their legislative Chamber relating to the Commonwealth, CPA, the draft Charter of the Commonwealth or any Commonwealth related topics;   

NOTING that the primary purpose of holding such a debate is to promote the Commonwealth amongst member nations and to educate our citizens on the principles and values of the Commonwealth, and with the new draft charter having been approved by ministers at its meeting in September 2012 there is greater need to promote its articles and its significance on the Commonwealth citizenry;

FURTHER NOTING that parliamentarians have the capacity to influence and to advance the common cause of CPA since debates held in different parliaments will enhance the reputation of the CPA as a predominate member of the Commonwealth family;

COGNISANT of the fact that Parliament as a legislative body commands significant attention from the public and the media and should be utilised to a great extent to illuminate the image of the Association;

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED THAT:

1. 	Uganda shall continue as an active member of the CPA and shall continue to participate in its activities.

2. 	Government of Uganda recognises the 11th of March as the CPA day.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? Okay, it is seconded by hon. Abia.

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, first of all, I want to thank you for the opportunity. Uganda, as one of the countries in the CPA, has managed to be active in all the activities of the Commonwealth. It is true - (Interruption)

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, before the honourable member justifies the motion, I would like to know the merits because as far as we are concerned, Uganda has been an active member of the CPA and we have not had any hiccups since we became members. We are a bit surprised as to why this motion comes at this stage and yet we have not had any problems in our membership of the CPA. Maybe we needed to get a justification for this motion; what value-addition are we making? (Laughter)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am equally surprised because Uganda has been a member of the Commonwealth for all these years and Uganda has been participating in all the proceedings of the Commonwealth. Why is this motion coming up now? Was there a threat that Uganda was going to be thrown out of the Commonwealth? Can we be briefed on that? (Laughter)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. According to my past knowledge of the CPA, Madam Speaker, you have been in this Parliament and you are one of the people to be commended for putting up a strong voice that Uganda becomes part of the CPA for a very long time. When you look at the prayers, honourable colleagues, there is nothing this motion is seeking to address. The Member who is moving this, with due respect, has been a member of the CPA as far as I recall and this has never happened anywhere that we come here, take off time and just come to debate what is obvious. So, I am seeking guidance; what is this motion seeking to achieve?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, if we were a little bit patient, we would have listened to the mover of the motion which has been seconded by a Member of Parliament. After she has presented the justification, then Members of Parliament can come up and say, “We do not see anything in this and so we cannot pass the resolution.” But to suffocate her from formally moving a resolution which has been seconded, I think is not procedurally correct. So, I beg that we listen to her and probably the seconder and then we either throw out the motion or support it.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, CPA is an association of very many countries; if any of those countries were to suspect that Uganda doubts its membership, it would create some uncertainty in our relationship with these countries. So, I think the mover should explain before she continues why it is important that there should be a resolution.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not want to anticipate what the honourable member is going to say but I know that when we attend these meetings, we are encouraged to go back home and cause a debate on some of the resolutions we have had. I believe that is what she is doing. Please, proceed hon. Seninde.

MRS SENINDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Dear colleagues, if you look at the prayers, one of them says, “Uganda will continue to be an active member.” It does not say “Uganda is going to become an active member.” If you could only bear with me. 

In the Commonwealth, we promote issues of good governance and of fighting corruption. So, when I say that we shall continue to be active in the activities of the Commonwealth, I think I am on the right track because we want to continuously be active in the issues of good governance and of fighting corruption. Those are the issues that are affecting us. So when I say that, I think I am not wrong.

Secondly, my dear colleagues – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members!. Please, listen to each other.

MRS SENINDE: Secondly, on the issue of 11th March, we shall be commemorating this day. So, dear colleagues, you have to be in the know that on 11th March we shall have activities as the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Uganda Chapter – (Interjections) - I want you to listen to this, dear colleagues. Madam Speaker, I beg for your protection.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please, proceed. 

MRS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, this motion is requesting for two things: That we continuously struggle to ensure that we are active members of the CPA and also to recognise 11th March as the CPA Day. Madam Speaker, on the CPA Day, I want us to understand – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please!

MRS SENINDE: The Commonwealth Day takes place on the second Monday of March every year and the purpose is to promote global issues, international co-operation and the work of Commonwealth organisations like our CPA. Although CPA undertakes a number of activities on this day, there are always opportunities to do more. There are quite a number of things we can initiate and do on such a day. I also want to add that we can carry out debates on that day and these debates can enhance the reputation of our CPA Uganda Chapter and encourage the perception that our organisation is a predominant member of the Commonwealth family.

Members should appreciate that as CPA Uganda branch, we have done quite a number of activities in the promotion of women and children’s issues and generally gender issues. We can always discuss and look more at such issues on such a day. So, I want Members to understand that when 11th March comes, we have to have activities that we can bring up and push forward for the good of our CPA branch and for the good of Uganda and promoting our organisation.

I do not want to take long but I wanted Members to get this. Of course, Members should not also forget that we still have a task as a branch of CPA to promote issues which CPA International promotes – issues of good governance and the rest. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the other member of the CPA speak – hon. Abia. Before she speaks, in the public gallery we have guild officials from Bugema University represented by hon. Nabukenya and hon. JC Muyingo from Luwero. You are welcome. I hope you are the ones. Please stand up. (Applause)

3.38
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I second the motion by first of all thanking hon. Seninde. Why we want this to be a debate – (Hon. Members: “Yellow”) - I know that those who actually wear yellow believe in blue, so it is okay. (Laughter) 

To be an active member of the CPA does not actually mean that you go globe-trotting or something like that. What this motion actually calls for is good governance across the globe. Why are we members of the CPA? It is because there are principles which we believe in as a country that are respected by all other member countries. What is this country’s commitment to good governance? That is what hon. Seninde is saying and it is the same thing we are asking Government to do.

We would wish that, for example, as a country we would recognise that we must free all political actors; we must give them the space to interact and engage with the citizens. However, is that what is going on in our country? This is a call for us to re-commit ourselves to matters of good governance. 

As CPA, both domestically and internationally there are challenges we face as countries but the question is: What are the legislatures in these countries doing to avert that? Are we committed to the separation of powers in our various countries, for example? As a Parliament, are we guarding our mandate? These are quests that we are trying to throw as a challenge so that come 11th March, we should celebrate this day as one, committed to good governance. 

I know the Front Bench will agree with me that the quest for participatory leadership across Africa and across the globe is something that we believe in and something we should encourage. That is why we are requesting that as a political actor, you come to the forefront to say, whether it is in your constituency or here in Kampala, that you must take this 11th day of March as a serious day to reflect on where we are going as a country, where you are going as a leader and whether your citizens are participating as a people. That is very paramount.

Fundamentally, the question we seek to address here is: are we running people-centric governments? In other words, is your leadership bearing fruit for the most underprivileged of society? If that is not the case, then it is a fundamental duty that as a leader and as an institution, we take up the challenge to say “well, here are the gaps, here is where we are moving forward and here is where we can recollect ourselves and say we need to address the following challenges”.

We believe that for the country and the entire globe to move together, we need balanced governance. What does that mean? It means that both domestically and internationally, all beneficiaries of governance, implying the ordinary people, should be able to appreciate the value of leadership. Now, the question is, are we heading there? These are the things you and I are seeking to address.

One key thing that the world is challenged with now is the issue of unbalanced growth both in our countries and internationally. The question, therefore, is if Uganda is growing at 11 per cent, is this growth transformative? If it is not, then we are asking whether we as the Commonwealth believe in the principles that we stand by.

So, honourable members, I beg that you support this motion based on these principles and facts. Otherwise, we shall be seated here as an institution without even reflecting on our roles and responsibilities and whether our leader is giving the ordinary person a focused life.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let me give one Independent Member three minutes and then we close.

3.43
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Rosemary Seninde for bringing this motion at the right time.

You will all agree with me that we are members of the Commonwealth but I believe, and according to her justification, we were almost slipping away, sliding from the norms of the Commonwealth. I am going to focus on three issues. 

In the Commonwealth, they believe in consensus building. What happens in Uganda and how do we decide - caucuses, directives, authorities. That is not a principle of the Commonwealth.

Another thing I am going to talk about is equity. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification from the Member holding the Floor. Commonwealth means countries that have got a relationship with the UK and in the UK they have caucuses within their Parliament, and within the caucuses there is consensus as we have in NRM. Can you clarify to me whether in Britain they are practising democracy by having caucuses and here we have caucuses and we are not practising democracy?

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, I do not think I will be diverted by the honourable member because he is very aware of what happens in Uganda and that it is very different from the UK Parliament. So, Madam Speaker, I will still reaffirm my statement that as Parliament- (Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, is it really in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to impute improper motives on the functioning of caucuses in Parliament yet consensus building can be done and is done through various fora? A caucus is such a forum where Members begin to build consensus so that when they go to the Floor, everybody has given his or her views and we have decided that this is the way? Is she in order to impute improper motives?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe all the parties here have caucuses. Please conclude.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise ruling. I want to talk about the issue of equity. The Commonwealth recommends and promotes equity but we are seeing here in Uganda that development is taking place at a high rate in some areas and declining in others. That is not what the Commonwealth promotes.

Let me talk about transparency and accountability. We have parliamentary committees here and we have institutions, which are set up to foster accountability in this country. How far do we go to achieve that accountability in this country? This is why we have a lot of corruption in this country. The IGG is there, the reports are laid on the Floor and they are diverted. We are not committed to the principles of the Commonwealth.

What is good governance? We have parliamentary democracy in Uganda but you have heard people threatening the powers of Parliament. Are we not losing our grip on the principles of the Commonwealth, Madam Speaker? We have told the world that we are a democratic government. What does the - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this item was allotted only 30 minutes, which are now up. Honourable members, I just want to confirm that one, as members of the Commonwealth we are expected to organise activities for 11th March, that is, the Queen’s day. We are then expected to report back to the Commonwealth and say Parliament of Uganda did this, the Parliament of Kenya did this, and so on and it is put in the magazine, the Parliamentarian. So, what they are doing is to alert us on the need to organise activities and I will ask the Clerk to arrange some activities.

The second one is the IPU. The 15th of September is Democracy Day and we are also expected to organise activities and also report back that this is what we did as a Parliament and as a country. So, I put the question that this House do adopt the resolution as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA INVESTMENT AUTHORITY FOR THE PERIOD 2002 TO 2011

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a general debate on this matter and there were proposals for amendments, which I asked Members to go and draft and bring back today. I do not know whether they are ready. That was the stage we were going to. Where are the amendments?

3.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (Mr Patrick Amuriat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As was proposed, the committee went, sat over the weekend and we had a feeling that some of the recommendations contained in the main report should stay as they are. The recommendations in the latter part of the report were altered, though not significantly, in order to accommodate the needs of this House for us-(Interruption)

MR BYANDALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, hon. Amuriat, for giving way. This is causing some confusion to me because the chairman presented a report here and we went through it with the resolutions therein. Now the chairman is claiming that they have made changes but he has not laid the minutes of the meeting with all the signatures on the Table, which is a requirement. Isn’t it better that we go through the report and if they want to make any amendments, they can do so within the report which was submitted here instead of bringing new documents, which were not part of the committee? We cannot debate this. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we asked you to make an addendum. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, maybe the title of this document might be misleading. All I am saying is that what is contained in this document is not significantly different in context from what is contained in the committee report. If you would like, you could read the two documents together because it would be helpful in the sense that the new document enriches the recommendations contained in the original document. It does this by naming individuals. Where the chief executive officer is implied in the original document, the name is mentioned in this document that has been circulated. I think this House is interested in progress and not indulging in flimsy issues. This is a point where any Member as they may wish can stand up and present an amendment to what the committee presents. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the reasons we did not complete deliberations was because amendments were being made on the Floor and I directed that they should all be put in writing but now, you are bringing an addendum. This is not what I asked for. I wanted to see recommendations in one, two, three words. You are now starting again. Now you are going to read again and we start debating this. This is not what I wanted you to bring. I wanted you to bring amendments to the resolutions.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I want to seek your indulgence and that of the House. These are amendments and in my view, amendments can mean complete deletion. We have done this here before. They can mean complete deletion of a particular phrase, sentence, paragraph and inclusion or replacement by a particular phrase, paragraph or statement.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, we have no problem with making amendments but there are procedures we must follow. We are not going to accept documents written in the room of the chairman without consulting the members of the committee. That is fundamental. He can make all the amendments within the report he presented here, we have no problem, but let us go to the report. Let us go point by point and the chairman or any other Member can come with any amendment they want but we are not accepting a report where there are no minutes of where they sat and decided on this. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I agree with my colleague and if this is how we want to proceed, I am open to that. We can go through the report and I will bring amendments as and when we reach a particular item as conceived by the committee.

THE SPEAKER: I hope you have your reports, honourable members. You do not? No, you should be having the reports. Clerk, can you read Recommendation No. 1?

Recommendation 1 

Government should transfer political leadership and supervision of Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives for effective guidance, supervision and oversight.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (INVESTMENT) (Dr Gabriel Ajedra):  Madam Speaker, before I give my submission regarding the first recommendation, I wish to correct some errors in the report. I think the first one is in the introduction part of the report where there is a mix-up of the board committees. As of now, UIA has a board which works through committees and there are four committees. The first committee is the land issues committee and the second is an audit committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we are dealing with recommendation No.1 on the transfer of UIA from Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Trade.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, with regard to the transfer, I have the following comments to make: 

As Ministry of Finance, I think there is a temptation to misconstrue what investment is, and I want to make reference to the Investment Code, clause 10(5), which says, “A foreign investor who is intending to engage in trade only shall not be required to comply with subsection (1) but shall – 
(a) incorporate a company with the Registrar-General of Companies 
(b)deposit a sum of US$ 100,000 at the Bank of Uganda for the importation or direct purchase of goods and businesses.”

Madam Speaker, investment is quite broad. Investment into the country affects both the micro and macro economics of any country. When you talk about investment, for example in infrastructure where the funds are coming from outside, it has nothing to do with trade. The amount of money that comes into the country has an impact on the economy of the country and there is no other ministry in the government which is mandated to control or to develop policies that affect both the micro and macro economics of the country; it is only the Ministry of Finance. 

Ministry of Finance, you will recall, has also recently submitted a Bill, the PPP Bill, to this Parliament and it is being considered by the committee.  You will recall that is the responsibility of Ministry of Finance because it deals directly with foreign direct investment. So, investment cannot be treated as buying and selling of goods. It cannot be treated as trade because it has far much wider implications on the national economy. So, the position of the government is that UIA remains in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are on recommendation No. 1 that the UIA should be moved from the Ministry of Finance to the Ministry of Trade. 

4.01
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Minister of State for Investment has given some technical argument as to why UIA should remain housed under Ministry of Finance. However, the committee’s findings were to the effect that UIA’s poor performance could have arisen from poor political supervision. That is why the committee was looking for alternative mechanisms of improving performance of UIA. If UIA is to remain under Ministry of Finance, may I find out whether Ministry of Finance is really in charge? This is because the committee found out that UIA was dealing more in land for investors and mainly trade. 

My problem is that I got persuaded by the committee’s argument. However, technically, investment is not limited to trade but what UIA has been doing is only just about trade. That is the dilemma we are in. So, an undertaking ought to be made; if it is to remain in Ministry of Finance, will Ministry of Finance really be in charge to avoid the scenario that we have found ourselves in?

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. You need to go to the mandate of UIA so that you will be able to understand and believe why it should be in and remain in the Ministry of Finance.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think Members understand the mandate. The question is that last week, a report covering over 10 years was presented here and it did not show Finance as an effective supervisor of the UIA. That is the problem that the Members have.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, you see, an organisation has management and it has a board. If you go through the Investment Code Act, it is the board that is responsible for the day-to-day running of the Uganda Investment Authority. So, if the problems were with the board, this does not in any way mean that if you transfer it to Ministry of Trade then you are going to have- (Interjections) - Can I finish my submission before you come in? 

In the report there have been a lot of issues about the management as far as UIA is concerned and also the board, but if the problem has been the board - As far as I am concerned, I have had an opportunity to go through all the files and looked at what the board is supposed to do and how the board was supposed to sort of run the affairs of UIA. (Interruption)

DR BITKEYEREZO: Thank you very much, minister, for giving way. You have brought it out very clearly that it is the board that is responsible for overseeing functions of the UIA. I want to know from the minister, who chooses the board? (Interjections)- If it is the minister, then it means the minister has totally failed to run UIA. So, do we give you the mandate again to formulate another board that is going to do nothing here? That is my question. I want clarification from you.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. On that clarification – (Mr Kassiano rose_)- Okay, I will take the information.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. It is not West Nile connection but information for the whole House. The information I want to give my honourable colleague and brother from Arua is that in 2005, on the Floor of this House, a resolution was made by Parliament to relieve Dr Kigozi of her duties as the Executive Director. Ministry of Finance was asked to implement that directive recommendation from Parliament, unfortunately Ministry of Finance failed and Dr Kigozi remained on board until her contract expired. The information I am giving you is that Ministry of Finance, to a large extent, has failed in giving political supervision to that sector. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us get information from hon. Tumwebaze and then we conclude on this matter.

MR TUMWEBAZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The brief information I would like to give to the honourable colleague and the Members is that I think two things should be looked at here. The point of concern is the performance of UIA. As far as I know, agencies or authorities are created to give them some slight and better autonomy to act on their own to build systems and not to really be a department of the ministry.

Government is Government, whether it is Ministry of Trade or Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Trade today can be the Ministry of Finance. To me, the concern of Members should be: can the management of UIA account for what it has failed to do? Whether you shift it from this ministry to another, will that cure the problem you envisage? So, the question should not be, where does this ministry fall? If I am a weak political supervisor today, I can be one tomorrow. So, I beg Members to look at the – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Exactly what hon. Tumwebaze is talking about is where we as a committee based our resolution. We interfaced with the management and the board and all the fingers were pointing at the weaknesses within the Ministry of Finance. That is why as a committee, we are recommending that the weakness is Ministry of Finance. It is not management, it is not the board because many decisions were taken but they were reversed by Ministry of Finance. In some instances, Ministry of Finance interfered with the operations of the management directly. That is why we are changing from Ministry of Finance to Ministry of Trade. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, if all the ministries are the same, then why are you objecting? If one ministry is as good as another, then why don’t you agree for it to go to Ministry of Trade?  

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I have listened to the argument from my honourable colleagues. We need to define what investment is before we make a rational or irrational decision. I have had the opportunity to do research in the field of investment. If there are issues regarding the management or the board, those issues can be addressed administratively. As we speak, the Ministry of Finance is in the process of reconstituting the board. The tenure of the current board expires on the 12th of March 2013. We are in the process of re-constituting the board.

Secondly, because of the weaknesses, administrative or otherwise, within UIA, I had directed that there should be what we call a restructuring exercise to make it more efficient and align it towards the objectives for which the authority was established. I can assure Members in this House that being a substantive Minister of Investment I can assure you I will.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that last week I had said that the Government is expected to come here with a Treasury Memorandum to say what they have done with our recommendations. Let us go ahead with our recommendations; when you come back with the memorandum, you will say “this was done, this was not done.” We cannot settle it here. So, I put the question that recommendation No.1 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 2

Government should put in place an industrial park policy and all the enabling legislation to operationalise the said policy

THE SPEAKER: Does anyone have an objection to that?

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as a matter of fact, a policy was developed and submitted to Government and is currently under review. However, that notwithstanding, because of the urgency to establish industrial parks the management, with the approval of Ministry of Finance, developed a nationwide business parks development plan. The document I am laying on the Table is essentially an extract of what the policy was meant to achieve. So, it is not entirely correct to say that there is no policy yet the policy has not been passed by Government. We are in the process of expediting the industrial development parks policy. 

THE SPEAKER: No, are you proposing to establish the policy? Are you in the process? Therefore, this recommendation is right. 

DR AJEDRA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I put the question that recommendation No. 2 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 3

Uganda Investment Authority should streamline and follow procurement and other procedures when purchasing land for industrial parks. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development must desist from ring-fencing funds for industrial parks and directing UIA on which land they should purchase.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House that the procurement of land for industrial parks was strictly in accordance with the PPDA law and guidelines and we have documentary proof to that effect. So, it is not entirely correct to say that UIA did not follow procedures in acquiring land. In instances where land was acquired, which is going to be discussed later on, it would have been on the basis of a directive. So, Madam Speaker, I want to assure this House that yes, all the procurement of land by UIA for industrial parks was done in strict accordance with the PPDA law and regulations. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I wish to submit that at the time of our investigations, no procedures had been followed and we have documentary evidence to that effect. There was an attempt to commence an orderly and procedurally correct method of work as far as this procurement is concerned only when we raised the red flag. 

So, for the committee, they believe there was abuse of authority and misuse of office. Underhand methods were followed by the acting ED, Mr Tom Buringuriza; Mr Amos Kamugisha who was a senior executive procurement officer; Mr Godfrey Semakula, the Ag director of lands development. We believe they had ill intentions while conducting the procurement of the Kashari land. We, therefore, feel that these officers should be investigated with a view of identifying criminal intent and prosecuted. 

In addition, if the land has not yet been procured - because it could have been procured by now - the procurement of this land should be stopped indefinitely as industrial park land for Mbarara is already in place. Instead, the funds should be diverted to purchase industrial land in another region where there is no land purchase for industrial purposes. 
I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is that your amendment to this?

MR AMURIAT: Yes.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I have documents to lay on the Table to show that there was a process to the proposed acquisition of land at Kashari, Mbarara. It started with a directive, which was brought to the attention of the UIA board. The board sat –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. The committee was tasked to examine this report and I assume that they interfaced with the minister and the board in respect of these issues. But now it seems the minister is trying to get documents to rebut what the committee put forward yet they had an opportunity to appear before this committee. Is it procedurally right for us to go on when a recommendation is proposed and the minister pulls up a document which he should have produced in a committee? The committee could have had the opportunity to look at this document and maybe dropped some of the issues raised. Is it procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Did you invite the minister to your committee? 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, we did and the minutes which we laid on the Table can attest to this. Unfortunately, my brother, engineer Ajedra, is new in the ministry.(Laughter) Probably, he could have been duped by the Uganda Investment Authority, which in the first place actually failed in their duty. 

We examined all the documents which were presented to us. There was a presidential directive; I remember very well. The board objected to the purchase of this land. There was no single advert run in the newspapers leading to this. It came later. I even said this here on Thursday. It appeared later, sometime late last year, and this was directly trying to address the flaws in procurement, which the committee had noticed and cautioned UIA management against.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to the House. The advert appeared after we had interfaced with everybody and it appeared at a time when we were in Entebbe finalising with the report. It was meant to circumvent the process to appear as if it was genuine.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the recommendation be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we tasked the committee to go and do this but there is one point they have left out; Ministry of Finance paid the money within 12 hours, which has never happened before. We cannot leave out the Ministry of Finance in this recommendation - the person who paid the money within 12 hours. People ask for money and it takes months but this money was paid within 12 hours of request. So, that person from Ministry of Finance should also be brought to book for that crime. You cannot look at Uganda Investment Authority alone.

THE SPEAKER: But who is that person? Is he or she named in the report?

MR AMURIAT: As part of the report’s documents, we have a letter written by the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury and signed by him. In fact, we have not only one letter; there are two letters – (Interjections) - Keith Muhakanizi is the name.

MR BYANDALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the Leader of the Opposition for bringing in the time factor. However, to the best of my knowledge, it is not written anywhere that money should be remitted within a specified time. I do not remember reading anywhere that payments should be done after a given period of time. So, on what basis should we charge somebody like that; are we charging them for working very fast?

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as I said I have documents to lay on the Table to prove that the initial request for funding was made on the 14 November 2011. There are a number of correspondences between Ministry of Finance and UIA. On 20 December 2011, Ministry of Finance advised that money was not available. On 25 January 2012, UIA wrote to Ministry of Finance to say they do not have money so, “please, can you make funds available to procure this land.” 

On 26 June 2012, they were still requesting for the money and it was not until 27 June 2012 that Ministry of Finance finally gave authority to release the money to the accounts of UIA. It was on the basis of the release of the funds that the board sat on 24 September 2012 to finally resolve – (Interruption)

MR KAWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The functions of a committee are delegated by this Parliament and it performs its duties on behalf of Parliament. The chairman has clarified here that there was an opportunity for the ministry and all parties mentioned therein to interface with the committee and clarify these documents. The documents the honourable minister is trying to – I do not know how to describe this. We did not even have an opportunity to look at these documents, to read and comprehend them. So, I want to reiterate that, is it procedurally right for us to go on in this manner when the minister had an opportunity to appear before the committee? 

THE SPEAKER: Which minister appeared before that committee? 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance by then who was holding the portfolio of investment, hon. Aston Kajara. He appeared before the committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kajara, please clarify these issues. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I think it is necessary that when we exercise our parliamentary functions, we should speak the truth and nothing but the truth. When this matter was introduced on this Floor, I requested leave of the House to generate answers to this report. I asked for that because some of the information in this report was not truthful. One of them is an issue such as this one. 

I recall that the committee of COSASE did invite me. They conducted this investigation for quite a long time – I think more than even a year – but  it was only once that this committee invited me and they asked me general questions, which I answered. The other times, this committee invited officials from elsewhere. We understand that some of these documents or information was actually given to the committee but the committee has chosen to ignore it in their report – (Interjections) – Yes, it is true! The information we have just – (Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, the committee on COSASE has investigated this issue for a long period. Within that period, we had time to interface with everybody concerned in this matter. The minister is right now abusing the conscience of the committee by saying that we did not do due diligence to the work assigned to us as a committee. Is the minister in order to impute that the committee based its report on rumours and bias yet we did our work? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that since we have accepted the proposal by the chair, this one appears to be contested so let us leave it. We have already taken the recommendation of the chair to amend. So, let us move to the next item. 

Recommendation 4

Uganda Investment Authority should create a strong monitoring and evaluating system/unit that must follow up all the licences it issues to investment projects to ensure that such projects create the projected jobs for Ugandans

DR AJEDRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Monitoring, as you know, is a multi-sectoral approach with regard to investing in the country. You have to bring in immigration, the Police, the local government, NEMA, Ministry of Trade and others. It is true that is one of the mandates of Uganda Investment Authority, to do monitoring and evaluation, however it is wrong to say that there has not been any monitoring. It has been an issue of resource allocation, and we do accept the recommendation that government will in future make resources available to UIA so that they may be able to increase on the monitoring and evaluation. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable minister, I wish you could understand that this House is trying to assist you to do your work better. It is not necessary to – Honourable members, I now put the question that this House do adopt the recommendation as proposed.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Recommendation 5

Government should put into place an SME policy to guide, coordinate and monitor the development, growth and performance of micro, small and medium scale enterprises in the country.

THE SPEAKER: Is there a problem with that?

DR AJEDRA: The draft SME policy has been completed and it is under consideration by Government.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House adopt the recommendation on the SME policy.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 6

The Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development should disband the board of the Authority and subsequently restructure the entire institution with a view to ensure that it is properly managed and it achieves the mandate it was created for. A new organisational structure should be created and all positions subjected to subsequent recruitment.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, even without having received the copy of these recommendations, one of the first things that I did was to essentially look at the structure of UIA. As I said earlier, instructions are going to be given for the restructuring of UIA. Also, the tenure of the current board expires next month on 12th March and we are in the process of constituting a new board. Particular attention will be paid to the appointment of the board to ensure it complies with the Investment Code Act and to also draw new blood into the UIA board.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the House do adopt the recommendation.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 7

The board of Uganda Investment Authority should ensure that a substantive Chief Executive Officer is appointed as a matter of urgency. In future, UIA should not delay the appointment of such critical positions in the organisation

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, as we are all aware and as I speak, we have a substantive ED and that recommendation has been over taken by events.

MR OKUPA: No. Madam Speaker, there is a contention about the recruitment of the new Executive Director. Hon. Byabagambi here can bear us witness because that gentleman was interdicted from the Ministry of Energy when he was the Executive Director of ERA, and the circumstances surrounding the way he was recruited to that position as stated here leaves a lot to be desired. 

You remember there was a man who had gone through but he was left out. There was Joseph Muvawala who was also left out. It is also strengthened by the letter that I laid here, Madam Speaker, which was written by the minister where he was directing the executive director to restructure UIA but he went ahead to appoint a junior officer in that letter, that he should be the one to carry out the restructuring. That shows that the minister does not even trust the executive director. So, is he now in order to come and say that these things have been overtaken by events when he himself does not trust the executive director?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister, did you write that letter that the member is talking about?

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I am one of those persons who gives thought before I put my thoughts on a piece of paper. One of the things that I learnt when I was doing my PhD is to always give  thought to a situation – (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order, members!

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, my letter is very clear and I am going to quote the last paragraph. It says, “In this regard, I propose…” It is a proposal and not an instruction – [MR OKUPA: “That is a directive.”] - It is not a directive; it is a proposal and either the management accepts the proposal or they refer the matter back to the minister. I did not say, “I hereby instruct.” I proposed and, therefore, it is up to the management and the board to say “yes” or “no”. 

As a matter of practice, anybody who has done what we call a restructuring exercise in any organisation will know that restructuring is best done by – [HON. MEMBER: “A junior?”] - Not a junior but by members who are outside the organisation, preferably by consultants. This matter has been discussed with the management and the board and my preference was that UIA engage an external consultant to do restructuring. However – (Interruption)

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Speaker, I did not intend to interrupt the minister but he seems to accept most of the amendments and he is even in agreement with what this amendment is saying. Why are we taking more time? What is he trying to explain? Why don’t you just accept the amendment and we continue?  He has been coming up even when he is not going to stop the – 

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the recommendation is to Uganda Investment Authority but it should be to the Minister for Finance because Uganda Investment Authority does not appoint the board but it is the Minister for Finance that proposes the name to Cabinet and then it names. So, it needs to be adjusted.

THE SPEAKER: Is it not the board that advertises for the chief executive?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, as we observed in our report, there was an attempt to recruit an executive director for the Uganda Investment Authority. The exercise was flawed, terribly mishandled. The person who should have gone through - the successful candidate - was denied the opportunity and we clearly state this in our report. Mr David Obong was the one who was found to be the best candidate for that position and he was not given the position. We elaborated this on page 9 of our report and I do not intend to go through this again. 

The substance of the letter of the minister gives power and authority or proposes power to be given to Mr Tom Buringuriza who is the current Deputy Executive Director. Through our interaction with members of staff, some of them who were not prepared to open up to us in an open meeting so we met them in camera, it was found that Mr Tom Buringuriza was this person who was “breathing” down everybody’s neck and making people very uncomfortable and threatening them. In fact, he was shouting at them even in office and in the presence of their subordinates. I do not know where the minister is coming from in giving or proposing this kind of responsibility to be given to him. 

Besides that, I do not know what the function of the board would be if the minister is taking such decisions that look like directives to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, his letter is not part of the recommendation. I now put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 8

Uganda Investment Authority should make sure for every contract, a contract manager must be appointed to manage it. The situation in which UIA managed the Dama Consultants should not be repeated

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, there is an officer who mishandled this procurement. Apart from the recommendation that is given, the committee would like to propose as follows: “The Acting Director of Finance at the time, now Deputy Director Finance, Ms Barbara Kabuchu, exhibited incompetence in paying a contractor without the necessary documentation certifying performance per the terms of the contract. It is clear that Ms Kabuchu does not deserve to hold the high office that she now occupies. She should be demoted for acting negligently and for gross incompetence.”

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just to give some information. We did raise this matter in the last committee report where I happened to serve with hon. Reagan Okumu, the chair, about the mismanagement of the finance department. The management of UIA leaves a lot to be desired because the circumstances under which the current acting person came in were as a result of the director of finance, the deputy director finance and the accountant resigning. So, there was no other person and this person was just put there to act. At one time, the Ministry of Finance even seconded an officer to handle that department. So, this person is not fit to be in that position. 

I wonder why UIA has continued with the same person instead of recruiting a new person. I see the minister nodding his head. I think you should have recruited a substantive person to sort out this matter. Otherwise, without this person now, I do not know who can act as director of finance.

THE SPEAKER: Is she substantially appointed? If she is not, then you cannot demote her. How can you demote her if she is not appointed?

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, we were shown a substantive director of finance during one of our meetings. Ms Kabuchu was at one time, in the absence of a substantive director of finance, made to act. During her time as acting director of finance, this is where this financial loss was caused – the mishandling of this project. 

THE SPEAKER: If she was just acting, how can you demote her? She is not substantively appointed.

MR AMURIAT: Well, from acting she had been substantially appointed Deputy Director of Finance after causing this mess.

MR KABASHARIRA: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the amendment of the committee. According to what they have written, Ms Kabuchu was not substantively appointed. For us to go into details of who should be appointed and when, when we have stated that they should appoint a new board - Madam Speaker, is Parliament managing what is happening in other ministries and institutions? I think Parliament is going overboard. If Ms Kabuchu made any mistake, let us recommend that the board takes action but we should not mention that she be demoted. You know, in ministries people undermine others; how sure are we that someone did not come and talk about Ms Kabuchu? Let us leave it to the board to take action.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chair, I think what we should do is to invite the board to review the circumstances surrounding this contract and then they will take decisions; whether they demote or sack, that is their business. 

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, before assuming office, one of the things I did was to do some research and that research raised issues, issues of the management of UIA or mismanagement thereof. We accept the recommendations that have been given by the committee and further to that, where there is financial loss we have agreed that those officials will be investigated by relevant organs of Government and prosecuted accordingly if necessary. Madam Speaker, as you have said, we are in the process of restructuring and I think these are some of the issues that will be taken into account once we have a new structure and a new board of Uganda Investment Authority.

THE SPEAKER: The committee can continue its oversight on this matter. I put the question that the recommendation be accepted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 9

The committee recommends that the wrongful appointment of Mr Tom Buringuriza be reviewed with a view of having a transparent process that can attract the right candidate on merit

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I am wondering why you are allowing the minister to respond now. What is the use of the Treasury Memorandum? We are supposed to make these recommendations, they go to the Executive and the Executive responds. These are things he should have done when we were in the committee. So, what are we doing?

THE SPEAKER: I have called the recommendation. I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 10

The committee recommends that the accounting officer of UIA computes and recovers operational benefits accrued to officers while on leave

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be accepted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 11

The committee recommends a value-for-money audit for this project

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 12

The Uganda Investment Authority should recruit and facilitate the internal audit section to execute their work with the necessary independence and autonomy they deserve. Alternatively, the authority may consider outsourcing this function

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I want to request the chairperson of the committee to expunge, “the Authority may consider outsourcing” because this is now internal. The Public Finance and Accountability Act is very clear on the function of internal audit. As of now, we do not have procedure of licensing an internal audit committee. Chairman, if you do not mind, please expunge.

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to delete the last part?

MR EKANYA: Yes. It could be expunged.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the internal audit function is a very important function in any organisation because they audit management and they also audit the assets and liabilities of an organisation. The people who are supposed to set this up are the management and the board. You can see for all these years there have been many flaws. The management and the board did this deliberately. They did not want to have the internal audit function so that they could be audited. I want to move an additional amendment here that the board and management be held liable for the loss as a result of lack of the internal audit function.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to suggest an amendment to that recommendation considering the importance of the internal audit department in an organisation. 

Having seen all the loses that have arisen out of all this mess, I want to suggest that a recommendation be adopted at this point that no funds should be allocated or appropriated to Uganda Investment Authority until the internal audit department is in place. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, it is true that UIA did not have an internal audit unit - that is a fact – until 2009 when it was established. Yes, we accept the recommendation, but as we talk I would like to inform the House that we now have an internal audit department, which is housed in the board.

With regard to the amendment, I wish to draw the attention of Members to the Uganda Investment Act, which states, in part, that “a member or an officer or other member of the Authority shall not, in his or her personal capacity, be held liable to civil or criminal proceedings in respect of an act or omission done in good faith in the exercise of his or her functions under this Act.” So, as we move amendments, there is need to reflect on what is provided for in the Act that established the Authority in the first place.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, thank you. I think we need to understand how management and systems of some corporations work. Internal auditors are employed in some of these systems to highlight frauds and mistakes to management in form of a report. So, if management fails to discuss such a report, then the board should demand that that is done. If it does not do that deliberately, that is absolute corruption. The purpose of that audit report is to ensure that those financial mistakes and frauds are corrected. If they are not corrected, that is absolute corruption. If we adopt the amendment suggested by the Leader of the Opposition, I do not see why the board and management should not be held liable for the loss that was incurred.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, maybe the minister is still new in that field. First of all, the terms of the Uganda Investment Authority say that every investor will annually submit returns to be audited by the Uganda Investment Authority focusing on the investment, employment and the money that has been received. So, if you appointed the internal audit department in 2009, what happened to the earlier years? Where was the Minister of Finance? I am saying this because they were the ones responsible for auditing those returns at the time.

Two, I would like to make it clear that the external auditor depends on the material from the internal auditor and that is the law. So, what happened? Where was the Ministry of Finance getting the reports from when there was no internal audit? It looks as if there are three beneficiaries in this - the Ministry of Finance, the board and management. My amendment is to hold these people responsible and liable as per the law and as per – (interruptions)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, allow me give information to the Leader of the Opposition. What I am saying is that they should be held responsible as per Article 164 (3) of the Constitution of Uganda. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Maybe just for the information of the Minister, if they were acting in good faith, that will be proved later and it can act as their defence. I now put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, my suggestion is to the effect that we should add the Minister of State for Investment. (Laughter) Yes, because he was one of the consumers of this report. In other words, the people to be held responsible should be the board, management and the Minster of State for Finance in charge of Investment at the time. I thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the Leader of the Opposition. Could he give or throw some light on the circumstances as to why the internal audit team was not constituted during that period? He seems to have some knowledge about that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I listened to the chairman of the committee while he presented that report and perceived it to be dealing with only the board. I do not think it dealt with the Minister of State for Investment. So, I think we should not import new suggestions into the recommendations. Let us deal with the board because that is what the COSASE committee reported about.

While we accept your proposal, I request that you do not carry it too far for now. (Laughter) Okay, honourable members, I put the question that the last sentence be deleted as proposed by the Leader of the Opposition, without the minister being included. I put the question that those recommendations be adopted.

(Question put add agreed to.)

Recommendation 13

The Uganda Investment Authority should consider opening and operating a separate account for a staff gratuity fund in any case not later than three months from the date of adoption of this report. The Authority should find funds for the staff gratuity from the internal operations or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question – (Dr Ajedra rose_) – do you really have to say something on this recommendation?

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, just for the benefit of the House. I would like to state that the process has already commenced and we should be able to –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you can bring that with the Treasury Memorandum. I now put the question that this recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, let me say something on the minister’s actions in regard to the gratuity of staff. I would like to say that at the moment, the entire staff of UIA is on contract for only six months. This has kept the morale of those staff very low. So, I am wondering under what circumstances the board decided to employ those staff on only a six-month contract. That is something that the minister should take up. It is already affecting staff morale to work.

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, allow me allay the fears of this House on that matter. I think I already said it, but let me repeat it; one of the first things I did was to do some research. During that research, one of the things I picked up when I met the board was about staff being employed on only one year’s contracts. Most staff are now left with only five months to end their contracts.

On the issue of job insecurity, I agree with you. However, I would like to inform you that I directed that because it was at not the fault of the staff, employment terms be reviewed in accordance with the manual approved by the board so that every staff is given a minimum of a two years’ contract before we exhaustively restructure UIA into a new organisation. 

So, while I take note of my colleagues’ concerns, those have also been my concerns. But by way of emphasis, I want to say that I have already taken steps to ensure that staff are comfortable with their jobs to improve on productivity.

Recommendation 14

The committee noted that Uganda Investment Authority’s argument that Namanve Industrial Park was not suitable for offices is unfounded. The Uganda Investment Authority should instead fast-track the completion of the construction work at their incomplete block at Namanve and avoid paying huge bills in rentals as their money lies in the bank without any interests accumulating. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, the committee has an amendment, and this is really to bring into light the mishandling of the same property on Kampala Road. We wish to propose as follows: 

The committee believes that given the magnitude of this transaction, Mrs Maggie Kigozi and Mr Joel Byaruhanga, former Executive Director and Director of Finance UIA at the time respectively, were fully aware of this fraud process. The committee therefore recommends that Mrs Maggie Kigozi, Mr Joel Byaruyhanga and staff in the procurement department be investigated by the anti-corruption agencies of Government with a view of prosecuting them and any other person responsible for the losses incurred by their decisions. I beg to move. 

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall very well that when we were debating the motion on this report, we proposed that a special ad hoc committee of Parliament should be constituted to investigate the activities of the industrial park at Namanve. So, I would like to propose that we should put it as part of our resolutions. 

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, I think presently there is a value-for-money audit going on in the affairs of UIA. I do not think we should duplicate the efforts. That value-for-money audit is coming here. So, let them finish and we can deal with it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, somebody offered US$ 2 million and they went for US$ 1.7 million. First, we lost US$ 280,000; and with the sale of an asset like this, the board must approve. Secondly, before they could go to their new buildings, they started renting the same building and again we lost Shs 416 million. So, this is just a bill shared among them; it is a process of stealing public resources.

THE SPEAKER: Isn’t that a subject of investigations?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It might be, but we must deal with these ones that we can see here, the Shs 416 million and US$ 280,000, and the people who were involved are the board and the management. I can see that we are leaving the board out and yet the sale of any public asset is authorized by the board. The rent is budgeted for by management and approved by the board. So, we are saying that the board and management should first of all refund the US$ 280,000 and the rent of Shs 416 million. Secondly, they should be held liable for the loss as a result of us continuing to pay rent when we had not finished the property. 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable members, I thought we should say that they be investigated. If you say that the whole board should refund this, I do not know. Are all the board members involved? Why not say “investigate”? 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the issue of plot 28 Kampala Road is very clear. There is no way that building could have been sold if the board did not okay it. So, these are the people who should be held accountable because you cannot sell your house and say we are going to look for another house to buy and it takes you 12 years. That house was sold in 2000 at US$ 1,700,000 and the idea which they were pushing forward was that they were going to buy another house but it is now 10 years since then. The value of houses and even plots has shot up. The US$ 1,700,000 cannot even buy a plot. So, those members of the board who made the decision and the accounting officer should be the ones to be held responsible because we just threw out that money.  

MR BYABAGAMBI: I am seeking clarification from the chairperson of the committee. It is stated here that the building was disposed of at US$ 1,720,000 yet another company, Estate Link Ltd., had shown interest. So, I want to know how they showed their interest. Was it verbal? Did they come to the committee and say that they had shown interest? Did they testify as informants of the committee? What sort of interest is this because when you say they had showed interest, it is vague? If it was written, then that is a firm proposal and it cannot be showing of interest.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the issue of the US$ 2 million which was offered by that company is mentioned in the Auditor-General’s report. It says that there was a company which had already put it up for sale, which had offered US$ 2 million, but instead they went for the one of US$ 1,720,000. It is in the Auditor-General’s report. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am rising on the issue of the board. The board may comprise five members, for example, and in the board meeting there could have been members with dissenting views. If you say that all the board members must be liable for the payment of this money, then what are you talking about? Have you catered for those members who could have had opposing views? I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: That was the reason why I was objecting to the blanket statement that the board should refund. We do not know whether it was the chairperson who said or two of the members. Why don’t we say we should investigate and those who are found liable should refund. Otherwise, we are going to carry everybody and – 

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, this is a matter that we have agreed on as Ministry of Finance, that further investigations be carried out into those who were probably involved in the whole exercise. There are only two issues on which I want to set the record straight. The reason why the plot was – (Interruption) 

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have already informed the minister that he is out of procedure; he should wait for recommendations to be discussed at Executive level through the Treasury Memorandum. We have also advised him. Is he in order to keep standing on every point and owning this report of ours? Is he in order to disturb us? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the recommendation be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation No. 15

The Uganda Investment Authority board and management should take disciplinary action against the staff who executed the irregular procurements. The US$ 2,783,000 should be recovered from them. In addition, the board or any member of the board at the time of this expenditure should be relieved of their duties immediately.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this touches again what we said, that if you are to sweep everybody you may sweep the people who did nothing. “The board or any member of the board at the time of this expenditure should be...” Can you amend that to say, “establish those who were involved”?

MR AMURIAT: Yes. I want to be specific and this specificity is contained in our amendment. I wish to state as follows: Mr Michael Mugabira, the head of the procurement and disposal unit, should be made to pay back money amounting to US$ 2,783,000. In addition, disciplinary proceedings should be instituted against him for purposes of determining the motive behind his actions and if criminal intent is identified, punitive action be taken.  

MR TUMWEBAZE: I do not disagree with the committee but there is a contradiction. If you are saying that disciplinary action should be initiated, you are more or less suggesting a legal process of justice against someone. If you are directing the accountant or the head of management to immediately recover money, what is the legal implication of that? Someone is still undergoing disciplinary action and then another goes maybe to attach his or her salary. Maybe the lawyers can guide us; how practical is that?
MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, while appearing before the committee, this particular officer conceded that he had actually made a mistake. He even apologised before the committee. What we could not establish though is whether he did it deliberately or whether he had interest in this. So for us, there is no doubt that he caused a financial loss of over US$ 2.5 million and he should be held responsible for that. However, beyond that, there is need to investigate him further to establish if this was intentional. Surely, if it was intentional, then he is not a good person to be at the Uganda Investment Authority.
THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)
Recommendation 16, adopted.
Recommendation 17, adopted.
Recommendation 18, adopted.
Recommendation 19, adopted.

Recommendation 20
The Uganda Investment Authority should recover the excess payment of Shs 19,769,653 from Toyota (U) Ltd. The UIA board and management should take disciplinary action against the staff who irregularly procured the vehicles

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I know we might be going back to where we started from and that is on the issue of documents. I am in receipt of documents which show that two vehicles were ordered for, two vehicles were delivered and all the payments were made. So, Madam Speaker, that is an area I disagree with. 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, what you are saying was said by your colleague, hon. Kajara. So, really, your response should come with the Treasury Memorandum. Please, do not circumvent the memorandum. I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 21
The Uganda Investment Authority should regularly conduct bank reconciliations to avoid risky exposure to fraud and errors
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if a full director of finance cannot reconcile a bank statement, then there is a problem; he does not deserve to be in that organisation. Also, the internal audit function needs to take note of them. I want to say here that the director of finance and the one in charge of audit at that time should be sacked because they are incompetent - (Interjections) - Yes! If they cannot reconcile a bank statement, then we are in trouble. This is for accounts clerks. I think those two should be disciplined.
THE SPEAKER: I put the question to the recommendation as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 22, adopted.

Recommendation 23, adopted.

Recommendation 24

The Uganda Investment Authority should conduct proper due diligence before committing public resources to any project. Besides, it must update its books of accounts to reflect the US$ 131,040 in rent payable.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want the Minister in charge of Investments to help me understand; how can US$ 131,040 go missing and the accounts balance? What happened? It is a very big “miracle”. That means these accounts are doctored. So, I want you to help me; was this financial engineering that the accounts could balance without taking this money into consideration?

DR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, with regard to the US$ 131,000 I wish to report that there is no outstanding payment for rent as far as UIA is concerned and all the payments have been made.

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the committee’s observation, they stated clearly that an MoU was signed between UIA and Anupam Soft Global Ltd for the setting up of a computer assembling plant in Kampala that would, among others, provide training to Ugandans. However, that project never took off and the Authority lost its contribution to the project but here we are recommending only that the books be updated. I think we should amend this by not only saying that the books should be updated because of this money which was spent and yet the project did not take off but I think we should recommend that the money be refunded and the person responsible should be interdicted. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the chairman needs to help us with this recommendation because this was a PP project. Land was given as part of a contribution, among others. Has UIA recovered the land? The recommendation needs to be stronger so that we do not just interdict somebody but we also recover our property, which was part of our contribution, and then take disciplinary action against the officer who did not ask for a security bond.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I think our report is very clear and I have nothing useful to add. I would advise members to look at the original report as everything is contained there.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Recommendation 25 

The government should put in place a policy and a legal regime that will streamline how industrial parks are developed in the country.

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I propose that this recommendation be dropped because it was handled earlier.

THE SPEAKER: So it has been overtaken by events. Okay, let us go to the next one.

Recommendation 26 

The Uganda Investment Authority should immediately recover Shs 1.6 million paid to Lumu Village Council from the accounting officer who authorised the transaction.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, so that this recommendation takes effect and is directed towards a specific person, we as a committee wish to propose the following amendments: 

Delete the entire recommendation and replace it with the following: “The Shs 1.6 million paid to Lumu Village Council was authorised by the accounting officer even though it was neither planned nor budgeted for during the financial year under consideration. The sum should therefore be recovered from the then accounting officer, Dr Maggie Kigozi, who authorised the transaction.”

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 27 

The accounting officers who authorised the payment should refund the money.

MR AMURIAT: Another amendment on the same: “The then accounting officer, Dr Maggie Kigozi, who authorised payment, and the finance officer at the time, Joel Byarugaba, for the year ended 2005, who made the payments should refund the money.” That is in respect of double payment amounting to Shs 11.453 million.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 28, adopted

Recommendation 29

The Uganda Investment Authority should strictly adhere to the procurement regulations when executing any contract. In cases where the Authority works with other government entities, a MoU should be signed stipulating the role of each party.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 30

The Uganda Investment Authority should strictly adhere to the procurement regulations when executing any contracts.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Recommendation 31

The committee recommends that the accounting officer recovers Shs 146,055,250 lost in this transaction.

MR AMURIAT: As a committee, we wanted to be specific, Madam Speaker, as advised by the House. We would like to say, “The committee recommends that the accounting officer recovers Shs 146,055,250 lost in the transaction from the former Executive Director, Mrs Maggie Kigozi, and the former Director of Finance, Mr Joel Byaruhanga.”

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, it is a fact that Association Consulting Engineers were contracted to design the roads to suit the specifications of BAT in the proposed project in Namanve and they were duly paid in terms of the conditions under which they were contracted. However, BAT lost interest in the project along the way but as Ministry of Finance, we had to meet our financial obligations to Association Consulting Engineers who were contracted to do the work. Determination, therefore, meant that we had to contractually pay them the Shs 146 million. So it is not entirely correct that the money was either misappropriated or misspent. As a House, we need to reconsider that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the recommendation be adopted as amended.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO DURA CEMENT LIMITED

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this report was presented and it is now due for debate. Hon. Mwesigye, I think you are named in the report.

PERSONAL STATEMENT

5.27
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Madam Speaker, I thank you for allowing me an opportunity to make a personal statement as our rules allow. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to make a humble clarification on PAC’s recommendation No. 50 where my name appears. The Public Accounts Committee states that Mr Rawal was introduced to the President by me, the honourable Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye, without carrying out due diligence and that this was influence peddling. The problem with this allegation is that PAC itself notes in its report that Mr Rawal had successfully operated Hima Cement Ltd from 1994 to 1997 before he sold it to Lafarge. I am very certain that Mr Rawal must have interacted with Government by the time he purchased Hima Cement factory from Government.

The report on page 8 also mentions that Government officials including the Minister of Defence, Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Commissioner of Geological Survey and Mines and officials from NEC had approved the viability of the project as proposed by Mr Rawal of Dura Cement factory. By this finding, PAC itself says that there was a detailed study of the investment proposal by a multi-sectoral government team - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a procedural matter. Ever since our brother, the honourable Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye, took to the Floor, he has consistently kept reading a written text. I thought if it was so, then we should have the benefit of having it by him laying it on the Table so that as a committee and as a Parliament, we can all appreciate it.

Is he procedurally right to read a document only to himself without providing us copies? If he was debating, do our Rules of Procedure allow somebody to come with a written text and make persistent reference to it instead of engaging in an open debate? I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, on that procedural matter.

THE SPEAKER: I believe hon. Mwesigye is just consulting his notes. (Laughter)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought I had the privilege of making a personal statement as I consulted you this morning. 

What I want to emphasise is that NEC had interacted with this investor and all the departments of Government, actually seven ministries were set up to process this investment. However, along the way, this involvement of NEC was completely suspended and it was directed that all mining concession rights should be surrendered back to the Department of Minerals, Surveys and Mines which NEC accordingly did. From that time, NEC ceased to participate in any further transactions. 

Therefore, I would like to appeal to all of you not to involve Fred Mwesigye in this business of influence peddling or causing financial loss. I, therefore, pray that this recommendation where Mwesigye’s name is mentioned be deleted from the recommendations. 

I clearly state that when we were doing this job, we were working on behalf of Government. I have clearly stated and explained that any further problem that could have accrued from this should be directed to the Attorney-General to further clarify but not Fred Mwesigye. In any case, I do not see anywhere where the Auditor-General implicates Fred Mwesigye as having caused any financial loss because of introducing a Mr Rawal Rajesh who had operated Hima for many years successfully. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.32
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County East, Kibaale): I stand to support the committee work especially the recommendations. When you look at observation No. 3, the draft consent judgement had provided for an award of US$ 14 million but in the final consent judgement, it had changed to special damages award, which meant that they had tried to avoid paying taxes.
 
Madam Speaker, the then managing director of NEC, according to recommendation No. 1, acted with impunity by, one, transferring the mining sub-lease from NEC to Lafarge Group without tendering; and two, by transferring the mining lease from Lafarge to Dura Cement Ltd without tendering and at no fee. Thirdly, the so called Dura Cement Ltd was incorporated without the directors’ names or without any physical address, and this Government has really lost a lot of money. I would, therefore, propose that the investigating arm of Government, as the committee said, should get in and use the committee recommendations to investigate Dura Cement Ltd and those implicated. If they are found guilty, they should refund the US$ 14.5 million to the Treasury. Thank you. 

5.35
MS FREDA KASE-MUBANDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a problem with this report. I find that there were lots of gaps that were not explained to help us understand the recommendations. 

I find that there is a consistent pattern in this compensation that was recommended to Dura Cement. A contract is awarded and very soon it is cancelled; it seems to me that there is an orchestrated arrangement. You give a contract and after a short time it is cancelled to give reason for compensation. I find that the report did not go into detail on this matter to find out why there was a contract given and suddenly it was cancelled. 

Madam Speaker, in the auditor’s report, he recommended that an auditing firm be given the responsibility to investigate and recommend compensation. Now, this investigating audit report was submitted but it was a preliminary report and the report recommended no compensation at all. This firm that was auditing was paid the full sum for the job it was contracted for, to make the audit report, but it did not  submit a final report. Our committee report does not explain why this happened. 

Madam Speaker, I see that all these gaps need to be addressed. I see that without the report of the auditing firm, someone recommended to the President that a sum of US$ 14 million should be paid in compensation and yet this report does not actually address this question. Who made this recommendation? (Member timed out)

5.38
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have come to another stage yet again to discuss issues of corruption on the Floor of this Parliament. By the time we went for Christmas, this was almost the same story. 

I have also stood up to support especially recommendation No.8, that the investigative arm of Government should step in to lift the veil of incorporation of DCL to establish its true owners and to identify the beneficiary of payments of US$ 14.5 million to Kampala Associated Advocates.

Madam Speaker, as the previous speakers have said, I have also found a lot of gaps that need to be answered. The report does not answer the questions about who brought Dura on board, because this facility was already allocated to Hima and then they brought on board Dura. Afterwards, of course, there was a letter from the President saying, “No, it should not be Dura but it should be developed by Hima.”  

Madam Speaker, who stepped into the investigation of KPMG? This was a firm which was recommended to do the investigation. All of a sudden, before the final report was produced, it was stopped. The report does not come out to clarify this. Who stopped this? It was even paid! In whose interest was this stopped? Who gave the work to KPMG? Who stopped this work? The report does not come out to identify these. 

When you read this report, KPMG in its preliminary report indicated that the compensation should be zero but all of a sudden, we see US$ 14.5 million to be paid to Dura. Who came out with this? We thought maybe it was out of the consent judgement but the consent judgement does not even mention this. Of course, Dura in its computation had come up with US$ 103 million until US$ 14.5 million was brought on board. 

So, Madam Speaker, when you read the whole report there are some gaps. However, I thank the Members for this report. There are some gaps that we need to understand and it is also very - (Member timed out.)

MR MAXWELL AKORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is clear from the submissions so far that Members are raising questions in terms of gaps that they perceive in the report rather than debating. I thought I should, at this point, try to clarify. 

We presented this report last week on Thursday, 7 February 2013. The report was distributed and I thought Members would have had time to read the report over the weekend but nonetheless, the report is very clear. We have laid on the Table all the documents that we relied on to obtain evidence and to make our observations and draw conclusions and recommendations. We indicated the key players who are involved and who we interacted with in the different departments of Government, in NEC, Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, Attorney-General’s Chambers, Ministry of Finance and the President himself.

Madam Speaker, I do not know how we are going to proceed. Rather than debating the issues, there are questions being raised. I do not know if you would ask or expect us to take note and respond to these issues at the end so that we can put the concerns of Members to rest.

THE SPEAKER: So far, I have not heard anyone really objecting to the report. No one is opposing it. So, I think Members should concentrate on the recommendations and the findings.

THE CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Madam Speaker, I wish to give an addendum to what my colleague, hon. Akora, has said. I think we need to appreciate this report from the right perspective. I would encourage that since you have been given the copies of this report, you do due diligence by reading it from page to page. What I have so far heard, especially from my two colleagues, hon. Kiwanda and my sister behind there, has given me the impression that they have not read this report - (Interjections) - without mincing my words because I honestly would want us to be on the same page. If they had read this report, they should not have asked us the obvious questions. 

My sister is asking me, “why is it that it is common in this country to cancel contracts once they have been given?” In this particular case of Dura Cement, we have given you the information that first of all, that area was allocated to the Ministry of Defence under NEC and NEC went ahead and gave it out as a lease to Lafarge - that is the Hima Cement Factory in Kasese - where they were supposed to establish a factory to manufacture cement in Dura, the site in Kamwenge. However, Lafarge could not, within the time stipulated, carry out that work. For eight years, they never carried out that work. What, therefore, NEC did was to conduct - (Interjections) - Allow me to finish because you may appreciate it better – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Wadri, the point raised by hon. Mubanda was that it is becoming a pattern. The reports which have been coming show a tendency, a pattern - you issue a contract, you cancel, you compensate. That was her concern. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I am coming to that exactly because we have even included and expressed concerns. This is not the first time. Even in the other projects where we lost Shs 142.6 billion it was the same thing.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wadri, she is supporting you but she is saying she sees a pattern which she does not like.

5.46
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very good that we have just talked about the pattern which has been well highlighted. When you go to page 1, it is observed that in the report of the Auditor-General to Parliament in the year ended 30 June 2010, Government is incurring a loss in compensation to companies and individuals for loss of business arising from cancellation of contracts they entered into with Government. They go ahead and list the number of companies which have been fraudulently compensated. This is very vivid. 

It is out of this that I want to raise my concern.  I have not seen in the recommendations what you are advising Parliament to do about this particular spiral or pattern of events. I have not seen this in the recommendations. Should we constitute a commission of inquiry particularly to look into this racket? If Col Mwesigye is honest, he should be in position to tell us the number of meetings they had with these rackets on everything that they planned to do to defraud the country. (Applause) I think this fraud; if you go to the centre of crime, you are going to see the pattern, the linkage and the coordination. 

If you get Prof. Khiddu Makubuya to be very honest to the country, he will also tell you about these meetings. All these things, we should not deceive ourselves, are deliberate - (Applause) - and I think it is high time as Parliament we found a solution to this matter. We have to find a commission that should investigate these matters in detail. We know the real cause of the problem. Who are these people? These names have been consistently coming up. In every report, we find common names. What is the problem? This is what we really need to find a solution to.

Madam Speaker, as I get to my last point. I felt very - (Prof. Kabwegyere rose_) - Let me conclude because I have very limited time. I find it very disturbing when you read Prof. Khiddu Makubuya’s argument when he says it is bad enough to cancel an investment project out of no fault of the investor and the continued delay in sorting out this matter does not auger well for Uganda as an investment destination. For heaven’s sake, an investor who even got land for free after talking with Col Mwesigye! He gets land for free because he is linking with a historical member! (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, on this very point, I started looking at the other side. Are these people really Ugandans who are making decisions on our behalf? What about the Ugandans who would have benefitted through employment, through direct trade with this company? 

Even us, Ugandans, what about us on our side? On top of us making a loss by not getting jobs, you go ahead and you punish us through our taxes, the little money which we have, and you reward only one person, an investor, at the expense of all of us. I find this very shameful and I think that is why we must find a formidable solution to this matter. Let us set up a commission, investigate the thieves and get rid of them. 

5.51
MS OKETAYOT LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to start on a positive note because we have made a lot of lamentations on the Floor of this Parliament. I think sanctity and sanity is not all lost. On a positive note, I want to thank the office of the Solicitor-General, specifically all the officers and all the individuals who have been holding this office. The Solicitor-General has always been giving very good legal opinions and very good legal advice. Unfortunately, this advice and the recommendations have not always been taken. 

It is not only for this case but talk about the case of the LC bicycles, the compensation to Basajjabalaba, and all these cases in which the country has lost money; the Solicitor-General has been giving a good legal opinion. I want the minister to help me understand the relevance of this office. If the office of the Solicitor-General gives good legal advice and it is not taken, what is the relevance of this office to this country?

My main concern, just as colleagues are saying, is that Kampala officers never learn from their actions. If a mistake is made, can’t one learn from that mistake after action has been taken where we have lost money - in fact, not only money but big sums of money? Can’t our officers learn from this action if it is not intended? Time and again, they are saying, “Cancelled by Government; frustrated by Government; frustrated; frustrated.” Oh my God! (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: And then compensated. (Laughter)

MS LOWILA: Are these actions not really intended? My main concern is for the minister to help me appreciate the relevance of the office of the Solicitor-General, as I give them credit to motivate them to maintain the integrity they have. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.53
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for their recommendations.

When you read this report, it is full of directives and I am just wondering why. We have the Office of the President, we have the President, we have a lot of presidential advisers around, we have Cabinet ministers but at times I wonder who is not playing their role. Is it that our Cabinet ministers do not advise His Excellency the President or the presidential advisers are just sleeping, leaving the Head of State just to work alone, tired at times, and he just gives directives? 

You can see the President just directing the Attorney-General to act. I do not know how it is done. Do you just write for directives or you request for some advice from the Attorney-General and maybe from that, form an opinion and you act accordingly? In the long run, our Government ends up losing a lot of money. I think we should be kind enough to advise Cabinet and His Excellency the President that you are putting us to a very big test.

At one time we shall go back for elections but what will we tell our people when we are just playing with money like this - give this one; give this one; pick this one? From the word go, you know that this contract is not there and you are even offering free land but the President, Cabinet, everyone is just dilly-dallying, writing, making exchanges. We are holding this country at ransom. It is very painful. 

We should learn from our experience. The other time we had a debate about identity cards, how some people just go to State House, lead some individuals and they end up with a lot of money. When we come to the legal aspect, hon. Elly Karuhanga and Kampala Associated Advocates just go to His Excellency and convince him. At the same time, he is dealing with the companies in this contract and as a consequence, we end up losing a lot of money. In another report again, you find Kampala Associated Advocates going to London to participate in the arbitration. Ladies and gentlemen, honourable members, enough is enough. (Applause)

You may even call us rebels when we mention this but we speak with a lot of pain. We need to change and correct these mistakes. They are so grave and we are making our people of Uganda suffer. (Member timed out.)

5.57
MR JAMES KAKOOZA (NRM, Kabula County, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee. At least I have also been reading the report and I know the difficulties PAC goes through. 

My observation comes from page 50, the recommendations which are made on damages and cancellations. That is where Government loses money. However, the most difficult part - I shared this with the committee – is that when you go to the Registrar of Companies, these companies are not there.  I went to seek clarification. I think it is high time the recommendations we make here became instructive so that the relevant institutions take up the matters seriously. If it is a chain of cancellations and compensations, Government loses money and these companies are not there but the lawyers who are representing these companies are still around, I think the recommendation should be instructive to the IGG and DPP for these people to be prosecuted. 

They should tell us; for instance, when Rawal was called to the committee, one of the people in Government said, “No, we cannot bring this person because the company did not exist and he was in one of the neighbouring countries.” Somebody cannot steal money and run away! They asked the committee to address the matter to Interpol and give the address. But if the face of a person is known and the lawyers who are representing these people are known, why don’t they be held accountable? I - (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I want to give to you is the word from the President. The President himself was shocked that this Rawal was paid US$ 14.5 million. He said that perhaps Rawal should have got half a million dollars for his air ticket and hotel bills. The President said that this money, the US$ 14 million, must be refunded. That information is enough for you to know that the President was shocked that all this money was paid out to Rawal.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the report repeatedly talks of investigations. Recommendation No. 13 says that the investigative arms of Government should step in to lift the veil of incorporation of DCL, to establish its owners and to identify the beneficiaries of the payment of US$ 14.5 million to Kampala Associated Advocates. These recommendations are directives and Government is going to undertake them. The investigative arms of Government are existent. So I do not know whether, much as we talk here, we will improve on this. 

The last speaker here said the President himself was shocked. Now, what more do you need? If the President is dissatisfied with what happened, what do you expect will happen – (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In these documents they gave to us, the President wrote a letter on 28 January 2009 and in the last paragraph of that letter, he is recommending - let me read it, “The figure, US$ 14.5 million should be offered to Dura Cement Ltd as negotiated compensation for the loss of mining rights for 19 years”. It is the President who wrote that. So, please clarify whether the President wrote this letter or it is forgery. 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, if the honourable member studies the position of the President, and indeed people who hold high offices, he would discover that recommendations can be tendered to a person in a position and a decision is made only to discover that that decision was made in error or was misinformation. 

Here I am talking to this House that this report has been studied and discussed and that investigations will take place. This country will know what the truth is. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, as I said, we need to go deeper into detail and the relevant institutions should get hold of these people and have the money recovered. 

In another observation on page 26 where they say, “NEC, including but not limited to the then managing director, Col Mwesigye...” I think if there is an opinion - I have heard from hon. Mwesigye that the Auditor-General did not give any opinion. However, if he did give an opinion on these companies and the ministries, why don’t we go to those corporations – (Member timed out.) 

6.04
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to commend the committee for a job well done. 

I invite Members to look at the time factor; that is when you will know how this government is ripped off by a clique. When you read pages 8 to 9 of the report, Dura Cement Ltd came into the picture in this transaction in July 2006 and Dura got the lease for this land on 19 January 2007 when a lease was transferred to it. Remember, this particular company was incorporated just two months before, on 25 October 2006. Within two months, it gets a lease over this precious mineral. 

Now, on 18 April 2007, exactly three months after, if you read page 5 of the letter from Dura Cement Ltd, it says it was verbally intimated to it to halt its activities. So the termination was brought to its attention exactly three months after. For three months, they had not done anything and they walk away with US$ 14 million. In other words, they get US$ 5 million per month for no work done. 

So who are the involved parties? The first one is H.E the President; let us not mince words. His Excellency the President comes to believe a report served to him by Elly Karuhanga who happens to be his fellow constituent. They are all from Nyabushozi County. Elly Karuhanga is not shown as an officer of Government and based on this report, he directed payment. Where was the money paid? It was paid to Kampala Associated Advocates Ltd where Elly Karuhanga is a senior partner. So, where is the money? Of course, this Dura Cement Ltd is incorporated by shareholders who are all outside the country – they are not even individuals but these are companies. These are two companies, offshore companies, and not individuals. So, isn’t there a high possibility that actually the shareholders of this company are within this country?

If money was paid to Kampala Associated Advocates, definitely every law firm has an account. If Kampala Associated Advocates paid this money, the records must be available as to who received the money and how much. We do not even have to labour. We would even pass this report as it is and wait for the Police to swing into action. I hope the Police this time will not look for people walking to work because there is already a lead on where to begin from to recover the US$ 14 million that was stolen in just three months.(Member timed out.)

6.08
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank Members for this report. The rate at which Government is donating money to the so-called investors is worrisome. Anybody interested in this country must look at the way we are giving away money for free. 

We have a government, a government that has ministers, a government that has technical people. I am dismayed that one of our own, the honourable Col. Mwesigye, is mentioned in this. Apparently, he did not make any effort to see that the House he was joining would be interested in finding out the manner in which he was dispensing his office. Now as you stand, you see him looking at you. (Laughter) What does he expect us to do? Passing judgement on one of our own is quite disturbing. 

I am surprised that hon. Migereko is not here. When the President wrote to him on 5 April 2007, what did the minister respond to the President? When the minister was asked to expedite the cancelling of the contract, knowing the implications behind it, and knowing that there was technical advice from the Solicitor-General against this, we ended up incurring such astronomical losses. 

Madam Speaker, I stand here because I saw the recommendation of the committee about the President. I think it is high time we did something. Each time we have such a dubious transaction, the name of the President is brought into play and we are tied. So, what do we do? I think that it is appropriate at this point in time for Parliament to express its displeasure – (Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: I thank you. When we met the President, he said that actually there should be a law called the Presidential Powers Act so that he knows his powers properly. Maybe when he writes to them, I do not know if people misunderstand his powers. Actually, he said that anytime he is about to come up with that style. 

MR TUMWEBAZE: Madam Speaker, I am aware that PAC interacted with the President and the President has always been eager to interact with committees of Parliament. However, I have perused through the report and the only statement that I read, which is on page 13, and maybe I would have raised this in my submission, is that H.E the President informed PAC that he took the decision to cancel the contract of DCL in favour of Lafarge because of economic and strategic reasons. 

They interacted with him, they have told us, twice. The President is not a member of this House. Is it not procedurally right that when committees interact with the President, the submissions and explanations he gives the committee are produced verbatim in their report such that people who are debating are informed, because the President is not here to clarify what he said –(Interjections)- No, this is very important. 

If I may ask PAC one question; Lafarge had gone to court, how come in your report you do not bring out that one of the reasons why the President was pre-empted to cancel Dura and return the lease to Hima was because there was a pending suit in court by Lafarge, which was a big threat to Government. Why do you summarise and say, “economic and strategic reasons”? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tumwebaze, when was the suit filed? When was the suit filed?

MR TUMWEBAZE: You see, Madam Speaker [HON. MEMBERS: “When?”] - Yes, l will come to that as it is not a “yes” or “no” answer. Listen to the questions we are asking. The committee interacted with the President and the whole House was not in that meeting. Now, they have only written two sentences that the President told them that Lafarge’s contract was terminated because of economic and strategic reasons. That is not the only sentence that he told them. 

I can tell you, Madam Speaker, I am from Kamwenge and before this matter became of public concern, we the leaders of Kamwenge were concerned and actually we expected to be called to PAC to give our side of the story. Hima/Lafarge had this mine for some time. When their rights were terminated, Kamwenge got excited because we knew we were going to get another factory from Dura. Later, it came out that Dura and the same Rajesh was the one who had sold Hima to Lafarge and after it had got the Dura mining rights, the same man was busy mortgaging or looking for people to buy and Lafarge had gone to court. 

Madam Speaker, this can be found out but let me tell you what I know – (Interjections) - You are talking about the President but the President is not here. You interacted with the President –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that let us concentrate on the contents of the report. Honourable, please conclude. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thank you, Madam Speaker. Even on that, on 10 June 1997, that relationship had been formally terminated between Lafarge and NEC and they accepted and that is when, if you read the report, in January 2005 Col Mwesigye now invited Rawal under Dura. Lafarge at that stage did not have any active interest in that place. So, for purposes of the record, hon. Tumwebaze, by that time when these transactions were being done Lafarge had no interest and I do not think that they really went to court.

Having said that, why is it all the time as we trace the dubious people, they run back to the President? Now the President comes out to appeal that, “You know, for me, I did not know that it was US$ 14.5 million; I thought it was US$ 0.5 million.” (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR SSEKIKUBO: So, really, we must find out. That is why I urge Parliament to express displeasure because this trend is not sustainable. We are going back to the old times where deals were being “cut” in State House. We have vilified past leaders that they were involving themselves in pro-forma invoices in State House and we are doing exactly the same.  

I want to end by challenging the minister; I have information that I am still verifying that even now Lafarge itself is on its way out. When they get the period within which they do not have to pay taxes, once it expires they will find a way out. I am reliably informed that this time round, even Lafarge is getting somebody to buy out over a deposit they got free of charge. This country is being ripped off and the Cabinet, the President and those involved are accompanying this theft of Ugandans. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: There is information from hon. Byarugaba.

HON. MEMBER: Hon. Byarugaba is a member of the committee.

THE SPEAKER: He is giving information.

MR BYARUGABA: I thank you. It is important that we go a little bit behind in the report and also listen to our colleagues on the committee and get the details as to why the President’s name is continually getting into play. 

One, the President was duped by a private citizen – (Interjections) – Yes, it is clear here in the report. Well knowing that the President had not or was not privy to the draft report of KPMG, this man comes and tells His Excellency the President that, “Your Excellency, if we do pay these people their compensation immediately, we are bound to pay US$ 100 million.” Like any leader, the President must have got the shock of his life and said, “Is that so?” (Interjections) - I am only imagining. That is exactly what he told us and that is how he comes in to recommend this US$ 14.5

6.18
MR STEPHEN KAGWERA (NRM, Burahya County, Kabarole): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually, we are all disturbed as a country and particularly us here in this Parliament. Each time things come up, ministers are mentioned, permanent secretaries are mentioned, the President is mentioned and instead of coming up and saying that here there was wrongdoing, people come to defend themselves.

Madam Speaker, the terms of reference are very clear: Whether the contract was executed according to the law, my answer would be, “no”. Whether the contract was cancelled through the right procedures in public interest, the answer would be, “no”. Whether compensation was justified, the answer would be, “no”. Whether the public officials had interest, the answer would be, “yes”.

The honourable Col Fred Mwesigye, in the first instance, why did you have to go to the President as Col Mwesigye? Why am I saying this? Do we have minutes or any written document to the effect that you had a meeting as NEC and they mandated you to go? Even when you are a managing director, you do not work because you are a managing director and you take decisions on your own.

Hon. Col Fred Mwesigye, you are telling us that people should not drag your name here but you are mentioned a number of times here. As a Member of Parliament, why would you speak like that, that do not mention my name? If you did not want your name to be mentioned here, you should not have involved yourself in such a scandal. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, we are wondering why the so called investors come empty handed, they are given land and everything and at times they are given money. I remember a number of times we appropriate money and give these people. What is this kind of investment? What are we doing as a country? Someone comes empty-handed and says he is an investor and you give money, land and everything! What are you investing?

Madam Speaker, when you look at page 23, when they were getting it from Dura and giving it to Hima Cement, the condition was that the price of cement should go down as soon as possible. We are operating in a free market economy and the President is very aware of this. So, how do you put such a condition? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR KAGWERA: Madam Speaker, the other issue is on page 61, if you can allow me read it, where the President says, “The mutual understanding in terminating the agreement should take into account the fact that the site was earlier given to you without prior financial obligation on your part and that I will not hesitate to recommend your company to develop any other site you may wish to invest in as long as there are no encumbrances...”

The President is taking decisions, I think as Museveni and not even as President. Why do you have to say that “I will not hesitate”? I do not see anywhere where he has consulted. We must differentiate the two; there is the person of the President and there is Museveni the person. (Applause) When he is writing this letter, it is as if he is saying I am giving you this land as Museveni. 

Madam Speaker, we are heading for bad times if we continue with such things. Ugandans are not happy. We won these offices in trust. (Member timed out.) 

6.23
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, there is a saying in Ankole and Kabale that the one who talks about the problem is not the one who has brought the problem. So, I am going to talk and I have actually asked the Holy Spirit to guide me to be very honest with my statements. (Laughter) I am torn apart because some of my own are mentioned but I will try my best to debate. 

Madam Speaker, the problem of middlemen going to the President to confuse him to write some of these things, I do not understand. Mine is simple; I want the honourable Col Fred Mwesigye, who is very close to me, to tell me whether he is the one who took this man called Rawal to the President. If it is true that he is the one who took the man there, then Col Mwesigye, I will wash my hands because this man came with nothing and went back with billions of money from the taxpayer.

I am a doctor by profession; if the President came and told me that this person has peptic ulcers but I want you to give them aspirin, I would tell him that aspirin will corrode the stomach walls and it would cause more ulcers. So, I would say, “It is very bad, Your Excellency; it is better to give maybe a proton pump inhibitor.” I do not think that he would kill me if I said that. My problem is: why do our people mislead the Head of State for the sake of getting some dividends after deals are cut? That is my problem. Why do you tell a lie?

Secondly, where are the institutions and the structures? Are they functional? If you are given a job, if I am given a ministry, do you give me chance to do my work as a minister? That is why I want to advise my brother with whom I studied in Mbarara University of Science and Technology, hon. Tumwebaze, who is now the Minister of the Presidency, to be brave enough and help the President. Don’t be in that car and those chairs and you only breathe A/C and you forget. (Laughter) Remind our Head of State and please tell him the truth; don’t confuse him. You tell him there are some thieves that are taking proceeds from this country and you would have helped our Head of State. 

I am at pains when I see the Head of State mentioned here. 
On Basajjabalaba, when I saw the Head of State’s name being dragged there – Madam Speaker, I have seen that Ugandans now know what to do; whenever they want to steal, they must make sure that they just go to the President and confuse him and then they come and say he has talked and things are done. Whenever we catch them, they just go to him. 

I am of the view that let court take its course and I believe they will do due diligence. (Member timed out) 
 
6.27
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I start my submission, I want to refer to the Bible. Isaiah 10:1-3 says, “Woe to those who make unjust laws, to those who issue oppressive decrees to deprive the poor of their rights and wealth...”

Madam Speaker, when you read the letters in this report, when you start with the letter of the late - may his soul rest in peace - Brig. Mayombo, you shudder. You ask yourself whether at that time when he wrote the letter, he was the President, the Minister of Finance or he was the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Finance. At that time he was even issuing directives to offset tax. As a Permanent Secretary of Defence, he was offsetting tax for an investor. (Laughter) The letter is there in the report. So, you ask yourself, what type of person and leader is that one. When this gets to other leaders in government, they follow it up. They go as per the letter. 

Secondly, when you talk about the President being duped, I do not think that the President can be duped. I cannot believe it - (Applause)- because the President has got the machinery to verify whatever he wants to verify. He has got lieutenants below him, ministers and technical people to give him the information that he requires at any time. I do not see how the President can be duped at any time. I believe that what the President did in writing these letters he did because he was aware of what was happening. (Applause) 

I have got experience of more than 10 years in investigation and I believe this was an organised crime where people sat in a boardroom, agreed on who to do what, when to do it and how to do it. That is why you see the whole operation moved very fast and smooth without anybody detecting it. Even those who were supposed to detect were part of the mission. 

Madam Speaker, I would request that we do not leave this report the way it is. We should have all these people mentioned in this report investigated further for purposes of criminally prosecuting them. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, only half a minute allowed.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, you sent me to represent this Parliament in Manila. I can report that the Chief Justice of the Philippines was impeached because of such actions, because of his failure as Chief Justice to detect corruption within the Judiciary of that country. He actually accepted to leave office. In this case, if the chief executive officer failed to detect such acts and even supported some of them, then we need to look at the character of such a chief executive officer.

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, it is very clear in the report that at first the President said, “pay” but that when he realised that something was not right, he said, “no” – (Interjections) – It is in the report. As we debate such issues, we should be fair to those who do not have the chance to present their opinions to this House. The President is not here to defend himself but it has been said in the report that at first, the President wrote a letter but that later he realised that he had been misinformed. So, are they in order to report such a thing in respect of His Excellency the President of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Can you tell us what happened.

MR AKORA: Madam Speaker, allow me to again give clarification on that matter. It is clear that the honourable minister has not read the report or if he did, he has not conceived it properly. 

The committee has indicated in its report that it met the President, I think twice, and the President gave information and accompanying documents. In our observation, however, we indicated, and I want to paraphrase what the report said, that it was inconceivable. In other words, we are being very diplomatic; we do not believe that the President did not know that he had recommended a payment offer of US$ 14.5 million. It was inconceivable to the committee that the President did not know that.

6.33
MS FLORENCE MUTYABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Namutumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the report made by PAC. I would like to comment on the observation concerning the issue of transferring the sublease to NEC by the honourable Col Fred Mwesigye. 

The NEC is a corporation under the Ministry of Defence. That mother ministry wanted Dura for purposes of security. If I can read verbatim a letter written by Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye on 22 June – see page 21 of the annexure; he says that, “While we take cognizance of the contract terms and conditions, we are obliged by the Ministry of Defence, which is our line ministry, to serve you with a notice of 90 days from the date of this letter terminating the said contract.” The letter goes on to say that the Ministry of Defence wishes to utilise Dura for purposes of security needs. Surely, colleagues, how could Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye refuse to surrender the Dura area when Defence, which is the mother ministry, wanted it?

In the circumstances, I would like to propose that we discharge the honourable Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye from this responsibility – [HON. MEMBERS: No!] - Yes, because it was a requirement by the ministry he served. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.37
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me this opportunity to make comments on this report. I also would like to thank members of the committee for doing a good job particularly by revealing what other people thought were just mere speculations.

It is unfortunate that in this country people do not accept their potentialities. We have different professionals; for example, we have those who have specialised in law, accounting, and we have teachers and so on but there are also those who pretend that they know everything. When you look at page 13, you read that the President is advising and also trying to give directives. I have also seen the President position himself as an expert whenever matters of land occur. When there are issues of health, the President positions himself as an expert. When there are issues of investment, he does the same and when it comes to matters of security, he does the same. So, which profession is the President of our country? What profession does he possess that makes him feel he has to be everywhere? I am asking this question because all of us are actually Ugandans and we have to contribute to the affairs of this country but it is not possible for us to contribute on anything. That is where the problem comes from.

In Hima, there was the original factory, but recently they constructed a second factory on the basis that some survey had been done and the material that would feed the second factory - limestone - would be got from Dura. You realise that all this was sanctioned by the President. He even went to Hima and commissioned that second factory, but within a short time, after a few months, he again sanctioned another person to take up Dura to construct another factory; so, how contradictory is our President?

Secondly, the headlines of today reported that Pope Benedict XVI resigned. (Laughter) The holy man of God resigned just because of one aspect – health and maybe age. I think the President should have even resigned yesterday because I know very well – (Interjections) – Yes!  (Interruption)

MR ISABIRYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Our Constitution is very clear; Article 98 of that Constitution states, “There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of Government and Commander-in-Chief of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour.” 

The point of order I want to raise is that hon. Nzoghu is comparing the President to the Pope who resigned. Is it in order for hon. Nzoghu to compare the Head of State to the Pope?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Pope is the Head of State of the Vatican. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I thank you for your wise ruling. The problem that we have in this country is sycophancy. We do not believe in ourselves and we cannot even defend the sovereignty of our country. I want to finalise with one thing – (Member timed out.)

6.41
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee and all members who have contributed so far to this report. I once stood on this Floor and I asked some people whether we owe them, so that they state the amount and we pay it once and for all because every time there is a corruption case, those very people keep appearing. We want to know their price such that we can pay it off and we safeguard Uganda’s assets. 

Recently, I interacted with people from outside the country and even in my constituency and they told me, and I want to believe them, that Adam and Eve were born here in Uganda because the scandals in this country, the problems of this country – (Laughter) - Today we are debating Dura Cement but I want to give you in figures certified statistics of the money we have lost in the period between 2000 and 2013. We have lost Shs 2.7 billion in NAADS; Shs 1.6 billion in GAVI funds; Shs 9 billion in the IGG’s office; and Shs 5 billion for the bicycles of our poor LCI chairpersons. We have also lost money in Tri-Star and the person I saw parading other investors took our Shs 20 billion. We have lost money at the hands of one individual, Mr Basajjabalaba. I can read billions and billions of money. 

My district is struggling to raise one administrative block, which requires only about Shs 800 million and we cannot find it. Who has this key to this money so that we remove it from him? 
Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we have passed resolutions and we have made recommendations and they are not being implemented. I support the suggestion by hon. Ruhunda to create a specific committee to deal with these matters appropriately. The problem is, who is going to appoint these committees? I do not want it to be the President. Why is it that every matter involves him? Why does he meet investors when he has appointed ministers and their technical people? Why doesn’t he leave these people to do their work so that he does not get involved in these scandals and blunders in Government? (Member timed out?)

6.44
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the committee for this report on Dura Cement. As a citizen of this country, I am dismayed at the lack of shame which continues to prevail in this country. It seems there is nothing which can be done without theft, corruption and without influence-peddling. 

What hurts me most concerning Hima Cement is that the original  Hima Cement was set up by nationalists who served this country effectively. In 1969, Hima Cement was born. During the Amin era, it collapsed. In the early 80s it was rehabilitated using taxpayers money. By 1983 it was producing at 30 per cent. When it was later privatised or handed over, it was given for less than what it cost to rehabilitate it. We do not have shame in getting rid of national assets. It is a shame that a letter is being written saying, “We want it for security purposes”. It was a national asset! Did it not occur to the government that this is an important asset before it was handed over? 

Again and again, we go through the same process. When we were discussing HABA Group, I raised concerns that we need to protect the presidency but I was attacked by some members of the Front Bench. Honestly, each and every time we go through these scandals, are you really protecting the presidency or you are assisting in running it down? Every scandal is a President’s letter, a President’s directive; what is happening? 

As somebody who is concerned about the future of this country, we cannot have the presidency involved in every single scandal that takes place, but it seems nothing can be done. [HON. MEMBER: “It is too late.”] It is truly too late because I do not know what else can happen. Tomorrow we will be discussing something else and it will be more billions which have been swindled out of this country. 

All our assets have gone for next to nothing and we cannot even establish a factory. Across the country, all the concerns which were under the Uganda Development Corporation are gone. You look at the Commonwealth Development Corporation under which our UDC was born, it owns a lot of vital assets. Dig deep and you will find that Umeme is owned by CDC, which until recently was a public company, and yet when we are giving away our vital and strategic economic assets to public companies of foreign countries, we can talk about security. Where is our future? 

I am glad that the Minister of Works and Transport raised the concern about bringing up somebody’s name when he is not here to defend himself, but every time the committee interviews, they do not put all the minutes. But let us remember the nationalists who worked to put up these public assets which the government has failed to take care of and has got rid of. Remember that as you raise that question of those who cannot defend themselves. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

6.49
MRS SANTA ALUM OGWANG (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this. I would like to first of all start by appreciating the work of the Public Accounts Committee. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to state that we have a well organised system, a system of making quick and easy money. I would like to thank PAC once again. From the beginning of their report, they started by asking a question: “how did this compensation come about; who caused this financial loss?” The PAC members, allow me to put it this way: What is this system called - the system of stealing money - and who are those people behind this system? If you answer those questions, then we shall get a way of dealing with this system.

Madam Speaker, at the beginning of this debate, hon. Col Mwesigye was disputing this, but on page 8 I see that he is the one who invited Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal. Hon. Mwesigye, allow me to ask you this question: What was your interest at the time of inviting Rajesh? Was it by invitation or by advert? Did you need to invite him, advertise or follow the normal procedure? Not until you answer these questions, I will not leave you out of this problem. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, this is because the ordinary invitation is highly questionable. Not only that, PAC in their first observation noted that after giving Lafarge/Hima Cement 14 years, a sublease was also tendered. I concur with the committee that this was the beginning of the problem. When you were investigating the bicycle saga, it was the same man who was also mentioned. He got the contract and immediately got the sublease. I see this as a consistent way of “eating” public money. Honourable members, you are saying this man had no investments; I see that the investment conmen need is only a presidential letter or a presidential directive. When you have that, you already have an investment.

Madam Speaker, each time the President gives a directive, we all know that he has immunity from prosecution and that means that we cannot touch all these other people who have done this because they will all fall back to him. That is why we cannot see the Minister of Energy who was in charge mentioned here. This is just like a game played by primary school children; music is played and a limited number of chairs are provided. So when you are dancing, you have to be conscious that you must sit when the music is abruptly stopped. (Laughter) Some of these people we have seen here, like hon. Makubuya, it is because they were not conscious to find a place to sit. (Laughter) (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will add you half a minute.

MRS OGWANG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am saying this because the last time we had the bicycle saga, it was the Minister, the Solicitor-General, the Attorney-General and Bank of Uganda. Now this report is more or less the same as that one of the bicycle saga. I want to say that hon. Makubuya cut his neck last time and today he has cut his buttocks – (Laughter) – tomorrow again he will cut his leg; where will he cut next? (Laughter) 

I concur with recommendation No.4 which says, “The President respects the technical advice given by Government departments rather than relying on briefs and information from by unofficial sources...” I strongly agree. The solution to this problem that we are seeing, and we shall continue to see more of, lies with the President. If he does not stop giving erroneous directives, we shall continue to see more and more of this. So, the only recommendation is recommendation No.4. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to introduce hon. Mutuluuza, former member of this Parliament. He is there in the gallery. You are welcome. (Applause)

6.55
MR JACK SABIITI (FDC, Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the President has executive powers but at the same time the Constitution directs that he must adhere to the Constitution and there are relevant departments which are supposed to do his work. I remember when we were handling the Bank of Uganda issue, some of us were disappointed and had to leave this Parliament because PAC refused to mention the President as one of the people to be named in the report. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time we became open if we are to talk about good governance in this country. Whatever powers one has in this country, we must make sure that the resources of this country go to the relevant people; we should not squander them but ensure they go to the right institutions. I, therefore, recommend that recommendation No.4 clearly comes out to name the President. If we continue leaving out the President, we shall just be playing around, saying “the presidency, the presidency”. 

It is true that the President is exempted from prosecution, but if we name the President, I think he will begin to realise that there are some institutions that are supposed to do his work. I, therefore, recommend that the President be held personally liable. (Applause) It will be my recommendation later when we come to these resolutions. He should be held liable for losing US$ 14.5 million and for basically writing that letter to grant this money to Dura Cement. It is my contribution because we are tired of trying to protect the President. We should now come out clearly and make sure he is named so that we protect the institutions of Government. Thank you.

6.57
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the last 12 years I have been in this Parliament, this seems to be one of the best reports to come from any committee. I congratulate the Public Accounts Committee. (Applause) 

Let me say that this is the first time I have seen somebody getting legal advice from an opponent in order to sort out the opponent’s problem. Hon. Elly Karuhanga was the lawyer for Dura Cement but he is the one who advised the President to pay that amount when Dura was suing Uganda or the President. It does not happen elsewhere and it defeats both legal and commonsense; it is illogical and unethical. 

The KPMG report they seek to rely on was made for the consumption of the negotiating team. Instead, it was brought to the attention of the President by the lawyer of the adversary. This sort of thing can only happen in Uganda, not anywhere else. Why does the President go on to terminate a contract without seeking legal advice? The first thing you do is to seek legal advice; you have the Attorney-General who you pay and he has staff to give advice. Ask them, “Should I terminate this contract?” “What are the consequences?” 

When you read the letters from the President, he has already directed the termination of the contract without knowing the consequences. There are things within this report which make some of us think that the President’s behaviour is not consistent with innocence. (Laughter) There is a very big problem, Madam Speaker. The figure of US$ 14.5 million was a directive of the President and he sought advice from the lawyer of Dura Cement, who was being paid, hon. Elly Karuhanga. When the Attorney-General’s Chambers received the letter, they started working towards justifying the payment of US$ 14.5 million. They had no option, their hands were tied. This was purely a deal!

Madam Speaker, when you look at page 15 and 16, the initial claim of US$ 103 million was examined by KPMG and their conclusion was that they are not entitled to even one dollar. However, in the option they say, on page 17, paragraph 34, assuming Dura’s capital investments, production quantities, operating expenses and sales revenues in the proposal were realised, the anticipated net profit attributable to Dura shareholders over the 19-year term of the lease would have been US$ 14.5 million. That is assuming they had put in the money, but these people had not put in even a single penny. So, what they were entitled to were the expenses, general damages just for breach, and here the lawyers got it correctly. The technical people should be upheld. That is where I defer with some of the recommendations here. They did it very well; they put it in writing. Look at the memo from the State Attorney.

Rt Hon. Speaker, I seek your indulgence to look at that document. There was a memo to the Attorney-General, page 73. It says, “At the start of these negotiations, the Plaintiff’s advocates stated that they accepted the offer of the President of US$ 14.5 million...” It is actually the President who made the offer but worse still, when the President made that offer or suggestion, he copied it to Dura. I wish you can read the President’s letter which he copied to his adversary. He wrote to the Attorney-General’s Chambers and said, “Can we offer them US$ 14.5 million?” and he copied it to the adversary. So when they came they said, “Even the President has already offered us the money”. (Member timed out)

7.04
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. This is a very good and clear report and I wish to thank our colleagues for it. I wish to state from the onset that the President should be held responsible for the loss of this money. The President has continued writing letters and he says he did not know. In the case of Basajjabalaba, he said he did not know. Now on the Dura sale, he did not know. It is a lie. The President knows and he writes these letters knowing and he causes these losses.

Dura Cement was given money by the President. I think that the President, either knowingly or unknowingly, abates theft or looting of public resources. There is no doubt about that and it is not hearsay; it is all based on letters written by him. It would be unfair to punish Col Mwesigye or any other accounting officer for a letter they wrote in this case and you do not punish the President who also wrote a letter. Where would the logic be?

This was organised theft by a Mafia group; it is so clear. This man, Rawal Rajesh, was allocated Hima Cement. I was a journalist then and I covered the story. He was allocated Hima Cement and he had a lawyer who is a minister in this Government. I think they paid something like US$ 9 million for Hima Cement and then they came around and said they had been duped as the cement in Kasese was not enough. So the government returned some of the money to them. A few months later, Rawal sold to Lafarge. 

Again, the Dura sale is in the same syndicate. They first allocate Dura Cement to Lafarge and it does not do anything, then they give it Rawal and he returns it and sells to this company. It is all calculated to cheat the people of Uganda and the beneficiaries are those who are near the President. There is no one from Bugiri who will ever move near the President and benefit from things like this. – [HON. MEMBER: “Not even Kamuli?”]  Maybe Kamuli can benefit because – But it is always them. Have you ever heard a big scandal where there is somebody from Karamoja or Kamuli or Bugiri? It is all to do with people around the President. So, it is high time we say to the President that he should be held responsible for the loss of some of these monies. We cannot sue him but it should be recorded that he was responsible for the loss of public resources.

Madam Speaker, the companies which have kept on doing wrong things and carrying out dubious contracts with Government like this KAA and Mr Rawal should be blacklisted and should not do business with the Republic of Uganda. This is not the first time; they have their footprints everywhere, looting the people of Uganda. (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. The information I want to pass on to the House is that actually in the formation of this racket of the companies, when you look at Dura it has two offshore shareholders but the Rawal Rajesh we are talking about is not a director within the company, neither did he even have the power of attorney to act on behalf of the company. That is the information I want to pass on.

MR WAFULA: Thank you very much. How can the President deal with a company, which was formed two days before? It’s not only this one; there have been several companies formed in a few days and the President awards them contracts and he says that he did not know. (Member timed out)

7.09
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have made many recommendations and some members are getting irritated and tired. One thing I have taught myself is that I will not get tired of naming the thieves and we should all join up. If the Executive does not take our recommendations, let us speak and embarrass them in whatever fora we get the opportunity to.

Madam Speaker, I have heard Members say that the President has been duped, but whenever these issues come up, have we heard any name from Bunyoro duping the President? Have we heard anyone from Karamoja duping the President? In this case here, Col Fred Mwesigye is from Nyabushozi, hon. Elly Karuhanga is from Nyabushozi and the President is from Nyabushozi. Honourable Colonel, where did you introduce this man to the President from? Was it in State House or was it in Rwakitura? On page 8 of the report it is clearly stated that you introduced him to the President. I was also there in the committee that day when you told us that you introduced this gentleman to the President. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of colleagues that please, if you have any case that involves money and you see Kampala Associated Advocates, please fight it tooth and nail. We have seen in the Acholi compensation, they paid Shs 5 billion and then another Shs 10 billion but the money has not reached its destination, it is with Kampala Associated Advocates. During the campaigns, Kampala Associated Advocates came up to help the people of Teso saying that it was going to get their money, but up to today they have not got it because they know the case involves a lot of money. Now in this case it is only Kampala Associated Advocates. I think this firm should be de-registered or the Uganda Law Council should blacklist these directors and ban them from practicing the profession.

Rt Hon. Speaker and honourable members, on the issue of Dura compensation, there is a letter here which was passed on to me and it is from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, written to the Commissioner-General of URA instructing them to pay back the money. The legal opinion of the Solicitor-General was that this money which URA had collected from Kampala Associated Advocates as the mandatory 30 per cent when a tax payer appeals be refunded. I will take this letter to the chairperson. 

So, it is the Solicitor-General, and Uganda Revenue Authority cannot go against what the Solicitor-General had instructed on the 30 March 2011. So, when we come to the issue of recommendations, it should be noted that it is the Solicitor-General because this letter is written by Oluka Henry for the Solicitor-General. He wrote most of the letters we have seen in the report from the Solicitor-General. So, I thought that I should bring that to the attention of the Members and the committee. Thank you. 

7.12
MR GILBERT OLANYA (Independent, Kilak County, Amuru): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work done. What we now need to tell ourselves is: in Uganda if you see an investor coming, that investor will be given free land. If you look at it critically, you find that thieves are with the so called investors. The moment they connive with the so called investors, they emphasise that land must be given free of charge. 

I would like to give you an example, Madam Speaker, from Amuru District. The President called upon the people to give 40,000 hectares of land, free of charge, to investors. What will our people benefit after giving away their land free of charge? The moment you ask such questions, they say you are anti-development. You have heard the President saying that we are blocking sugarcane growing in Amuru District. They wanted our people to give away their land free of charge in the name of investors. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we need to be very critical. We should not put so much hope in the so called investors. We need to understand their credibility. We need to understand where they are coming from and the source of their income. 

Madam Speaker, Col Mwesigye appeared several times in this particular document. I would like to appeal to my colleague, Col Mwesigye, to be transparent and tell the truth to the nation. We should not think that we are the last generation in Uganda. There are so many people who are coming after us. So, we should not think of exhausting all the resources that we have currently. 

I would like to appreciate the committee where they said that the President should respect the technical advice given to him. It looked as if there are other people who are misleading the President. They are advising the President as if they are still in the bush. (Laughter) It seems the President nowadays majorly relies on the advice given by operatives or those who are not properly trusted. The President normally relies on such advice. If they advise the President that this is happening, he will not bother to follow what the technical people tell him. The cadres should stop misleading our President.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we should look at Uganda as our own property. We should not think that we are going to exhaust each and everything tomorrow. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

7.16
DR LULUME BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would also like to thank the Public Accounts Committee for the work well done and for the recommendations that they have made. 

I have been listening to this debate since it started and the submission of each and every member from both sides of Parliament. I have also looked at the recommendations which have been made and, of course, the submission of the honourable Col Fred Mwesigye. I would want to agree with him that he was a very small man in this scandal. I want to believe that the gentleman across had to take directives from above and Rt Hon. Speaker you know very well that very many public officers fear directives from above because they want to save their skins, they want to save their jobs, they want to take their children to school and so forth. They would want to appease the powers that be. 

I have seen this recommendation No. 4 where they are talking about Justice Bill Kainamura. This was also another small man in the equation. He had to take directives from above, and he was an acting Solicitor-General; poor man was seeking to be instated as a true Solicitor-General. (Laughter) I think even up to today he is an acting Judge. So, you can see how treacherous power can be to hold people at ransom so that they can accept directives from above. 

I want to associate myself with hon. Ssimbwa’s submission that this was a boardroom plot to fleece the whole country and indeed it was established. I also want to appreciate the submission of hon. Sabiiti that it is really foolhardy, if I may say, for Parliament to continue to skirt around the problem. If we are not able to execute our duties as leaders, let us pronounce ourselves as so, that we are simply sterile and we can only make arguments and continue to lament here in Parliament and cannot do anything. 

Rt Hon. Speaker, the President of Uganda, who has been closely associated with this scandal, should be told by this Parliament to return US$ 14.5 million, which was lost under his directive. We are very humble; we are not saying that he is one of the thieves. We are simply saying that his directive caused a loss of US$ 14.5 million and we should beg the President to return this money as an individual. Thank you very much. 

7.20
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A Member did ask, what are we dealing with? My answer is that we are dealing with a subject called lootology. (Laughter) The lootologists are in serious competition as if Uganda is running away. Everybody is busy trying to secure whatever they can go along with. 

At the beginning of the debate, the honourable Col Fred Mwesigye was given the opportunity to contribute. Yes, he is also one of the witnesses who appeared before the committee. At that time I expected Col Fred Mwesigye maybe to beg for a lenient consideration from the House. But when he started praying hard that his name be expunged from the report, I started wondering; instead of going for penance you are committing more problems and opening a can of worms because you are at the centre in all this. 

If you check Annex I on page 24, on 12 January 2005 Col Mwesigye, then Managing Director of NEC, wrote to Motorsense Ltd inviting them to establish a cement factory at Dura. That was in 2005. Among other things he said was, “The government shall give your group all the assistance and guidance that you may require. I am also inviting you...” - mark the words “I am also inviting you - “...to consider co-investment in the establishment of a steel rolling mill and low cost housing.” That was the Colonel inviting a company whose business proposal had not even been appraised. Remember that organisation later sent their business proposal in July 2006. 

In Annex J on page 21, the honourable Col Fred Mwesigye wrote a letter of intent to terminate a sub-lease contract to the Managing Director of Hima Cement on 22 June 2006. Among other things, he said that the Ministry of Defence wishes to utilise NEC Lime Dura for purposes of security needs. This intent to terminate was not even taking into account the capacity of the new organisation, the Rajesh, because their business proposal was sent in July 2006. I can go on and on but what I am saying is, dear colleague, this House cannot keep you out of this organised lootology.  (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, Members have prayed that His Excellency the President be held liable and he should be the one to refund the money. I imagine such a recommendation would make all those others who were involved in the racket to smile because the bigger fish is coming to bail them out. I want to find out, if that proposal is to be held, really do you think it will be Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni refunding? It is going to be the taxpayer paying back; that is how I read it. We will just make it known that yes, the loss was occasioned by wrong directives from the Head of State but when we talk about a refund we are getting back to our very Consolidated Fund, I am afraid. (Member timed out)

7.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA)  (Ms Rebecca Otengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join my colleagues in appreciating the good work done by the committee. You may recall that this work was referred to the committee almost 24 months ago. I would like to thank them because I think they went into detail and they tried to interact with the people whom they thought were relevant to the investigation. I would like to further appreciate them because I have seen over 36 witnesses, including the President. Probably it is important also to appreciate that the President accepted to interact with you. That is not very usual in other places so I say it is important.

Amongst the people that were mentioned and the organisations and companies, page by page there is no page which did not mention either a person as an individual, an officer or the office itself or the company. I think on our part, starting from the Auditor-General who is also part of this Parliament, we did our part. I also know that this House has made a lot of laws creating other agencies which are also in charge of investigation like the IGG, the directorate that we now have in the Police in charge of anti-corruption, and the rest. If you look at our recommendations, all of them seem to refer these people to some of these investigative arms which are created by this House. You will see some places saying, “investigate”, “prosecute”, “be held liable or responsible” and all of them seem to go beyond this House. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that some Members were able to appear before the committee and they made their case, but they were not able to appear before this House except for my brother, the retired Col Fred Mwesigye, and he did not have enough time. Let us, at this point, carry the recommendations that we think are relevant and agreeable to this House and accept that other arms in charge of investigation be given an opportunity to do their work. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS)  (Mr Peter Lokeris): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for a job well done because they were able to interview and consult those they required. However, I would like, honourable members, to just point out the chronology of events which led to all these transactions. 

The National Enterprises Corporation expresses interest in the deposits which were in Dura to be given to them for the purposes specified in the application. Later on, a need arose to change part of the interest in the lime deposits from NEC to Dura Cement for a second factory. Later, around June 1997, the sub-lease again was given to Lafarge. Eight years later, Lafarge defaulted and therefore that part reverted to NEC. In 2005, Rajesh Kumar Rawal, the one we are talking about, shows up. He is interested in the land and he suggests to work together with NEC to set up a factory. In October 2006, Rawal Kumar incorporates Dura Cement Ltd. The NEC goes through many correspondences and decides to transfer the whole of the concession free of charge to Kumar. Kumar had already bought Hima Cement factory during the privatisation exercise. In 2007, Lafarge Cement got a reply of – they had written their letter –(Interjections)- I am trying to develop what I know.

THE SPEAKER: No, no, hon. Minister please.

MR LOKERIS: They received a letter of intention-(Laughter) - that they wanted to invest in cement production in a large way. This is where the issue arises. They said they wanted to expand their investment, and this is the crux of the matter. Now, there were two opinions. Do we allow them to expand? Do we allow a second factory? The adviser said that if you allow a second factory, then the lime on the other side will get exhausted and therefore that other one will be rendered inoperative. That is where the argument came from -(Interjections)- Wait a little bit. My minutes are going.  

So, now, when the haggling came up, the President’s advice was, “If you think it is economical enough to use the present factory, please continue and you can now negotiate with the other people of Dura Cement so that they pull out. Negotiate on economic terms.” That is what the President said; nothing else! It was then up to us, the rest, the actors, to discuss with these people and say, “You even got this thing free of charge, why do you do this?” (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute.

MR LOKERIS: I want to inform you that the President you are talking about, if he told you something and you said “No”, he will accept. It is up to you to negotiate with him -(Interjections)- As a father, he only tells you, “Okay, go and do this.” He does not do the calculations. Those who do the calculations are different. Thank you very much.

7.33
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth Representative, Female): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Having listened to what the various Members of Parliament have been raising - I have listened and pensively so - I only have one thing to say, that His Excellency the President of this country, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, should ask for forgiveness from Ugandans and also ask for forgiveness from God. We heard a scripture here, and I do not want all of us to pretend that we do not really have a God who presides over us. I do not know if he prays or not-(Laughter) - but that scripture was very serious. That scripture said “Woe unto those who make wrong directives.” In my view, the many corruption scandals in this country many times have had directives from the President behind them. The highest level of humility from a person is to say sorry and ask for forgiveness.

I think that because of his directives, many times this has deprived many Ugandans of their rights. While somebody is getting Shs 39 billion the other side, 300 Ugandans are dying in hospitals, children do not have immunisation drugs and the other women are dying in hospitals because they do not have Mama Kits. How can we proceed in this way, Madam Speaker? 

My heart is at pain and I think that many Members of Parliament too; whereas we are asking for action, I think that a level of humility has to come in our hearts as leaders. It does not mean that he has done it or that he did it knowingly or not, but the fact of the matter is that we are leaders and sometimes we need to accept that we have gone wrong, knowingly or unknowingly. For me, it is a simple thing to say, “Sorry my dear people whom I lead; here and there sometimes maybe I make wrong decisions out of misdirection or technical guidance - like other people have pointed out here - and this has cost us as a country.” He is the fountain of honour and a fountain of honour should be so. We are the ones actually paying the price as a country because Uganda is being called a corrupt nation in the world. 

For me, all this is uncalled for. I think it is very good for the Head of State to say sorry to Ugandans and to ask for forgiveness from God. Indeed, God will forgive. It is very important for us as Members of Parliament to set aside time to repent on behalf of our nation. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute, but honourable members we are closing. We have another report. 

MS AMODING: Somebody is asking me to kneel down and repent. I have no problem with that. I am actually appealing to you, Madam Speaker, if it is possible, let us put aside a day where we, as Parliament, take the lead in this exercise and spiritually, humble ourselves before God. For somebody this might be a small matter but this is very important. I would like you to actually give us time to repent on behalf of Uganda so that God can begin to change us. We shall also ask for forgiveness on behalf of friends and colleagues-(Applause) - and Uganda will be a better place. While we are taking the other action, God will start transforming this nation starting from us, as individuals. We shall even have the grace to forgive our colleagues in case they were involved in this.

I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I really pray that you establish this and we lead Uganda into repentance on behalf of Uganda. I would like Members who are close to the President to take this message to him very seriously that we are asking him to repent. (Laughter)

7.38
PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many times in this Parliament we have cited presidential directives and instructions. Our colleagues on the front bench when they are being sworn in they swear to advise the President without fear or favour. I imagine swearing to give the President advice without fear or favour means that if I receive a directive, I will wait, evaluate it and if I think it could injure or it may not be applicable, then I should advise and say, “But Sir, this thing is not easy; why don’t we move it in this direction?” That is what I think.

I think some colleagues have done it but I have always been at pains when a certain directive has been given and someone says, “It is a directive of the President.” Yes, it was a presidential directive but it was incumbent upon you to say, “Sir, the law or the practice may not apply.” As hon. Lokeris said, if you have a strong reason and you stand by it, President Museveni tends to change his mind if you have got facts. So, we should not hide behind presidential directives.

Secondly, many of us have been around for some time. The Duras, the Tri-Stars and others follow the same pattern -(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, are these  ones– 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, be courteous and listen to colleagues.

DR KASIRIVU: Madam Speaker, if you take the example of Tri-Star; I saw that gentleman, Mr Kananathan, the other day.

MR OKUPA: Mr Kananathan, you may now call him His Excellency, is an ambassador representing Sri Lanka here. This is the man who stole our money and he has not refunded or even apologised. He is right here in Imperial Royal.

DR KASIRIVU: A colleague said here that the organs of the state can pick them from there, but what are they waiting for? If someone took our money and there is evidence, this person should have been arrested long ago, charged and made to pay back. That is why people are saying there is impunity. Apart from taking the money, our children were mistreated in Bugolobi and nothing was done. 

Madam Speaker, let there be due diligence taken before a certain project or company comes in. In these days of the internet, you can actually crosscheck and be sure to get the details of that person. We should no longer have excuses brought to this Parliament that “We did not know” or “the person has disappeared.” How can someone disappear in this dotcom era? Somebody is conniving with criminals to eat our money. We must say no to anybody who wants to eat our money.

7.42
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Mr James Byandala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to thank PAC for this report; it is a good report. I sincerely appreciate the contributions of my fellow colleagues on this Floor; it has been fantastic. 

Madam Speaker, when you join the Executive, you do not change; you remain the same as you would have been in the Opposition or backbench. Government does not support embezzlement of funds. We do not encourage it and we are out to fight embezzlement. That is why the revelations in the Prime Minister’s Office and those in the Ministry of Public Service were initiated by the Executive. This shows you that we are serious and we are not going to tolerate anybody fooling around to steal this money.

When we are debating here, we should know that we are discussing    a report of the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General concentrates on failures, accidents and problems, but we should not forget the many good things which are going on. We should not paint a picture to the public and the rest of the world that things are so bad. If you take stock, there are very many – (Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, as a daughter of the greater north region and the whole country, we are aware that donors are withdrawing funds given to Uganda because of misappropriation of funds and blatant abuse of office, which the honourable minister knows very well. Is it in order for the minister, who is supposed to protect Uganda, to stand up and tell Members not to paint a  poor picture as if the picture painted is not true? Is he in order to urge Members to paint a false picture of Uganda and not represent our people by saying the truth of what is happening? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament and he is funded by the Consolidated Fund. Therefore, I think if he gives a report after his investigations, we should go by it (Applause).

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the ruling but I never said that we should not go by the Auditor-General’s report. All I said is that we should balance what is in the Auditor-General’s report – (Interruptions) – No, I am not contesting; I am just clarifying. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. Does the minister recall what our President told the President of Rwanda? He said, “I am surrounded by thieves.” Wasn’t that on an international scene? Are you therefore in order to tell us that we should not portray the picture that this country is not doing well?

THE SPEAKER: Well, I think I also read in the papers that the President said, while he was in Rwanda, that there are many thieves around here. So I think it is truth. (Laughter)

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, I did not say there are no thieves here. All I said is that let us balance the good things with the bad. I as Byandala, I have no problem for further investigations where it is necessary because we want to get to the bottom of the problem. There is no problem with that and the truth will come out. 

Lastly, a lot has been said about the President giving directives and so forth. When the President writes to us directing, it is not a must that we must do it – (Interjections) – Yes, he writes but you are expected to advise him and when you advise, he listens. If you advise him, he will listen. My colleagues who have been there before me can tell you. You will tell him, “Your Excellency, you said this but it is not possible because of this” and he will listen. So, nobody should hide behind a directive. 

We should remember that the President is actually doing these things in good faith. He wants to see this country moving forward, but some people misinform him as we saw in the case of this lawyer. Some people misdirect him as we have heard many times, but I can assure you I have worked with the gentleman from 1968, I know who he is and he is not the type of person who would want ill for this country. 

7.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to join my colleagues to thank the committee for generating this report which has brought out a number of issues. However, there is one issue which I wanted the Members to understand better. 

Among the recommendations, there is a recommendation that URA Commissioner, Moses Kajubi, should be investigated for waiving tax on compensation. Madam Speaker, URA is the arm of Government that assesses and collects taxes. So URA, after it learnt that there was a consent judgment, assessed taxes worth about Shs 10.7 billion – (Interjection) -  They assessed taxes of Shs 10.7 billion and this assessment was based on that judgment. 

Now, Dura Cement, through their lawyers, objected to this assessment, which is normal; any taxpayer can object to an assessment. They argued that the compensation was not taxable because it was for special or general damages plus costs. They also argued that Dura had agreed to drop or forego all claims to lost earnings and profit, and so on the basis of that, this money that they were getting as compensation was just restitution or designed to return them to the position they were at prior to the judgement. 

Madam Speaker, because URA received this appeal, they contacted the Solicitor-General. This is the opinion that hon. Okupa was referring to, that the Solicitor-General was to provide the details that constituted the damages and also give advice. This advice was given; the Solicitor-General responded to URA. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I am disturbed. Hon. Aston Kajara is a lawyer and he is very experienced, with over 15 years in Parliament, and he is a Minister of State for Finance. He knows that the power to impose and waive taxes is with Parliament, but if he is speaking like that then what is happening behind you? The power to impose and waive is with Parliament. If you, the Minister of State for Finance, is speaking like that, are you really informed?   

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, hon. Ekanya also knows that there are laws governing assessment and collection of taxes. In the wisdom of the Solicitor-General, he advised that after protracted negotiations, the plaintiff had accepted to drop claims as loss of profits. The Solicitor-General further advised that no compensation income was ever paid and, therefore, the plaintiff having dropped those claims was goodwill, and that is the opinion hon. Okupa was referring to. On the basis of that, URA vacated the assessment of that tax as advised by the Solicitor-General that they were not legally tenable, that they could not have collected those taxes. 

Madam Speaker, I brought that out so that the members, in taking a decision, do understand that this commissioner was acting on the advice of the Solicitor-General that the taxation of payment to Dura could not be legally tenable since both parties had agreed on them when they agreed on the special damages. That is what I wanted to bring out, Madam Speaker, and I thank you, honourable Members.

7.54
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Women Representative, Gulu): Madam Speaker, let me thank the committee for work well done. I feel so much pain because two days ago I was at the Northern Uganda Youth Centre, which should have opened together with all other schools but it did not because of this plundering of the country. Who are the people who plunder the country? These are the people who actually dupe the people down there. Who are the people who put on  “prosperity-for-all” t-shirts? Are they the people who are here, who are very rich, stinking rich, or are they the poor people? Why do we deceive our people? I think that this committee should even go further to compile all the thefts in the country - the stealing of the funds for the bicycles, Tri-Star etc - and we see. 

If we talk about quality education for our people, we compare the education in the 60s and the education now, are we really there? Have we not actually pushed the poor to be there so that the rich can operate their schools differently? Look at the roads of Uganda. Look at even the health status of Ugandans. Are we really serious? Most of us here are representing the people and the President represents the whole country. The whole country elected the President of Uganda and here is the President who actually abuses the rights of the people of Uganda. The people down there actually think that this money belongs to the President. Sometimes we tell them, because they do not know, that this is their money. It is taxpayers’ money that is actually being abused so much. 

Let us go all out to educate our people. I think civic education should be brought back and should be for all so that people of Uganda know their rights and know that if Betty is stealing, then she should be brought to book. But now you find people stealing without shame. What makes us not think that the people who got involved in this were actually behind the business, that they had vested interest? We always think that we must scoop for ourselves and we forget the Ugandans who suffer so much. 

If it was within my power, those poor people would not put on the t-shirts with “prosperity-for-all”. When are they going to prosper if we are stealing like this? Why do we have to pay or waste taxpayers’ money for presidential advisors? What are they doing? It looks like they have no work and so why should we use taxpayers’ money to pay them? Some of us – (Member timed out)

7.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): I thank you very much.

On page 8 of the report it says that on 22 June 2006, NEC issued 90 days’ notice of termination of the contract. Before the 90 days could expire, on 9 August 2006, Col Fred Mwesigye terminated the contract. The 90 days were not over. If you go down to the third paragraph, it says, “On 9 August 2006, DCL’s business proposal was officially accepted by Government.” The day he terminated the contract is the same day Dura Cement Ltd’s business proposal was accepted. Also, note that Dura was incorporated on 25 October 2006. So the proposal was accepted before the company was incorporated. That is how you know the thieves.

Madam Speaker, I want to concentrate on letters only. On 2 February 2007, there is a letter that was written by Wandera who is the Commissioner for Mining. He extended the contract from four to 19 years commencing in March 2007. Then on 4 April 2007, President Museveni writes cancelling the contract, after two months. They had given them 19 years but two months later, they cancelled it. But of interest is that the letter is copied to Linda Chalker. Now, what is the deal with Linda Chalker in this Dura thing? 

Madam Speaker, on 7 May 2007, the President officially communicated to Rajesh offering him the money. Now, what is of interest is that this company called Lafarge was given this place for eight years but it never developed it but now it comes up and wants to develop it. The person who got it bought it from the same man who has formed Dura, whom Col Mwesigye picked from Nairobi in January 2005. (Interjection) He picked him from Nairobi; it is there. 

Madam Speaker, if you read through all this, you realise it was an organised criminal act for a period of only eight months. Within eight months it had been executed and US$ 16.5 million was gone. People advised that they discount it to US$ 6.5 million but Makubuya, the Attorney-General, rejected. He said they should not discount; they must pay all the money. What does discounting mean? They said that if they had invested, by the 19th year they would have earned US$ 14.5 million. Now, you are paying the US$ 14.5 million which should have been earned in the 19th year now, so that means we should reduce it; you discount at that rate. But Col Mwesigye and his team said, “No, do not discount it; pay it in full.”

Madam Speaker, the US$ 14.5 million was as a result of loss of profit if they had invested. Again, the Solicitor-General’s office, instead of saying this would be loss of business they said these are general damages. The reason was so that they do not pay taxes, with the help of Ministry of Finance. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one more minute. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, at least two more minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, two minutes.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Dura was formed in a tax haven in the Virgin Islands. The shareholders are Beaver and Sweetline, and these are companies. They came together to form a company called Dura in a tax haven. All of you, honourable members, know that these countries where tax havens exist are countries where criminals do business from. I can tell you that this company was formed most likely by Ugandans here, the mafias. 

We now want to confirm, when we compensated Dura, did this money go to the Virgin Islands first? We must confirm that it went there. We must follow it to the Virgin Islands to see how it left, and it is very easy to do this by the way. Madam Speaker, you will discover that this money never left Kampala. When we do that, we shall know the true story. 

Kampala Associated Advocates consists of lawyers who were former lawyers in the Attorney-General’s chamber. They left it because they knew how to defraud government. They went and formed a company so that they can steal government money. There are many reports, if you looked at them, where you will get Kampala Associated Advocates involved - NSSF, CAA where in one day they had collected Shs 50 billion and had been paid Shs 6 billion at short notice, and others. At an appropriate time, Madam Speaker, we should come up with serious recommendations on this Kampala Associated Advocates. It is a dangerous company. If you are not careful, it is going to finish us the people of Uganda. We suspect this company may have been formed for the purpose of finishing off Ugandans, and hon. Byandala knows it - (Laughter) - because he has seen what it does.

Madam Speaker, I think the President has made big mistakes. I am happy that he has started looking at young people like my brother, Frank Tumwebaze, maybe he will advise better; but if you look at Prof. Kabwegyere, these tired ones, we have a big problem. (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I normally do not want to interrupt my good friend who claims to be younger than me, not by default but by reality. Is he in order to imagine that when you are young, all your brains are working all the time and when you are mature, that they go to sleep? Is he in order not to forget that young as he was, he did not win the elections and yet the one who beat him was older?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, I have not established the ages of those candidates. Please conclude. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, he knows very well that in Budadiri West I won an election. For you in Bushenyi, a youth beat you badly. (Laughter) I want to tell Professor that I love him so much and he is here because of only one vote, from the President, and any time he can withdraw it. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 34 Members have contributed to this report. I think we have debated enough. I just want to hear from the chair on the issue raised by hon. Okupa and the honourable minister. That is where we have contention. Also the issue of the instructions to the commissioner of URA; can we hear from you on that and then we conclude this report.

8.08
THE CHAIRPERSON, PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (Mr Kassiano Wadri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I want to thank all the Members who have positively given their opinions and views on the report of the Public Accounts Committee.

Madam Speaker, this letter which was ostensibly written by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has just come to our attention. During the time when we interfaced with witnesses from the Ministry of Finance and witnesses from the same ministry, this letter was never brought to our attention. Probably, if it had been brought to our attention, we would have taken a decision as a committee. 

Madam Speaker, what I can say at this particular time is that by the time we go into considering the recommendations, the members of the Public Accounts Committee will have taken a position on these documents so that it becomes the committee’s position. Madam Speaker, since it has just come to our attention, I beg that we be given time, preferably tomorrow when we come back, so that we can be able to have a position of the committee and not that of the chair.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I propose that we take a vote on all the others except that one so that we only remain with one issue?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I now put the question that the report be adopted save for the issue of the commissioner.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Speaker, yes you put the question and we voted but you did not pronounce yourself.

THE SPEAKER: No, I pronounced myself; I said the ayes have it. It is only that one which is outstanding –(Interjection)- Okay, they will come together with that one tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we are saying this because a man who extends a lease from four years, before an investment is done, to 19 years - Within two months it is cancelled so that somebody is compensated for all those 19 years. If it had been compensation for only four years, maybe the amount would have been different. So, unless you are saying –

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that one and the one on the commissioner will come tomorrow.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: In other words, we shall bring some additions tomorrow. In that case there is no problem.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us move on to the next item on the Order Paper.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON COMPENSATION PAID FOR JINJA-BUGIRI ROAD

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report was presented last week. I want to note those who did not speak earlier and they include, among others: hon. Peter Ogwang, hon. Oboth, hon. Migadde and hon. Ekanya. Let us start with those – (Interjections) - No, no, it has to be today. 

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I sincerely want to applaud members of the Ninth Parliament for the hard work we are doing. As you are aware, members have been really diligently concentrating on the debate. However, you realise that it is a biological phenomenon that at a certain stage, there is always a principle of diminishing returns. So, I now want to propose that this is the appropriate time for us to respond to that principle so that we resume debate tomorrow.

Additionally, I would like to pray that item No.6 in the notice of business to follow be sorted out this week, where possible, and that is the Anti Homosexuality Bill, 2009. My wish is that we bring up this Bill in the course of this week. We need to handle it because the vice is really eating up our communities. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the reasons I am trying to get many items off the Order Paper is to ensure that whatever appears on it is handled this week. However, I would also like you to agree with me that tomorrow this debate should be for only about 10 people. We do not need all the 34 members to speak to it like we did today. If that is agreed upon, we will allow only those named and others to make 10 and after we will move on. We can share out the work.

Honourable members, I forgot something in my Communication from the Chair. I want us to meet here tomorrow at 10.00a.m. to discuss the issue of gratuity. I had given you notice last week that we should have a meeting in the morning at 10 O’clock –(Interjections) -  Yes, a closed one. Since the Conference Hall is still under rehabilitation, we will sit in here and we deal with that before we will adjourn to come back for the House at 2.00p.m.

So, House is adjourned to tomorrow first to 10.00a.m for the other closed meeting and 2.00p.m. for the ordinary session.

(The House rose at 8.15p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

