


Wednesday, 27 February 2019

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I will begin by amending the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Internal Affairs to make a statement. 

Secondly, yesterday and on previous occasions, we have discussed the issue in Kigorobya. I have reviewed the situation and I believe it is one where we need to set up a select committee to go and establish what is really going on, on the ground. Therefore, I will be working on the terms of reference and composition of the select committee.

The third issue is something that has preoccupied the country for almost a month; the issue of Miss Curvy Africa and Miss Curvy World. Today I received a delegation of the Miss Curvy Uganda – Oh, I forgot to invite them because they were here at around midday. 

Their position is that they want to change the narrative of beauty pageants and feminism in Uganda. They said that in the world, slim people are celebrated and the big ones are discriminated against. Therefore, they feel that it is time that the fat women are also able to participate in pageants and not be made to feel rejected because of their size.

These are their objectives:

    1. To give plus-size ladies a chance to express themselves on the runway;
    2. To have an event that will showcase creativity of Ugandan ladies in the fashion and beauty categories;
    3. To educate, inspire and empower plus-size Ugandan ladies in various aspects;
    4. To provide a platform for the plus-size ladies to express themselves and build their self-esteem;
    5. Display beauty through size, presentation and mental power.

Honourable members, their position is that they have a right to participate and organise their own beauty pageants. They have assured me that it is not about sex tourism but that they, as Ugandans, big and small, will be able to market this country and talk about our qualities, tourism and so on. Therefore, it is not about sex tourism.

In my view, honourable members, if we insist on this position, we would be discriminating against Ugandans because of their size; for the small ones it is okay but for the big ones, no - (Laughter) - therefore, I appeal for understanding that we allow Ugandans to express themselves. They asked me to ask you to understand their position. Thank you very much.

Honourable members, today we will not get responses from the questions asked; the answers will come tomorrow. For today, I just want to take four issues of national concern and we move back to the Order Paper.

3.06
MS JANEPHER NANTUME EGUNYU (NRM, Woman Representative, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have a problem in my constituency; the ferry that connects Kiyindi landing site to Buvuma has been down for about five days. However, before it broke down, about 70 people almost capsized on their way from Kiyindi to Buvuma. About eight vehicles were on board. 

I would like to ask the Ministry of Works and Transport to urgently help us rehabilitate this ferry or bring us a new one so that we do not lose lives. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a serious issue because there is no other road for them, except the water. Therefore, can I ask the Minister of Works and Transport to update us on Tuesday about what they are doing about the Kiyindi ferry?

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery we have students of Eastern and Southern Management Institute (ESAMI) from Kenya and Malawi. Are you the ones? Please, stand up. They are here to watch our proceedings, you are welcome. (Applause)

Hon. Migadde, your colleague has talked about the ferry. Talk about only the fish now.

3.07
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My issue is about the price of fish. For the last one month, a kilogramme of fish was going for Shs 13,000 at the factory but as we speak, it is Shs 6,000. In the islands, a kilogramme of fish was going for Shs 9,000 but as we speak, it is Shs 3,000. The issue is not about abundance of fish because we are part of the fishing community. Actually, it is scarce. 

Like we have had explanations for other commodities, we would like an explanation from Government as to why there is this sharp decline in prices because our people cannot break even.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter is a bit widespread. Yesterday, hon. Nanyondo of Kyamuswa had also come with the same issue and I told her that my office was carrying out research about all the landing sites so that we can come up with an update on what is happening everywhere. 

However, I think we should still ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to come and explain to us the cause of the sudden drop in prices of fish. We expect the minister on Thursday next week.

3.09
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance. Last year, the Government embarked on an exercise in the country to vaccinate against Hepatitis B. This exercise was meant to be free for all Ugandans. To my surprise, in Mubende and especially my area of jurisdiction, people have been charged between Shs 2,000 and Shs 20,000. This has created discrimination against those who cannot afford. Secondly, it is contrary to the policy.

Madam Speaker, it is good that the Minister of Health is here. My prayer is that you instruct the minister to investigate this matter and provide a report to Parliament. Otherwise, there is a huge outcry in Mubende by those whose money was extorted; moreover, the money was not receipted. How can we account for that money? 

Secondly, in case of any liability, who is liable? Is it the Government or those who extorted the money? Let the minister investigate this matter and report to Parliament. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Health should come and explain the complaints of extortion of money for the Hepatitis B vaccine in Mubende District.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Madam Speaker, protect me from hon. Mbwatekamwa. (Laughter) I am one of the people who are very bitter with this Miss Curvy thing. It is okay; the pageant can go on but women cannot be used as tourist objects.
	
On the issue of Hepatitis B vaccines, these vaccines are provided free of charge to the population. We have been rolling out these vaccines in phases to different parts of the country. Therefore, if there are people who are charging money, especially in our public health facilities, they are doing it wrongly. We will investigate and take the necessary action against those who are doing this. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in connection with health, there is a young man who wrote to me requesting to be sponsored for a trip. He stated, in the letter, that he needed US $150 for the yellow fever injection. I said, why should the yellow fever injection be charged in dollars? Is it US $150? What is the cost? Kindly give us the cost of a yellow fever injection.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the yellow fever vaccine is not one of those vaccines that the Government provides to the population free of charge. We only did this when we had an outbreak in some parts of Masaka and western Uganda. That was when we bought this vaccine.

We also provide free yellow fever vaccines for soldiers who are taken for peace missions. Otherwise, the yellow fever vaccine is provided by the private sector and the fee ranges between Shs 120,000 to Shs 170,000. It is not US $150.
		
Kampala Capital City clinic and Norvik Hospital provide this vaccine. Actually, there are private facilities, which we have accredited. At the airport, they charge about US $50. However, in the other parts of the country, we have hospitals and clinics accredited in Busia and Tororo - the border facilities. Otherwise, the fee should not exceed Shs 170,000. Thank you very much.

3.14
MS IDAH NABAYIGA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the decrease in price of oil palm in Kalangala District.

Farmers in Kalangala District are experiencing a decrease in the price of fresh fruit bunches. These prices have been decreasing since last year. As farmers, we thought that it was due to an increase in supply. As I talk, the harvests are low yet the prices are still low. 

The agreement between the Government of Uganda and Bidco Uganda Ltd established the National Pricing Committee, where we have a member from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who is supposed to be the chairperson of the committee. We have a member from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, a member from the Ministry  of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, a member from Bidco Uganda Ltd, who represents the buyers and the General Manager who represents the farmers.
	
However, ever since that committee was established, it has never sat. The mandate of the committee is to set prices and it is supposed to sit on the fifth day of every month to set prices for farmers. However, this committee has never sat and that is why our farmers are being exploited.
	
It is my humble request that this committee is operationalised to ensure that it sets prices and provides checks and balances to the buyers so that our farmers are not exploited. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is directed to come and explain why the pricing committee for oil palm has not sat so that the prices of the product are established. Come back to us on Thursday next week. 
	
3.16
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In 2001, the people of Sigulu Islands petitioned His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda to grant them district status. 

In 2008 when His Excellency visited the islands, he promised the people district status. When he came back in 2015, he promised the same.

In a letter dated 13 January 2009, the then Minister of Local Government, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire wrote and said, “I propose that the new districts of Namayingo, Sigulu, Kyegegwa and Kiryadongo take effect from 01 July 2009.”
	
Madam Speaker, up to now, these promises have not been fulfilled. My prayer is that the Minister of Local Government comes out clearly on this matter and gives the people of Sigulu Islands a district.
		
I also pray that the minister includes Sigulu Islands on the list of new districts to be created. 

Lastly, I would like to lay on the Table a petition to the President by the people of Sigulu, the minute extracts from the districts of Bugiri and Namayingo and correspondence from the Ministry of Local Government dated 13 January 2009 and the letters. Madam Speaker, you wrote to His Excellency the President, the Minister of Local Government and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs asking them to explain why the district has not been operationalised. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Bring them down here. Honourable members, I checked the Hansard and this House did not approve a district called Lusen. Our resolution is about Kalaki and Sigulu. Therefore, I do not know where that other district came from; certainly not this House.

MR OUMA: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay documents that came from the Ministry of Local Government regarding the creation of Sigulu District, the minutes of Bugiri District Local Government, the minutes of Namayingo District Local Government and your letters and correspondences, Madam Speaker, to the relevant ministries and the President. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister of Local Government, you have an obligation to give the people of Sigulu their district. Since 2009, they have not got their district.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Ouma was informed by the ministry that we are in the process of going to Cabinet –(Interjections)– yes, that is the procedure. We have to go to Cabinet and once it is approved, the people of Sigulu will have their district soon. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, hon. Ouma laid on the Table documents of commitment from Government to create a new district. While answering him, the Minister of Local Government has told him that as a ministry, they are in the process of going to Cabinet. 

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally okay if the minister properly sets out what she is saying exactly under the statement, “We are in the process of going to Cabinet” and what it entails. What does the minister require to go to the Cabinet? What does the process involve? 

THE SPEAKER: The minister should also explain why it has not been actualised since 2009. That is what we want to know. 

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, there are procedures. For example, we need a Certificate of Financial Implications from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development before we can move to Cabinet. Once it is approved, we will come here. That is what we are doing and it includes other areas, which I may not mention here. That is why –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, Sigulu was part of seven districts and only Sigulu was not actualised. That is what we want to know. The matter went to Cabinet and all the other districts were actualised. Therefore, you must now just implement it. 

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Speaker, I am most obliged. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we would like to hear that Sigulu has been actualised because it was one of seven districts.

3.23
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence to comment on the Miss Curvy contest that you communicated to us - (Interjections)– I am begging for the Speaker’s indulgence. 

The girls who participate in the Miss World Contest are indeed young girls like our own, Miss Abenakyo, who was still a student. Their bodies are still intact. However, some of the women we saw displayed on TV as part of the Miss Curvy contest were mothers. We would like to promote the decency –(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, women and girls in Uganda are faced with a number of problems. On various occasions, Madam Speaker, you have given us an opportunity to talk about those problems here. There are also several efforts to uplift women in this country; to enjoy it and be recognised as human beings. In that spirit, some people came up with the idea of the Miss Curvy contest and that idea was discussed here. Beyond that, even the organisers have honoured your office and approached you. If people meet you, they have met Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I know that they told you everything and you were convinced. Out of courtesy, you came here and briefed us even though it was not a requirement. 

Therefore, is hon. Kamateeka in order to start doubting your capacity to make a judgement and continue insinuating that you took a bad decision as if the women who bear children cease to be beautiful? (Laughter) Is she in order to keep dragging Parliament into a matter, which you have properly concluded as our Speaker whom we trust always? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is an issue of human rights. You cannot say that if you are small, you can participate in the pageant but if you are fat, you cannot. Very soon, you will say the pigmies should not be in the contest. Then you will say albinos should not be in the contest. This is about human rights; you are fat but you are beautiful. Let us allow people to be themselves. (Laughter)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS
ON AN INCIDENT THAT TOOK PLACE ON KAMPALA-JINJA HIGHWAY ON SUNDAY, 24 FEBRUARY 2019

3.26
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, I would like to make this statement to brief the House and the whole country on an incident that took place on Kampala-Jinja Highway on Sunday, 24 February 2019. 

On that day, social media was awash with video clips and pictures of an incident that occurred on the Kampala-Jinja Highway at Seeta at about 11.30 a.m. In the video clip and the pictures, two soldiers wearing red berets and a gentleman wearing a white short sleeved shirt are seen physically manhandling a female traffic police officer. 

The two soldiers have now been identified. They are RA/221607 L/CPL Peter Bushikindi and RA/230927 Pte John Robert Okurut. The gentleman in the white short sleeved shirt has also now been identified as His Excellency Ambassador Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza. 

What actions have been taken since this incident? The two UPDF soldiers; L/CPL Peter Bushikindi and Pte John Robert Okurut have been arrested and they are now at Makindye Military Headquarters. They will be subjected to the military judicial process. His Excellency Ambassador Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza has been summoned by the police to make a statement that will be used to process this matter to its logical conclusion –

THE SPEAKER: Why don’t you allow the minister to make a statement? Please, kaa chini.

GEN. ODONGO: Let me categorically state that this incident is most regrettable and detestable. No act of indiscipline by any member of the security agencies will be tolerated. This is the norm, which we follow.

Finally, let me also state that this matter, which I have just informed you about, will be followed to its logical conclusion and all those involved will be handled according to the law. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for listening to me. (Applause)

3.31
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to inform you that I was at the scene 10 minutes after it happened and one of my aides was present.

The gentleman you are talking about was fully involved in slapping. These were the officials at the site; Sgt Namaganda, PC Solomon Kabiito and PC William Ariku who was shouting, “Do not touch me.” 

Madam Speaker, this is not the first incident to happen in that area. I reported on this Floor that almost all vehicles with red number plates, even that of the military, which we used to respect, now have right of way in their own way. The traffic personnel are no longer able to stop them at any point.

Today, as I came, I tried recording the number of military vehicles, which almost caused an accident. Is that the way we are going to protect the image of this country when we are the freedom fighters? My people are saying that the ambassador should also be charged.

Madam Speaker, if you can retrieve the voicemail from BBS Telefayina when they called His Excellency, he said, “That was too small; she deserved bullets.” The voice notes are there - (Member timed out.)

3.33
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The practice in the army is that when a high ranking officer finds his or her juniors, we normally see them saluting and saying, “Jambo Afande.” We saw the ambassador participating meaning he was okay with what was taking place. He did not say anything to stop the private and the corporal.

In common practice, we would have expected the high command to first have the ambassador detained before the other officers suffer. With due respect, the minister is saying that the police has summoned the ambassador. Why didn’t the police summon the corporal and the private? Why did the army ask the corporal to be detained and leave the ambassador to continue being an ambassador and shaming the title?

The minister, with due respect, even referred to him as, ‘His Excellency’. He is not ashamed of addressing him with that title when the whole world got embarrassed when a senior person of that level where the President has always emphasised discipline in the army - we have been proud of the discipline in the army but here we are, ashamed that the people at the highest levels now exhibit indiscipline.

Madam Speaker, much as the minister has –(Interruption) 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to the House is that this has become a trend. One time I was driving around Fairway hotel and I saw a vehicle of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development being escorted. When one of the drivers on the road was not giving way, officers jumped and pulled the driver out of his vehicle. 

I intervened and asked who has the right of way in Uganda. That question must be resolved because this is what is taking place now. Everybody has sharp shooters and officers escorting them. That is the information I would like to give. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you for the information, hon. Mwiru. Madam Speaker, we have our colleagues who are generals here in Parliament. The level of indiscipline in the army has gone beyond our level. Let them do something rather than shaming us and the nation. If an officer could be manhandled like that, look at the rest of the Ugandans who are not in uniform or officers without have those ranks –(Member timed out.)

3.36
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, many times our people tell us that the generals in this country are above the law and people do not believe it. We witnessed it on social media and everybody wondered. I was in Busia. Good enough, sometimes I cross the border to go and say hullo to my colleagues. I was the object of laughter before my honourable colleagues from the Parliament of the Republic of Kenya.

How can a general slap - that was in the middle of the city. What about where generals are and there is no social media? Therefore, I sympathise with the wives of the generals. These people must be beating their wives in their homes – (Laughter) - because according to what we saw, that is abuse to the women of this country.

Madam Speaker, we have been saying that the army in this country are torturing people. They have tortured people on the lakes and at the borders but they have been denying it; that the Members of Parliament are just making noise.

My prayer is that the Commander-in-Chief - (Interruption)

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give my neighbour, hon. Macho, is that the motto of UPDF is, “Discipline and Courage”. However, the officer we are talking about has fallen short of discipline although he is courageous. He, therefore, lacks discipline and that is the information I wanted to give.

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, as I summarise, this act of the UPDF is a problem to the NRM party that I belong to. We are enjoying being in power and we believe that we shall be in power when the UPDF will –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You heard them say that the Speaker does not know what she is saying. When I talked about the islands and brutality on the lakes, they said that the Speaker does not know what she is talking about. Can you imagine?

3.39
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many of us appreciate the role that Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza played in liberating this country. However, the seat of ambassador is the epitome of courtesy and diplomacy reflecting the true character and values of our people.

St Paul says, you are ambassadors of Christ. You are the only letters that other people will ever read about Christ. Therefore, reflect the Christ in you. Certainly, Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza has shown that he does not know the value of the people that he represents. We do not beat our officers on duty, we do not beat our women; we respect them and that is why some of us are concerned that we need to go slow about this Miss Curvy contest.

Madam Speaker, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza does not know the value that Ugandans attach to their disciplined in the army. For him to supervise men to mishandle this woman officer was inconceivable. Therefore, he must resign from his post as a diplomat and an ambassador. Otherwise, the appointing authority should withdraw him and give him other duties. I know that the people of Burundi will not even accept him because he is going to cause a diplomatic row. 

As the minister has promised and my colleagues have said, he should be dealt with but he should resign. It is the right thing for him to – (Interruption)

MR WAKABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Are we in order to discuss Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza without discussing Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kasirye Gwanga who has been shooting – (Interjections) – why are we discussing Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza from Bunyoro and not the latter who has been shooting at people? He almost shot Kusasira. Is this House in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wakabi, the House discusses what is brought to it. What has been brought is the issue of Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Certainly, Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza is not reflecting the character of the people of Uganda and so he should not be our ambassador anywhere. As an officer, he can be given other duties in addition to being held accountable and compensate this officer whom he assaulted. I beg to submit.

3.42
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the people of Uganda and a woman in particular, we condemn what happened to that police officer. What is puzzling, to which I would like to get clarification, is whether we should not treat this case and particularly the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) or the security officers individually. I am saying this because each person ought to be held responsible for their own actions but not the institution as such. 

Therefore, my prayer is that we focus ourselves to the army general who committed what is undesirable of the level of an army general rather than saying it is the UPDF as an institution. 

However, when I watched the clips, I saw the dilemma of the police. They said they were unable to handle a retired UPDF officer. The minister should come up clearly to say under what arrangement Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza can be tried and brought to book. The spokesperson said that he is supposed to be handled either diplomatically or under the UPDF but not under the civil authority. 

We must not lose focus that the spokesperson of the UPDF came out immediately to condemn it. He has even said, with colleagues –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: What did the spokesperson say? Just conclude.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I was trying to develop is that as an institution, their spokesperson condemned the acts of the officer unlike the army general himself who was not even apologetic at all. 

Therefore, if the institution has distanced itself from individual actions, we should push for him to be held responsible for what he did as a disgrace. I would be in line with others to say that he should resign his position as a diplomat and face the wrath of the law without being protected.

Otherwise, the minister should come out clarify to enable the police handle the case because for now, he is between the police and the UPDF. They say he is retired and not for the UPDF, so where does he – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but he is a Ugandan; he can be taken to the ordinary courts. He is not immune; the immunity applies to Burundi not here. 

3.46
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to bring to the attention of the honourable members that when we saw the General beating the police officer, did anyone wonder and have reason why this man had to get irritated to this extent? 

Whereas we have seen this happen on camera - there are so many incidences that have taken place on Kampala roads with its traffic jam, whereby every officer who is supposed to get a solution for it gets an escort car. Escorts in these cars are always beating people and causing accidents and the officers who move in those cars think life is normal in Kampala.

It is high time the Government thought urgently to solve the problem of traffic jam in Kampala. It is so irritating and stressful yet more crimes are supposed to happen that way – (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was a teacher at Shimoni Demonstration School when the motion to sell it was brought. One of the reasons a Member gave was that Shimoni children and parents were causing traffic in Kampala. Shimoni was demolished but traffic jam has never ended. Whether there is traffic jam or not, it is no right to beating somebody. 

Therefore, when an honourable member comes to the Floor and says that Government should find a way of working on the traffic so that soldiers can stop beating people – (Interjection) - that is the message she is delivering; that whether there is traffic or not, there must be sanity. 

Therefore, is the honourable member in order to insinuate that the moment we continue having with traffic, senior officers will continue beating people? I never saw Gen. Aronda Nyakayirima misbehave whenever his convoy got into traffic while he was an army commander.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are out of order. I have a convoy but my escorts have never beaten anybody. I sit in the traffic jam.

MS STELLA KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I accept that I am out of order but I was being rhetorical. I did not condone the beating; I was only putting it across rhetorically to show how dangerous our traffic jam has come to Kampala that it has even caused people to do the undoable. I condemn it - 

THE SPEAKER: No, there is no excuse for beating people; no excuse at all.

3.50
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has briefed Parliament that soldiers have been arrested. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza, under the UPDF Act, is a permanent member of the UPDF High Command. It is not a Council of civilians. The minister cannot wash his hands that you see, the police has summoned him to make a statement because under the UPDF Act, Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza is a soldier permanently; that is how you made the law. Therefore, the minister should be briefing us whether Kyaligonza is also going to join his colleagues at Makindye Military Court Martial.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, according to our Constitution, you are No.3 in Uganda. You have police guards. There are people who are No. 1000 and all guarded by soldiers. There are soldiers everywhere you look in Uganda. Being guarded by soldiers has now become a status symbol. That is how a minister barked at a judge and immediately he finished, there were soldiers escorting him. The Government needs to examine the deployment of soldiers to do law and order.

Finally, Madam Speaker, as we speak about the behaviour of army generals, we also have an army general who deployed his guards to beat up members of Parliament including female MPs. They ended up being hospitalised. Maybe these other army generals are also learning from the one who sent the Special Forces Command  here to beat up MPs including women MPs and that is what we need to examine.

3.54
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza of all other things is the NRM Vice Chairperson, Western Region. The NRM has its core values that have been enshrined over a long time and even liberated a country. Therefore, a person carrying that capacity ought to know what carrying that position tantamounts to. If there are issues over which public officers should resign, this is one of them. He should have gone yesterday. 

Therefore, there are matters that are within our grasp as Parliament. One of them is that we can call for the resignation of Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza - he even carries a title of His Excellency. In addition, the act he did was not only beating a serving police officer but assaulting a woman. That makes it an extra grave case for a man of his calibre.

Therefore, in a world where people are losing shame, let us act firmly and not make a general debate but request this Parliament for Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza to resign as an ambassador. I think this Parliament ought to make that firm decision. We are the firewall for most people who cannot speak for themselves –(Member timed out.)

3.54
MS NABILAH NAGGAYI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I choose to look at this with a gender lens. When you look at the gains of gender equity and the laws this Parliament has passed, including the one on violence against women, I choose to say that the pattern of aggression towards women in their positions of responsibility is on the rise. 

The pattern is clear; of course, we talked about Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kasirye Gwanga violating a woman with bullets on the tyres. As if that was not enough, a certain Member of this House violated a Judge –(Interjection)– yes, we should look at it critically. 

Impunity is when somebody realises and says, “I can use gender aggression because she is a woman.” When we look at what Kyaligonza did to a uniformed police officer doing her duty, we cannot shy away from saying Government should pronounce itself on whether the laws that we have passed to affirm women and protect them –(Member timed out.)

3.56
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not happy with the statement given by the Minister of Internal Affairs. It is just courtesy with no genesis of what happened. We are lucky that we have social media and so we can see each and everything.

Madam Speaker, you can see that the Government is not ready to discipline Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza. I would like to ask the minister to tell us exactly what he is planning to do because these other low-ranked soldiers are already in Makindye Military Police Barracks. Where is he? He is comfortably seated at his home. Tell us what you are planning to do to him.

Secondly, I would like to support you that Sgt Namaganda should be promoted. To fight an army general and those armed soldiers - we should thank Sgt. Namaganda by supporting what she was doing; she was right. The moment we leave her issue hanging, many other officers will not do what they are supposed to do. Therefore, I support you, Madam Speaker. Sgt Namaganda should be promoted to another rank.

Lastly, this is not the first time Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza is behaving like this. In 1989, Maj. Gen. Kyaligonza slapped a policeman –(Member timed out.)

3.58
MS JOY ONGOM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to condemn acts of brutality that happened on a uniformed policewoman who was on official duty working for this country.

Madam Speaker, women have suffered in the hands of brutal men. There is a way they undermine women irrespective of their positions. These are the kind of men who do not even respect their daughters and wives at home or any female beings in their areas.

Madam Speaker, I do not think whatever happened last Sunday would have happened to a man but because she was a woman, somebody thought he could arm-twist her and went to the extent of slapping her; it is unfortunate. We condemn this, as women of Uganda and I condemn it as a woman in this country and I ask Government, most especially the minister, why they took the little “rats” to prison and left the big “cat?” There is nobody above the law in this country. Can we see the army general being tried in the courts of law for brutalising a woman in this country? He is an ambassador –(Member timed out.)

4.00
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have heard the statement presented by our colleague, the Minister of Internal Affairs. However, I thought that the minister would give us the current legal status of immunity being enjoyed by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza and to what extent Government has gone ahead to waive that immunity – (Interjections) – Kindly, allow me to proceed; you can chip in with your ideas later - 

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is giving us a war forward.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker, we are aware that this country ratified the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations in 1961. In my humble observation, it looks like the diplomat, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza, is enjoying legal or diplomatic immunity under this law. However – (Interjections) – Please, listen to me - this country, as an official home of the diplomat, has the obligation to waive that diplomatic immunity. Therefore, I expected to hear from the minister the extent to which Government has gone ahead to take –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mugoya, conclude.

MR MUGOYA: I would like a clear statement from the minister telling us whether all these legal challenges have been handled and the ambassador is ready to face the wrath of the law. 

4.03
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to say that I am disgusted with what I saw on social media, given the fact that women are the mothers of this nation. A woman is a wife and a mother, so she deserves respect. If Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza does not respect any woman, for the sake of his mother – because he was born by a woman - he should respect all women. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder what kind of image our children are going to get. Given the fact that I am a teacher, I know that children learn by seeing, so I imagine that the young boys in school are going to harass girls anywhere just because they saw a woman being harassed. Therefore, the image that is being shown to our young ones is very negative. 

This lady lost her esteem. She was mistreated and harassed while on duty. She may not even be respected by anybody else anymore because people now think that anybody can slap her. 

Yes, members have talked about the international consequences. However, these are my prayers: One, that Ms Namaganda be fully compensated –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude. 

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On top of compensation, I buy the idea of her being promoted. Thirdly, the perpetrators should also be charged with assault. Four, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza resigns from duty. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, the chairperson of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) brought out this issue and we told her to go and prepare a motion, which she did. Now the debate has taken place, so let her come and move her motion. We gave her permission yesterday and so we should allow her move that motion.

4.07
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to condemn the brutal attack and assault on Ms Esther Namaganda, a police traffic officer on duty, by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza and his bodyguards. I move this motion under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda. The motion reads as follows:

“WHEREAS Parliament notes with grave concern the unfortunate incident which occurred on 24 February 2019 at Seeta, Mukono, where Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza and his bodyguards, Lance Corporal Peter Bushindiki and John Robert Okurut, brutally assaulted Ms Esther Namaganda, a traffic police officer on duty; 

AND WHEREAS the misconduct of the officers, stemming from the confrontation, was not only embarrassing to the nation but was also traumatising to watch and portrays the growing level of high handedness, arrogance, ill will and impunity among certain public officials; 

NOTING THAT respect of law enforcement officers and civility towards fellow citizens, irrespective of gender, sex or age, is a national duty embedded in our Constitution and there is no obvious justification for such lethal and drastic action by a Ugandan diplomat towards an officer on duty; 

CONCERNED THAT this shocking, irresponsible, outrageous and utterly astounding conduct depicts the increasing disrespect of women and other vulnerable members of the society and the violation of the Constitution and other laws of Uganda; 

WORRIED THAT the continued holding of office by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza as Uganda’s ambassador to Burundi may compromise the credibility of the investigations by the police and the credibility of Uganda as a country, which is a signatory of various international instruments on human rights; 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament that:
1. 	Parliament condemns, in the strongest terms, the misconduct of Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza and his bodyguards and expresses its dissatisfaction about the lack of concrete action by the responsible authorities on this matter.

2. 	The security agencies provide credible investigations into the incident. 

3. 	The culprits be prosecuted in courts of law in line with our principle of fighting for human rights and freedom in our country. 

4. 	His Excellency the President of Uganda recalls Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza from Burundi where he is serving as an ambassador.  

5. 	Parliament commends Ms Esther Namaganda for professionally executing her duties and enjoins the Inspector General of Police to find a suitable promotion for her, for having exhibited a high level of professionalism.” 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Can we just have a few – First, you need to support the motion and then she will justify. You have supported the motion by standing, now let her justify before we debate. The motion has been seconded; give your justification, honourable member. 

MS KAMUGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It seems there is an attack on the dignity of women. This is not the first incident that has occurred; on several occasions, this so called Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza has been seen doing this. It has not happened only once but it is continuous behaviour. 

You can imagine, a man who has fought and held a gun for so many years laying his palms on a healthy chic, Ms Esther Namaganda. This is unacceptable. To men who are here in this House, we are supposed to be handled softly. Why would such a man lay his hands on a woman who was on duty?

Madam Speaker, I elaborated this yesterday. I would like to request that I give the opportunity to Members to make their contributions. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.12
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very right for Parliament to pass a resolution for this ambassador to be recalled immediately. I say this because this is not going to be the first incident for which an ambassador is recalled. 

You will remember that Uganda’s Deputy Ambassador to Washington, Dickson Ogwal, was recalled on 11 January 2018 for battering his wife. The American Government could not even withstand such weird behaviour. Last month, the Turkish Government recalled the Ambassador of Turkey to Uganda because of what they called “indecent dressing”. Therefore, the ambassador should be recalled immediately without any – (Interjections) - Yes, it should be done.
 
Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the question should be posed now by you as to whether the ambassador should be recalled and we vote.

Lastly, insulting a police officer on duty and in uniform – Even as we are seeking for her promotion, I think this officer should be promoted to the rank of assistant or senior inspector of police. You can imagine just a small lady managed to control the situation. (Member timed out.) 

4.15
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disability, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and the chairperson of UWOPA for the motion. 

This police officer was on duty. The army general, including his bodyguards, decided to break the law by driving the wrong way. If the army general can beat a woman, it shows that he can disobey any person because it seems the army general is above the law. We are going to have police women suffer on the roads because everybody will get up and slap them and move the way they want. 

I think action must be taken to show that there is nobody above the law in Uganda. This lady was doing her job. I also did not hear the minister talk about the driver, who listened to the army general who gave him wrong directions, that is, if he was the one who directed the driver to pass there. 

Touching a woman’s body is against the law in Uganda but this man decided to touch her. I condemn it. You can hold whatever position but as far as touching a woman’s body is concerned, it is not good. 

Madam Speaker, in respect of the women, I would like to say that we are always mistreated at workplaces; people under look women.  I think he thought that this was just a mere woman, but I am happy that she also tried to show them.

4.17
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I contribute to this debate, I want to say that I have heard from colleagues that in the Ninth Parliament, the same army general, while in Bujumbura, locked up Members of the Committee on Public Accounts who had gone to carry out their oversight role, and it was a serious embarrassment. With that, I would like to say that the army general is a serial offender. 

You cannot imagine the scenes of a uniformed traffic policewoman being violated in broad daylight in the line of duty. I believe this is a slap in our faces and a slap in the faces of the people of Uganda. This Parliament should, in no uncertain terms, make it very clear that nobody can do this and get away with it. 

I, therefore, propose that on top of him resigning from his position, he should also be stripped of his titles, three ranks down, because we must send a strong signal to the country and – (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, hon. Paul Amoru, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that we have witnessed situations on the streets of Kampala and everywhere where journalists on duty have been battered. 

We have seen on social media an instance when the Rt Hon. Speaker wrote about the same Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza who had stolen 64 heads of cattle –(Interjections)– Yes, the information is moving around. The Rt. Hon. Speaker wrote and the evidence is there - Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza stealing cows from the wanainchi! You have also heard the honourable member telling us that he arrested Members of Parliament. 

When all this comes out, this is an opportunity for us to deal with impunity. This is a chance for this Parliament to make a resolution to deal with the impunity of a senior army general of this nature. (Applause)

4.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the chairperson of UWOPA for the motion she has moved. I support the motion and also support the recommendation by hon. Amoru that indeed the army general be stripped of a rank in consideration of the feminine position of this country that he offended the other day. I believe he should be demoted to a rank lower.

That said, I wanted to comment on my colleague, hon. Mugoya’s position. He believes that the army general has immunity in this country. This is something I do not believe to be true at all. I know the army general is subject to the Constitution of this country. I know that the laws of diplomatic immunity apply to the country where somebody is deployed. Not even the Vice-President of this country has got – (Interruption)

MR OJARA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving me this opportunity to give you information. I worked with the diplomatic community for about four years. If you commit a crime in a country in which you are working, you are subject to deportation to your original country. Therefore, you are not going to elude the law in your country. It will actually affect you just like any other citizen of that country because you belong to that country.

We believe the army general, His Excellency – I do not know whether he should still be called His Excellency – (Interjections) - He should not be called His Excellency anymore. I believe he is actually subject to the law of this country. Therefore, when the minister alludes to the fact that he cannot be tried, I do not think that is correct. 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like us to imagine the pain of a policewoman who leaves home very early to go and stand on the road under the sun or in the rain, the whole day, trying to guide traffic and bring order to this country. Imagine her going through all that pain coupled with the marginal payment that she takes home, then a responsible person or somebody supposed to be responsible comes and roughs up this woman. Roughing up a mother, somebody’s wife and most especially a woman is most unacceptable. (Member timed out.)

4.23
MS CHRISTINE ACHEN (NRM, District Woman Representative, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, yesterday when I looked at my phone, I saw a photograph of a traffic policewoman being beaten by men - not even a man, but men – and I really wondered. I imagined that if a policewoman on duty is being beaten by men, how about our women at the grassroots.

Madam Speaker, men are mistreating women –(Interjections)– Men who always beat women – 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow the Member to speak.

MS ACHEN: Men who always beat women –(Interjections)– Not all men beat women, but men who always beat women, if you check properly, even inside those trousers there is nothing completely. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Proceed, hon. Achen.

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Achen for giving way. The information I would like to give to this House is that Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza was a member of this House immediately after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza fought in this very Parliament; he beat up a Woman Member of Parliament in this very House.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Aogan, what is the point order about?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, as men, we respect the women of this House, we respect the women of Uganda and we respect every Ugandan. We cannot partake of the information that the honourable colleague is trying to give. This is because she said something that has already angered me –(Interjections)– by making a blanket statement that men beat women, without clearly specifying. Madam Speaker, which men? 

Beyond that, the honourable member went ahead to mention something, which is un-parliamentary. Is it in order? Can she lay on the Table what she is purporting here? Is she, therefore, in order to allude to what she is trying to allude to?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think she can lay anything because I do not think she has it. (Laughter) I think she qualified her comment by saying “some men”. She qualified it. Please, conclude.

MS ACHEN: Madam Speaker, I did not mean all men, but some men like Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza. Additionally, in Uganda, the percentage of domestic violence is on the rise. Therefore, I am not saying all men, but some of them.

As I conclude, I would like to appeal to all Ugandans, especially those who are being escorted – (Member timed out.)

4.29
CAPT. (RTD) DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda South, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we are discussing this issue, for me it should not be a matter of who Kyaligonza assaulted. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza knows the military doctrine very well because he is a member of the High Command. He knows that where junior officers are under the supervision of a senior, then the senior is in charge. Therefore, charging the junior officers in Makindye is wrong. They should have charged Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza in the first place. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, Kyaligonza is a retired army officer. I heard the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs’ spokesperson saying that Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza is a retired officer and, therefore, is not liable to the Military Court Martial. The spokesperson is wrong because section 6(1)(b) of the UPDF Act talks about “the reserve force” and members of the reserve force include retired officers. Therefore, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza is still subject to the UPDF Act – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the Captain.

MR KAHONDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following the actions of Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza and they are not the actions of the Kyaligonza I knew. I propose that as he is being charged in court, the status of his mental health should be checked. (Laughter) I am telling you this because this is not the Kyaligonza I used to know. The actions of Kyaligonza now are really wanting. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support the motion that Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza should be recalled from duty and he should be tried in the courts of law.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, join me in welcoming members of Soroti District Local Council and technical staff. They are in the public gallery. They are represented by hon. Ariko, hon. Eitunganane, hon. Elotu and hon. Osegge. You are welcome. (Applause)

4.33
MR EMMANUEL KIGOZI (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The subject of today – Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza – has a home in my constituency; he stays in Mutungo Central, Mutungo Ward, Ndejje Division in Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality. It is not the first time issues about this man have been brought to the Floor. I have done that twice. 

Of the several incidents that have happened in my area where he has tortured people almost to death, I would like to point out one where I was actually present. We were trying to internalise a land wrangle involving Kyaligonza and his neighbours. All of a sudden, as I was watching, he ordered his guards to attack. They attacked Grace Kyamulabi, a councillor in the municipal council who is also the minister for gender, and they beat her thoroughly.

We took a recording but before we could get away from the site, his army guards grabbed the phones and destroyed them. What is even more annoying is that about four months after, the lady developed a very serious heart problem. My fellow Members here will vouch for me because I even came to look for money and it took us Shs 25 million to get her condition rectified and we are not even very sure that she is okay now. 

Therefore, Matayo Kyaligonza is a bigger problem than what this House has heard. If I had time, I would elaborate more cases involving Kyaligonza. Let me add at least one more case where somebody was suspected to have been killed by his guards and he ordered the guards to go and beat somebody who had taken the information to the police. When you go to the police, right from Kajjansi to Mutungo police posts, everybody fears the man. He had even blocked a road used by fellow residents.

Therefore, I fully support the motion and I do not even think that we have enough punishment for that gentleman. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.35
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

Maj. Gen (Rtd) Kyaligonza is a shame to the men and women in uniform. Matayo Kyaligonza is a shame to the people who have worked as diplomats. Matayo Kyaligonza is a shame to the Prime Minister, who served at the United Nations as the Permanent Representative. He is also a shame to the President who appointed him as ambassador to Burundi. We are ashamed because the people of Burundi watch what goes on in this country. If I were Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Matayo Kyaligonza, I would have thrown in the towel; but in this country, people never resign.

I request the highest authority to recall and punish this man for embarrassing Uganda. When you are an ambassador, you enjoy diplomatic immunity in that country, not here. For a man of that calibre to attack a woman and beat up an officer in uniform and who is on duty; for a man who bears the title “Major General” and is an ambassador, you cannot even fight. If somebody attacked me here, I would not even fight. I would get ashamed and embarrassed. The man has no shame.

I would like the President, if he is listening to this debate –(Member timed out.)

4.38
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the House and the country at large that we are ashamed nationally and internationally, because Uganda has signed very many treaties to protect human rights. The actions of Kyaligonza and his guards were a violation of human rights.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, Uganda is a member of and has accepted to implement the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. If you look at Sustainable Development Goal No.5, it calls for inclusiveness. Sustainable Development Goal No.8 is about decency at work. Sustainable Development Goal No.9 is about equality. Therefore, the actions of Kyaligonza and his guards violated our agreement, which we made to implement Sustainable Development Goals. 

I, therefore, recommend that to help our country and ensure that women are accepted in every task, that police lady should be promoted so as to encourage our girls that women can do every work that men equally do. I thank you.

4.40	
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this House, a question has been raised on whether or not Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza can be disciplined. Circular Standing Instruction No.6 of 2018 specifies ambassadors and diplomats as public officers. The code of conduct and ethics of public officers spells out the behaviour and ethics that must be exhibited by public officers. Even when we do not apply the military code of ethics, Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza has been seen to contravene the code of conduct and ethics of public officers.

Under the disciplinary code of Uganda’s Public Service Standing Orders, public servants are under obligation to adhere to the principle of discipline and professionalism. Similarly, under Standing Order F-s, there is a specific offence of assault. It goes ahead under F-t to specify what the appointing authority should do under those circumstances. Those include, among others, retirement from public service in public interest, dismissal or removal from office.
	
Madam Speaker, we do not need to labour because the video clip was very clear. The bodyguards held the police officer and Maj.  Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza administered a slap on her. That is clear assault. (Member timed out.)
	
THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.
	
MR ARIKO: I even wonder what my colleagues, hon. Karubanga and hon. Muruli Mukasa, are doing because by now, the ambassador should be on interdiction.
	
It is important that this House sets an example for other public officers and politicians that power lies with Ugandans. Therefore, the resolution that we come up with here must be deterrent and ensure that other public officers are protected.

The Code of Conduct and Ethics for the Uganda Public Service, in 8.0(i), says that the Government must provide a satisfactory, safe and healthy work environment for its public servants. Was the police officer provided with a safe, healthy and secure work environment? It is, therefore, the obligation of Parliament to protect the citizens of Uganda. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.43
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been embarrassed as a country. The longer Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza continues to masquerade as our ambassador, the more terrible the embarrassment becomes. 

An ambassador must be an agent of dignity and diplomacy. Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza is no longer an agent of dignity to Uganda. We have just witnessed examples across the world. Somewhere, someone just assaulted his wife and the country gave him a red card - marching orders. Here, a police woman in the line of duty has been assaulted on the orders of a major general; I want to challenge the minister to give evidence of any police summons issued to Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza. Can the minister table any evidence of police summons? Can he tell this House which police station Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kyaligonza has been summoned to and when he is supposed to appear there? (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to give the Member information. We are lucky that the honourable member from Budaka brought a motion. The assaulted ministry is the one that came on the Floor to defend the person who beat them. Hon. Jeje Odongo is the Minister of Internal Affairs and the lady who was assaulted is an employee of the Uganda Police Force. The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, whose officer has beaten someone, is comfortably seated here. You can imagine that situation where the one who was assaulted is now defending – 

MR KASIBANTE: As I conclude, I would like to say that it is absurd that the Minister of Internal Affairs could come up with a statement, which does not mention anything about his employee called Namaganda. There is nothing in that statement that mentioned anything to do with the policewoman who was assaulted by soldiers.

Madam Speaker, imagine an employee of the Ministry of Internal Affairs was assaulted but the minister came with a statement that he prepared for two days, which cannot even say anything about the situation of this poor lady. It is a shame and an embarrassment to the minister. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know it is an interesting subject but we have other issues on the Order Paper.  
	
I would like to remind the Government that when you wear this flag, you represent the state. She was on duty and that is why she had a flag on her uniform. It is not just an ordinary fight with an ordinary Ugandan; this was someone on duty. Honourable members, this is a test case for the Government. I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES (COSASE) ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON THE CLOSURE OF COMMERCIAL BANKS IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a number of Members who had indicated their desire to speak. I will start with hon. Centenary.

4.47
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to appreciate the good work of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). 

First of all, Bank of Uganda not having specific regulations guiding the winding up and closure of banks is unacceptable for such a high-level institution in this country. I would like to recommend that an independent and professional board be appointed so that we exercise corporate governance at the central bank in reality. 

I also recommend that the shareholders and customers of the closed banks should be compensated. I have an uncle who lost money in the Cooperative Bank because Bank of Uganda was only able to compensate the insurable amount, up to Shs 3 million. Since then, his businesses have closed. He is still grappling with lawsuits with Bank of Uganda. 

Bank of Uganda even has a transactional advisor called MMAKS, which has misled the bank. Now, Bank of Uganda is going to compensate people. I think another recommendation should be that the contract with MMAKS be terminated with immediate effect for misguiding Bank of Uganda into taking wrong decisions to close these banks.

I would like to also propose that these seven banks which were closed be resuscitated so that they can be reopened because they –(Member timed out.)

4.49
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in endorsing this report of the special audit on defunct banks. I would like to commend the outgoing chairperson of COSASE together with the members of the committee for a job well done. 

First and foremost, Madam Speaker, I would like to commend you for giving guidance that has enabled this House set a precedent, which I am sure has gone down into the records of this Parliament for the future. From the beginning, we saw the gymnastics that were being applied by Government in trying to fail this committee from proceeding to hear or interrogate the Bank of Uganda officials. The proceedings were open to the public to watch the rot in Bank of Uganda and see how public officers had turned into mafia to make fortunes using their official positions. Therefore, I would like to agree with the recommendations and support the entire report as it is. 

Having said that, I look forward to the implementation of the recommendations that the committee came up with. Many times, this House has discussed huge reports and come up with recommendations but we have not seen action – (Member timed out.) 

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure and it is on rule 79. Yesterday, we were here debating the report of COSASE, which we did not conclude. However, some Members of this House were on radio stations abusing members of the committee before even the House had adopted the report. 

Would it be procedurally right for us to be here talking about the report and then a Member of this House, who was around, rushes to a radio station, to be specific, 87.5 Star FM - Hon. Luttamaguzi, to be clear, was on radio abusing the committee and saying very bad things about this Parliament. He said that Parliament wants to pass a shoddy report and that there was money that exchanged hands. Whatever he said was recorded. 

Is it procedurally right for someone to be talking in anticipation when we are in this House debating such a credible report that touches on the heart of the economy and the heart of this country? Is it procedurally right for us to continue like this?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, towards the end of the proceedings, I also raised that issue. Members go to discuss reports out in the public, disparaging the work of the House and bringing Parliament into disrepute. Honourable members, if you continue, we shall bring you from the media and discipline you from here. If you want to debate a report, do it from here. The public do not know. Put an end to it. Anymore of this and we shall bring you from the media to the rules committee here. Thank you, hon. Silwany. 

4.55 
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to join the other Members to thank COSASE for unmasking the discrepancies in Bank of Uganda. Yesterday, a lot of things were said. I think, as the central bank, whatever was brought up in the report gives us cause to fear for the future of this country’s economy. 

Banks all over the world have failed because of mismanagement. The mismanagement we saw yesterday, as revealed by the COSASE report, was only in the area of closing banks. That means there is a lot more that the terms of reference may not have given us a chance to discover. 

I would like to say very clearly that as the central bank of this country, Bank of Uganda should clean up its performance. Otherwise, we may witness the case of Enron, the American bank, which we may know of; after many years of good performance, they went under because mismanagement was covered. 

I would like to recommend as follows: If the change in the management of Bank of Uganda is to be effected, as a country we should take drastic steps to change the entire current leadership of the bank. What does that mean? Individual managers who were found to have offended the rules of the performance of this bank should be investigated deeper – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR GONAHASA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the added time. 

Those managers who were found culpable should be investigated deeper and made to pay for the mistakes they made. Yesterday, we got to know that banks were sold for as low as 80 per cent discount of their cost. That means money was lost. Where is this big amount of money that was lost?

It is my proposal that for the investigation concerning this money, neutral investigators like the Scotland Yard could be used to identify where this money is. In this country, they say you can run but you can never hide. We can do this if we make an effort to find where that money is. It is the feeling of this House that those banks which were sold and shareholders lost their money should be compensated. The money is a lot and it is in the hands of the managers of those banks and not the taxpayers who have suffered a lot already.

Also, since the economies of big and even small countries are run in the global village that we operate in, I would like to say this, without fear of sounding neo-colonial: I recommend that the current leaders of the banks be suspended and international teams from bodies like the World Bank or International Monetary Fund (IMF) be hired for a period of time to realign the performance of the Bank of Uganda and the banking sector while more nationalistic locals are brought into the management. 

Otherwise, Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest that instead of emphasising nationalism in the realigning process of the mess we see, we may be –(Member timed out.)

4.59
MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank you, for ensuring that this special audit and investigation is done and for allowing the former leadership to continue and finish their work.

I know for sure that some of my colleagues may have been uncomfortable with the tone of the report because they expected the tone to be as loud as they were watching issues at the committee level. However, it is in our mandate to raise the tone by the kind of recommendations we make and adopt.

Based on that, I would like to add the following recommendations to those of the committee; 

    1. The people who are directly affected – even if the names may not be mentioned in the report but their details should be known. Those persons first of all need to vacate office.  
    2. Our due processes will continue in terms of prosecution, where possible and maybe eventually people’s properties can be confiscated. 
    3. For those who should probably spend time in jail, that should be possible. Those are my recommendations in addition to others.

5.01
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to extend my gratitude to the chairman and the committee for doing a good job. It has been a good effort considering the circumstances under which they operated. I would also like to say that the committee tried its best to focus on its terms of reference, which is very commendable.

When you read the report and it is listed that the ICB, Teffe Bank and Global Trust Bank – for all of which there was no inventory that was readily availed at the time of liquidation, the question that you would ask is how possible was it then for Bank of Uganda to sell something that they could not even effectively ascertain its value?

Madam Speaker, we need to seriously think about the issue of the set of the management and supervisory arrangements in the Bank of Uganda because the Board of Bank of Uganda as indicated in the report is chaired by the Governor. His Deputy Governor literally also deputises him as chair of the Board. This creates a very serious challenge in terms of corporate governance. How do you ensure that there are checks and balances in terms of delivery on your performance standards? 
Having said that about review of the management set-up, I would like to take exception to one particular issue, the recommendation on page 32 that talks about compensation on the loss as far as the bad book is concerned. I would like to ask, what is this that constitutes a bad book because it is a bit open?

Secondly, as a Member of Parliament representing Ugandans, how does it occur that a Ugandan goes and does maladministration intentionally or unintentionally causing loss and then we say that Ugandans are the ones to pay? Why? –(Member timed out.)

5.04
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for allowing the media to cover the proceedings of what was happening throughout the process. (Interjections) Yes, that is why many Ugandans are saying what they saw going on is not in the report. 

However, we need to allow the general public to get the hard copies of this report. Majority will even internalise to see what is therein. What we need to do as Parliament is to amend and add the names of the individuals.

This is a historic debate in this country; it had never happened before for Parliament to discuss or debate anything related to Bank of Uganda. Now that it has happened, let us sit and see what we can add. We do not need to shout with this one; we need to sit down as Parliament and see what we can do to regulate Bank of Uganda.

We have seen many things going berserk and this is the time; what can we do? We are losing a lot of money. Many people who lost their money in those banks are around and suffering there; so this is the time.

Lastly, I understand Crane Bank was given Shs 7.7 billion –(Interjections) Thank you Madam, Speaker. It was given Shs 3.7 billion loan three days before –(Member timed out.) 

5.06
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to say something on this report. I would like to thank the committee because the time within which they were given this task to be done, they were able to do some work. Therefore, we are grateful that they were able to finish it within this time.

The reason Government pays staff or workers of Bank of Uganda very well –(Interjections)– actually, they are the best paid in this country –  to avoid temptation of corruption and so on.

However, by the look of things from the proceedings of the committee investigations, Uganda was able to see that these people we have charged with responsibilities of running Bank of Uganda turned to be scavengers and decided to end up just eating on the flesh of our treasury.

Therefore, we must not accept this. We must condemn it by taking concrete action. Even if names were not mentioned in this committee report, Ugandans were able to see these Ugandans who think they are above others. I know I may not be able to mention all the names, Ms Bagyenda and whoever else is culpable must be brought to book.  

One of the committee recommendations that each of these takes personal responsibility is commendable. I support it because you take personal responsibility including recovering the resources that were lost under the discharge of your responsibility.

Secondly, I do not think the security of Bank of Uganda is intact. We are not sure whether we still have gold in our own gold reserves. If documents alone could move from one person to another, I wonder if our money is safe in Bank of Uganda. Therefore, we must check and make sure that the recommendations we make are stringent to take care of the security of Bank of Uganda.

We must also resolve that the Board is disbanded because they have shown irresponsibility and they are culpable. I would like to suggest that they are not subject to political appointment – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. Lastly, I would like to propose that the top management of Bank of Uganda are subject to external evaluation every two years. If this proves that they are not capable of holding responsibility anymore at the Bank, they must be sacked immediately and replaced with people who are able. Thank you.

5.10
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for this investigation. It is high time Bank of Uganda Governor went on air to bring confidence to Ugandans of whatever transpired in their institution. It is the Bank that oversees the rest of these banks but if people have no confidence in it, then what are we doing?

When I read the document, I found out that Bank of Uganda officials were conniving with some of the banks to steal taxpayers’ money. There was a situation where they knew for sure that the bank was distressed but they put so much money into it to a tune of about Shs 504 billion before closure. After a few days, they went to close it.

Record shows that some of the money cannot be traced. The account holders, numbers and names are not there. Where did this money go just few days after giving it to these banks? That is connivance of the highest order.

Record also shows that Non-Disclosure of Assets (NDAs) or accounts reveals that the Central Bank was disclosing confidential information of distressed financial institutions to potential buyers and the competitors of these banks. This is unacceptable. It is the Central Bank, which has got to protect and not to disclose information of the distressed banks to the competitors but they were doing so. This was the reason they sold some of these banks without audit reports or other reports.

You would wonder that Global Trust Bank and National Bank of Commerce were sold within a day before auditing, without any inventory. You wonder how much the value of those assets was.

Therefore, I feel that the Governor of Bank of Uganda is responsible for whatever happened because he is the overseer of the Central Bank.

I would like to talk –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to complete.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you. When we hold positions, we have to respect them for people to respect us. In a situation where you go to one office through the back door and wherever people do not enter from where you want them to and pick confidential information, it is unacceptable. 

I feel there are also police guards and escorts who are accomplices in this crime. They equally needed to be investigated because if such an incident happened, they should have made statements.

Finally, Bank of Uganda equally failed to publish this information within the time prescribed by Section 102 of the Financial Institutions Act, 2014. I would like to assure you that the creditors who are claiming –(Member timed out.)

5.14
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said. I do not want to repeat anything that anyone has said. However, the points I will try to underscore are only two. When you go through the banks that were closed and you read one by one - Teffe, Greenland Bank and Global Trust Bank, among others, you only mention indigenous banks. Slowly, by this action, we surrendered this economy safely into the hands of the foreigners. 

The struggle for independence of this country was not only for us to lift the flag but it was also an economic struggle for emancipation of the black African, especially, to have a stake in the real economy. When these banks are closed, they are the first call to investment.  

When all the indigenous banks are crowded out of the economic pie-chart, it is the highest form of enslavement. It is like we are back to colonial days.

I represent a constituency where most directors of Greenland Bank hailed from. I can honestly tell this Parliament the impact of the closure of the banks. Families that were able to pay school fees could no longer do so. We were reduced to going into miraa business – (Laughter) – that was a full impact.

Therefore, in the struggle for independence for Bank of Uganda, they let down our whole struggle by closure of these banks. Everything should have been done to sustain them. If you want to access credit today, every bank you go to is a foreign bank. That has led to capital flight. That was terrible.

The other issue is that of employees of these banks. I have looked through every line in this report. Nothing is being mentioned about the thousands who were being employed by these banks. Were they all duly paid? I have been told that when Crane Bank was bought by dfcu Bank, some workers were taken over but a host of the rest were simply – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to complete.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: My prayers are only two. While we make resolutions, we must put in a line for the people who had been employed in these banks.

Secondly, if there is any compensation to shareholding, let it not be selective. Let all banks that were affected – Greenland Bank, Teffe – otherwise, history will judge us harshly. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I raised the question of employees yesterday. I received a huge delegation of very unhappy former employees of Crane Bank - for the older banks, they come, but those of Crane Bank came in huge numbers.

5.18
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving us the opportunity to discuss the COSASE report. I would like to make two comments. First, it is important that we should applaud COSASE for this report. For the first time, we dug out issues, which have been stuck with us for years. I would really like to congratulate them. (Applause)

I know that others are looking at it differently but it is very important and it has made this institution proud that we can deliver and defend the interests of our people.

Looking at the report, I ask my self - what do we want the institution of Parliament to do to cause a cure? I can only suggest two. When you look at page 60 and 62 of the report, it is more about corporate governance.

It means that we put people in positions of responsibility and they do not care to supervise what they are supposed to supervise. There is no way these banks could have deteriorated to that stage to cause their sale before being intercepted, monitored, evaluated and diagnose the pitfalls. This was a failure on the part of the people we have delegated to that responsibility.

When you look at the sale of assets without valuation, the lack of proper documentation, no minutes at all –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to the senior citizen. (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: I am the only Commissioner in the House. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, when you look at all this, it is all failure of corporate governance. I wonder why all of us who have spoken have not touched Section 48 of Bank of Uganda Act. It talks about the role and the power of the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

This minister is supposed to give direction and guide all these financial institutions. When you look at Section 48, you will see that if anybody is to be culpable, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - actually, if I had time, I would just read a few. This would give you information of what I am talking about.

It says, “the Minister may after consultation with the Governor and subject to this Act, give directions of a general nature in writing relating to the financial and the economic policy of the bank.”

Madam Speaker, if I hear that all these banks that have been sold, there has not been a report at all submitted to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. What has the Ministry done about it? Nothing. Therefore, we can evoke Section 48 and cause the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to be accountable for all this mess, which has brought about shame to our banking sector.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you that you are taking serious steps in causing corporate governance to be made into an Act. We need it. You can now see that really without corporate governance, we cannot hold these leaders accountable. Thank you.

5.23
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Madam Speaker, the chairperson yesterday laboured to show that the committee desired to have this report pass the legal test. However, the initial motive of Ugandans was to have a report that passes the accountability test. We desired to know how things can go on and nobody is held accountable for them.

This is an opportunity for Parliament of Uganda to deal with officers who always behave without respect to the law. The report came out very clearly and the chairperson was very clear and said that these banks were sold without minutes.

The Auditor-General report is talking about Shs 478 billion that was spent and it cannot be traced. We are talking about matters where officers sit in their offices and discount properties at 93 per cent. We are talking about matters of selling a bank on phone. These are all matters that deal with impunity - people who behave the way they like.

Madam Speaker, under this special investigation, we are dealing with only one department. Bank of Uganda has nine directorates but in this report, we are dealing with only one. This mirrors what happens elsewhere in the departments. It tells you what can happen in other agencies of Government. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I find this report short of the effort to deal with impunity. Until a time that individuals are mentioned –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the impunity of Bank of Uganda did not start yesterday. I refer honourable members to the report of the ad hoc committee on the sale of Uganda Commercial Bank Limited (UCBL) that was chaired by hon. Ephraim Kamuntu.

One of the recommendations they made was that, “7.1, that the views and resolutions of Parliament on the sale of UCBL were ignored. Instead, Bank of Uganda used purported powers under the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC) of 1993 to sell UCBL and disregarded the call to release the bank to be privatised under Deposit Reinvestment Certificate (DRIC).”

Madam Speaker, the information I wanted to give honourable members is that several times, even when you look at the Justice James Ogoola report, they are also lamenting on the failure by Bank of Uganda to listen to the directive and instructions both of Parliament and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR AGABA: Thank you, honourable colleague. With that information, Madam Speaker, it is my proposal that this House knows that the matter before us is to deal with impunity. It is not only in Bank of Uganda; Bank of Uganda was only a case study about officers who behave as if there are no laws in this country.

We must come out with serious recommendations and individuals to be dealt with so that every officer now knows that if they mishandle public resources, they will be held accountable.

Ugandans are watching this Parliament. If we just push the recommendations under the table and tell the bank officials to make improvements while no one is held accountable, we will have given chance to thrive in another agency or within the same bank. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: I am starting with the Members I noted yesterday. When I finish with them, then I can come to others. 



5.29
MR FREDERICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the work they did. How I wish we would have approved all the recommendations and probably added on a few. 

Bank of Uganda acted with impunity, especially when they closed the banks. From the closure of the first, second and third bank, we would have expected the supervisor of these banks to be held responsible for their failure and collapse. 

You may all recall that Greenland Bank increased its operational hours from 8.00 a.m. to between 8.00 p.m. – 9.00 p.m. Their busiest time was between 7.00 p.m. to 9.00 p.m. This means that within all businesses in Kampala, the people had to take their money to the bank at that time. However, one morning, they just woke up to realise that the bank had closed. When we even talk about compensation, it should not only be to the owners of the bank but also the clients who lost their money because this was a very painful moment for the people in this country to go through. 

I still do not want to believe that these banks that were sold were sold after a six-hour negotiation, when the inventory had not been declared to the buyer. I want to believe that the sellers of these banks negotiated with the buyers before the day they closed the banks for the buying bank to accept to buy the bank. 

I want to ask whether the committee interfaced with the directors of the banks that bought the sold banks. Do you mean the managing director could stand alone and agree to buy an ailing and collapsing bank, without the support of his board of directors? I highly suspect that these negotiations took time and it was not only in six hours, as we were told. How I wish these investigations could be expanded further and we get a forensic audit to include the buyers as well as the sellers to understand the loss that we have suffered from these banks.

When we talk about the cooperative bank, we are talking of two banks. Some of us who come from families where our fathers were operators –(Member timed out.)  

5.32
MS MARIA GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank COSASE for this report and to quote the chairman for opening a door, which had never been opened. Madam Speaker, I thank you again for standing firm in the fight against corruption. 

Indeed, Bank of Uganda flouted the law and breached the principles of corporate governance. We have seen, in the report, where there were no inventories before the sale of the bank. The auditors were appointed after the takeover of the bank. We have heard that bank sales were done on the same day and there is failure to settle the creditors’ claims. 

I see that Bank of Uganda hid under Article 162 (2) to abuse their relative independence and to misconduct business at the Bank. I, therefore, support all the recommendations that the committee has come up with, especially the one that reads, “All those who are found culpable should be held personally responsible.” I also support that all the people who lost their monies in these banks that were closed should be compensated without any segregation. 

Like the committee has recommended, I agree that the Finance Institutions Act, 2004 be amended to provide sanctions against non-compliance with any provisions by the bank and all their agents.

I would also like to talk about the Cooperative Bank. On page 58, the report indicates the confusion. In 1964, before the Cooperative Bank was dissolved, another one was registered in the same name in 1997. There was an effort by USAID and the Government of Uganda to recapitalise the bank but because of this confusion, this effort was frustrated. The pain that the farmers went through with the closure of the Cooperative Bank has affected them and their productivity in this country. 

We are talking of revamping agriculture but we know that the cooperative movements played a very big role –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the farmers.

MS AJILO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Cooperative Bank is a farmer’s bank and I see that a lot of money is now being spent on SACCOs and groups, whose viability we are not even sure about. If we had our Cooperative Bank, this money would be channelled to the farmers through the bank. 

Therefore, I support the recommendation of the committee for Bank of Uganda and Government to listen to the cry of the Uganda Cooperative Alliance about the Cooperative Bank being revamped and revitalised so that the farmers can have their bank back. I thank you. 

5.36
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi-Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank the committee for having been able to prepare this report, even in the most difficult circumstances. I thank your office, Madam Speaker, for standing the ground and ensuring that this investigation went on. That was very important.

Bank of Uganda was only interested in closure and sale but it had other options and opportunities to ensure the revival of these sinking banks. They would have merged Crane Bank with probably dfcu for example. They were within their favour.

However, it is very clear that Bank of Uganda’s interest was closure and sale, simply because some individuals were going to benefit from the closure and sale. They were not interested in mergers and revivals of these banks, yet we all know that the revival of these banks was very crucial to ensure that our economy continues to stand firm. 

Madam Speaker, I would like us to recommend that Bank of Uganda explores other options like mergers before total closure and sale of our banks. 

The other issue I would like to address is on the recommendation on page 35, where it says, “Bank of Uganda should take full responsibility for any possible loss to Greenland Bank.” Yes, we can see this but even a sweeper at Bank of Uganda – because Bank of Uganda is not just mere buildings but it includes the officials seated there and conducting business on behalf of this Government. Therefore, should a sweeper at Bank of Uganda also be held responsible. I think there are those who should be held responsible and they are seated there. 

Therefore, we need to qualify some of these recommendations further. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.38
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for a job well done. It is very clear that Bank of Uganda deliberately flouted the laws and intentionally sold off banks without ascertaining the value of the assets, thus causing such gross loss to the extent of 93 per cent. 

Abetting fraud by disclosing information on the ailing banks would be buyers when they were competitors. Who would do that kind of thing unless they had personal interest? As the committee noted, they went ahead and appointed auditors after selling the banks. If you have sold, you have sold. Why would you cause more loss by engaging auditors? It was just a cover up. 

The admission that they sold these banks without the operating guidelines - really? You only needed to sell one bank and then sit down and codify the lessons learnt into guidelines. Therefore, they deliberately did these things knowing that they would benefit personally. We would not be wrong to conclude that way. You even ask yourself, what kind of managers are these who sell off such assets without operating guidelines? One wonders, should we continue to trust them with the business of managing Bank of Uganda?

For the issue of the conflicting powers between being the Chief Executive Officer of the Bank and Director of the Board, if they were conscious, they would have seen this problem and initiated the amendment of the law. Certainly, they were benefiting. 

The committee recommends that Bank of Uganda should tighten security. Of course, they even fell short of shutting the system down so that they can do whatever they want. The system is there but they flouted it intentionally. Whatever Bagyenda did, she did intentionally. When the security guards were coming back, they went through the machines. Therefore, is it true that they did not know that they had to go through the machines when they were going out?

When all is said, Madam Speaker, the individuals –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.                    

MS KAMATEEKA: The individuals should be held culpable. In cases of compensation, really, they should be held culpable for all these losses. I recommend that our recommendations be taken over by the Inspector-General of Government, who should investigate these individuals further and handover these matters to courts of law. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Jesca Ababiku, hon. Othieno Okoth, hon. Kenneth Lubogo and hon. Paul Amoru, honourable members, in this debate, consider the issue of the fact that the indigenous banks are the ones we allow to die. I am wondering whether the Government has a strategic plan to grow indigenous banks in this country because apparently, they are comfortable with what happened.

5.42
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good work. 

The love for Government and this country should not be seen in holding positions and earning salary but through providing quality service to even make this country grow bigger and self-sustaining. When you look at what has happened, it is sabotage to this country because closing people’s assets down, not thinking about the services to be got from these assets was too much. I grew up knowing that financial issues are handled with a lot of care. People who got recruited and are still holding offices in Bank of Uganda are qualified people. One bank was sold after the other.

This is a well-orchestrated plan to embarrass our country. I, therefore, support the committee recommendations. However, what puzzles me is, from the report, the committee made a deliberate request to initiate for this special audit. What would have happened if this request was not made in 2017? Were we going to know all this? This report is a post-mortem and what is happening there currently is not known. 

Therefore, I would like to propose that Bank of Uganda should be at a close watch. We should be able to regularly assess their report because behind the doors, we may not know what is happening. One of the recommendations is that Bank of Uganda should make good the losses made. Whose money are we going to use? We recruited people to implement things on our behalf, do supervision, provide checks and balances –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR RICHARD OTIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for a job well done. I would like to specifically thank the committee for the report and the process, the way they handled the probe up to the end. 

What disturbs my mind is that prior to the closure of Crane Bank, it had been presented as the bank of the year for three successive years. Suddenly, a bank, which had been the bank of the year -  by being branded the bank of the year, I believe it is the best bank. You must be the best to be the bank of the year. Suddenly, the bank was closed without any warning to the public because the public had been given a false belief that the bank was very sound.

Madam Speaker, this begs for one question. How do we trust the officials in that bank? It puts to question the credibility and the integrity of the officials who are managing the affairs of Bank of Uganda. Do they have the capacity or are they compromised? It is not only the bank officials but even the Board because the Board is the supervisory body.

I would like to propose that there must be a thorough check-up of the bank officials. This should not stop at the bank officials but should extend up to the Board. We need to scrutinise the people who are managing the affairs of a financial sector. Are they the right people in the first case? If they were the right people, what we have witnessed in this report should not have been the case.

However, what we are seeing is that probably, we do not have the right people managing the affairs of our financial sector in this economy. 

Therefore, I would support the views that have been expressed here that something drastic must be done to save the image and integrity of our banking sector. Otherwise, people are going to lose –(Member timed out.)

5.48
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Considering the magnitude of this investigation and considering the sensitivity of the affected institution, I would like to appreciate the chairperson and the committee for the report they produced. 

That said, we need to be guided, Madam Speaker, especially the chairpersons of committees in light of the case that was quoted yesterday, Fox odoi Vs the Attorney-General, on what the scope of investigations needs to be; on the level of disclosure that needs to be in the report. To read a report and we do not find a name like Bagyenda anywhere and not to find the names of some of these people who did outrageous acts in the bank, I think honestly – 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you were here yesterday when the chairperson was giving us the rationale. I think you were not.

MR LUBOGO: I have read what the chair said. I was trying to talk about, for purposes of guidance – Madam Speaker, it would not be offensive to for example disclose a name of somebody and then state what the role that person was in the bank. For instance, if somebody was responsible for minutes, if somebody was a custodian of reports, then I think to that extent, it could be disclosed in the report.

I would also like to comment on the issue of lack of integrity in the bank. We need to cry for this country. If we cannot find integrity in Bank of Uganda, where else do we find it? We must all be concerned that our country has taken a wrong direction. The fact that the highest point of supposed integrity has got that low, then it means all of us need to be concerned for our country. We must cry and pray for our country.

There is a recommendation on page 61 about the managers and it says that the appointing authority may consider revocation or review of their –(Member timed out.)

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, Rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament prescribes the dress code of the members of Parliament while in the chambers. 

I know the honourable member seated next to hon. Gonahasa, by virtue of his faith and with the leave of the Speaker, can put on his cap. I know the honourable members representing the UPDF, even if they are dressed in their formal attire, once they enter the chambers, they remove their caps. 

Is the hon. Mbwatekamwa in order, therefore, to remain seated in this House with his cap on? By virtue of his dress code, he is a devoted catholic. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know we are promoting Africa. Hon. Mbwatekamwa is dressed in traditional attire in one of the tribes in Nigeria. Therefore, he is in order. (Laughter)

5.53
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I should start by commending the committee and, indeed, the steadfastness of the Speaker that enabled this report to come out the way it has come.

It is important to note that in any country, the legitimacy, the integrity and the credibility of the Central Bank are paramount in preserving public confidence, maintaining a sound financial system and a stable economy.

A lot has already been said and I would like to restrict myself to three areas. 

    1. The root of the problem. Why I think we have gotten to where we have reached is that the Central Bank has unfettered powers and nobody is watching that institution. The executives are themselves leaders on the Board. I appreciate that the spirit behind this was previously to completely cushion the Central Bank from any unnecessary interferences. However, given the reality that we now see today, that we have burnt our fingers, it is now necessary that we root for reforms that enable the Central Bank to be checked so that  rot like this does not take over a decade to unearth.
 
    2. I am a bit hesitant about the excitement around compensations. We need to go slow on this. It must be handled case by case. The stage this matter has reached, we should be forwarding this it to the CID so that – (Interjections) the IGG? I think you understand the spirit. The place – (Member timed out.)

5.56
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for standing firm against corruption and also for your resilience to sit in the chair. Some of us go out for a cup of water but you stay there for the good of this country. 

I also want to thank you for ordering and directing the Prime Minister, the Leader of Government Business who came in person. Thank you, Madam Speaker and Rt hon. Prime Minister.

The names, though the report did not mention them, the people who appeared are known. One of them is prof. Mutebile, Mr Kasekende, Ms Bagyenda, Mr Sekabira, Mr Kasule. I will not name all of them. 

It is no wonder that the poverty indicators in the regions where these people come from are different from other regions. (Interjections) It is on record. 

I would like to propose to Government, now that the Prime Minister is here, the next appointments of these people’s positions should also cross the Nile (Interjections) Yes. The only person who crossed the Nile who appeared there was the head of security who didn’t sign. These signatures are within here. 

Madam Speaker, finally, all former workers must be compensated. Why? It is because these people lost jobs. All directors also must be compensated. If you say these people should be compensated by the culprits, most of these thugs – I am sorry to use that word – put property in other people’s names. Which property will you get? You will just get a small vehicle. Therefore, the Government should be responsible and pay these people –(Interjection)- the Prime Minister is here. 

If you say we get these people’s property, you will find that someone has a small house in Butaleja from which you will get Shs 2 million only. How will you pay the widow of the late Hajj? The Government should pay. The owner of Crane Bank should be paid and the Hajj who died should also be paid. Otherwise, if you say we get money from the culprits, their property may not be in their names. You may get Shs 2 million only. How will you use Shs 2 million to pay? I submit, Madam Speaker. 

5.59
MS WINFRED KIIZA (FDC, Woman Representative, Kasese): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee leadership and members for the job well done. We have been talking about buying Uganda and building Uganda, but it is unfortunate that we are the same people who are collapsing Uganda. Apart from possibly Global Trust Bank, all the other banks that were closed were Ugandans’ banks. Madam Speaker, I think you were right to note that it was a target to wipe all Ugandans’ banks from the economy for reasons that we may also need to investigate.

Madam Speaker, it saddens us to learn that Bank of Uganda, which has the mandate of superintending over all the other financial institutions, really slept on the job. When I talk about Bank of Uganda, I am not talking about the structure but the leadership. It is no wonder that President Museveni said that his officers sleep on the job. However, this time they even ate the job. 

Madam Speaker, members have been talking about who will pay the money to compensate the owners of the banks. Who paid the money that compensated Ugandan traders in South Sudan? Let us use the same spirit. We sat here and okayed the compensation by Uganda, paid by Ugandans. It should be the same Uganda with the same Ugandans to compensate these individuals. Therefore, the Government will be tasked with the responsibility of recovering the money from its sleeping agents.

Madam Speaker, the criminal investigations unit of the police should take interest in this matter. Let the culprits face the long arm of the law so that they can act as an example to others. Many of these people swear to do the job diligently but they have violated the good will. 

I would also like to propose that the board of Bank of Uganda should not be a political appointment. Some of them hide behind the support of the President and think they are untouchable –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the former Leader of the Opposition.

Ms KIIZA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am surprised that even the person who appoints them – the President – was saying he advised, and they never heeded his advice. President Museveni was saying he stopped them from selling the bank – and he was especially talking about Crane Bank – but they never listened to him. Therefore, who is who in this bank? When they get the job, they even forget the one who appointed them. 

As Ugandans, we are saying this country belongs to us. We cannot see Ugandans being mistreated in their own country when they cannot be given opportunities in other countries. We are here babysitting foreigners at the expense of our own investors. Many of the foreign investors are given incentives but we are killing our own investors and no wonder the cost of doing business in Ugandan is becoming impossible because our own investors are being sabotaged.

Madam speaker, we are talking about the death of family holders. Hajj Suleiman Kiggundu died because of the problems of the closure of Greenland Bank. Jamal Muhindo died because of the closure of Greenland Bank and all his assets were frozen. The owner of Global Trust Bank died. I look at Sudhir and he is losing a lot of weight and you may never know why. Possibly, one of the reasons is the closure of this bank. 

For the owners of the National Bank of Commerce – Amama Mbabazi, maybe Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda is one of them -(Laughter)- and the former minister in charge of finance – when you find them you pity them. These young men have grown very old because of the problems of selling their bank. I would like to ask the Prime Minster, who is possibly one of the directors of the National Bank of Commerce, to look beyond possibly the political issues that you may be having –(Member timed out.)

6.05
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to also add my voice in this very important report. I will add my voice in thanking the committee that did a thorough job. I am sure you did your work according to what was handed over to you by this Parliament. I am happy that I am part of this Parliament that is setting history today.

Madam Speaker, I also think there was a deliberate action to suffocate and finally kill the indigenous banks. Why do I say “deliberate” and “suffocate”? It is because this was a process that unfortunately we all somehow saw and now we have come to the realisation.

Madam Speaker, I must also applaud the media. I represent the people of Amuru and the COSASE investigation was very high in their agenda simply because the media relayed it the way it was. Even my people who have no access to TVs were able to listen on radio and that is a plus to the leadership of the committee. For those who are taking over from that leadership, I think in the next investigation we should involve the media.

Madam Speaker, with the issues that are coming from this report, there is a saying that the fish rots from the head. Now that Bank of Uganda is rotten, I am very scared. How are our banks, which are supposed to be supervised by Bank of Uganda, operating? That is my biggest challenge.

Secondly, I would like to support that the people who have suffered losses as a result of the negligence of Bank of Uganda, must be adequately compensated. We must get this money - (Member timed out.)

6.08
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will start by saying that whatever we do, we must not stampede Bank of Uganda. Otherwise, ultimately, they remain at the helm of our economy.

Secondly, whatever amendments we propose, they will remain supervisors of all banks; both foreign and indigenous banks. 

Madam Speaker, the way we are debating is as if commercial banks are angles. By the time you are you are flagged to be flouting and undermining depositors and creditors, there must be a problem in that commercial bank. We have indigenous banks. I personally bank with Orient Bank but there was a time when that bank was a one man’s bank but they were forced to acquire and get partners because we would not put all our future in one man’s bank.

Madam Speaker, I think we shall get a technical response on this report from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, such that we can make recommendations that are targeted and actionable. I do not know how the rules were made but we must get a response at least from the minister on this technical report. Otherwise, it is not a simple report.

I sympathise with those who are saying that the report did not meet the expectations. I talked to hon. Katuntu and Madam Speaker, we have processed more reports in this Parliament and this is what he said, “Parliament is not a court”. We need to do more work on this report. On the Auditor-General’s report, we need to do a thorough job in order to point to anybody who did a mistake.

Generally, Bank of Uganda has many functions including inflation targeting. That helps this country to remain a float such that our money is not like Zimbabwe’s money. There are other functions in the bank and this is one of the many functions they have.

Therefore, in monitoring and supervision of banks, we need to make sure that we point the right recommendations that will help Bank of Uganda stand a test of time.

On the matter of compensations, it goes without saying that it must be thoroughly –(Member timed out.)

6.11
MR CHARLES ILUKOR (NRM, Kumi County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this report.

Allow me to thank the committee for the job well done. We had lost hope in this bank. This institution looked very powerful that nobody could inquire into its affairs but what you have done has demystified that.

I remember one time when a senior officer of this bank was meant to be investigated by some institution, he said that he was above the law and therefore, could not be looked into. This probe has therefore, demystified that and brought confidence back to us.

Madam Speaker, many of us were old enough and had some little money and we were clients in these banks. We woke up one day and we were told the bank had been closed. This is the case of Greenland Bank. We suffered loss of money. You cannot know the suffering we have been going through let alone losing money. We are walking corpses as you can see. We have suffered several diseases as a result of closure of these banks due to impunity of certain officers. This probe has therefore, brought some faith to us. Otherwise, we had lost trust in the banking institutions of Uganda because we knew that any time, a bank could be closed and all your money is lost.

What this committee has done to us and this country is a blessing. We are watching and we applaud all the recommendations and we will support them. We are now going to watch and see what type of action will be taken against these people. After all, we are watching and the truth has come out. How I wish some of them could own up and leave their positions before they are followed and fired.

Madam Speaker, I would like to applaud the committee and support all the recommendations in this report. I thank you very much.

6.13
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity and I wish to offer my commendation to the committee for job well done.

Before the committee went to examine the activities of Bank of Uganda, Ugandans who were working there thought they were untouchables. Right now, we know that the people working in that institution can be apprehended when they make mistakes.
	
We know Bank of Uganda’s responsibility is to regulate banks. However, in the process of doing their work, they made some mistakes. What are we going to do to make sure that we regulate the people who work in that bank? As Parliament, in my view, the report has floated some issues.
	
The committee has told us that these people made some mistakes in the process of regulation the banks and so, I think it is our responsibility to come up with resolutions such that the people who are concerned can be held responsible.

I also know that in the process of serving this country, local banks made mistakes. Not all of these banks were giving money to their relatives; they were giving money to the regions. When you go the records, you find that the banks were actually not free. They had their own problems and caused their closures. So, those concerned must own the mistakes they made.

Madam Speaker, we should condemn the people who gave loans to their relatives especially, those that were not recovered. This is a serious matter and I think we should look at it. As Parliament, we must be neutral. In my view, the Central Bank made mistakes and yet they are supposed to be responsible. Also, those who owned banks must know that these banks are not theirs; the banks are for the people.

Once again, I would like to thank the committee for a job well done and thank Bank of Uganda for making sure that people recovered their monies. Otherwise, we would be having problems, if all the money was stolen. I do not have anything but I would like to see that this country moves and we look at these people and see those who were involved such that they answer their mistakes. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.16
MR SAM BYIBESHO (NRM, Kisoro Municipality, Kisoro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the good report they have presented to us as a Parliament.

First of all, this report has reminded me of an incident where some officials ate food and after eating food, they ate the spoons and the tables. It is really sad. Even the saucepans were touched. 

Madam Speaker, in all these cases, there was no evaluation of the assets and the liabilities. This gave an opportunity for the fraud and connivance between Bank of Uganda officials and transaction advisors of the buyers.

Madam Speaker, there is where you find the buyer deciding the price more especially in Crane Bank Limited. I am suggesting that these people should be held responsible.

They should have also involved the professionals like land valuers and engineers in all those assets. This was not even done. Therefore, I am requesting that these people should also pay heavily for whatever could have transpired. Thank you.

6.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am trying to clarify some issue. According to the people watching, they might have come up with a feeling that local banks are marginalised. Centenary Bank, for example, is number three in the country with a customer base of 12 per cent of the entire population. It actually has the leading number of rural subscribers in the country. So, it gives us rooms to think that when you carry out your services diligently, you can succeed. I do not believe in any deliberate efforts to suffocate local banks. I beg to submit.

6.19
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hear one or two voices talking about conflict of interest. Let me straight away declare my interest in this matter. I am one of the proud founders of the National Bank of Commerce. Unfortunately, the bank suffered the same fate of the other banks that were closed. 

I agree with hon. Kivumbi that local banks had a poor deal because when they were closed, the voice and power of local efforts to have local banks got significantly curtailed.  It is true that the local people find it a little easier to go to the banks that are locally founded. Fortunately, we have Rural Centenary Bank which is doing quite well. I hope more local banks can be founded and they do well to serve the people of Uganda.

It is true that in the case of the National Bank of Commerce, there were several shareholders and I was one of them. 

Let me commend the Katuntu’s committee- (Interjections) - it is Committee on COSASE, which was chaired by hon. Katuntu. There is no contradiction. It is true -

THE SPEAKER: Do not heckle the Prime Minister.

DR RUGUNDA: I must commend the Speaker. She was very strong and right to support this committee. (Applause) Ndugu Atiku has gone out but he made a rather startling remark that Government was opposed to the work of the committee. That is absolutely incorrect. Government supported the committee in doing its work. (Interjection) Well, I think I have more mandate to speak for Government than my brother, hon. Mbwatekamwa. (Laughter)

I would like to comment on the 66 points. First of all, I think the recommendations made by the Committee on COSASE are really important and I do believe, as a country and Government, we will take them seriously and follow them for implementation. I will give just a few examples. They are saying there should be separation between bank supervisions and liquidation. If we had the two separated, we would not have had the problems that we are facing today. To me, it is a straightforward and good recommendation they made.

They are saying we should have a clear records and minutes of all major decisions taken. This is a logical matter because we are here to serve the public. Therefore, we must put on record what our service is and what we are doing for posterity. It is good governance and it makes a lot of sense.

One other issue that comes up is that we have many lawyers in Bank of Uganda. I am informed that all of them have Master’s Degree. They are well educated people. So, surely, why should Bank of Uganda spend so much money on external lawyers? You know it may be necessary to consult, once in a while, external lawyers. However, 11 lawyers with Master’s Degree should do the work.

I think the point that has also been made is that if you are a lawyer for Bank of Uganda, you should declare that you cannot be a director in one of the commercial banks. That is a conflict of interest in my view. How about those local banks that may not have connection with you, the lawyer? So, on this issue, we need to improve governance in Bank of Uganda. 

There was also a call for reform. It is true that there is need for policy and legislative reforms so that the Bank of Uganda’s laws and policies can be up to date and be responsive to what is happening in the governance of the financial sector. 

Comments have been made about the board. I think there is need for reform. Having the chairman of the board who is the Governor of Bank of Uganda may give too much power at one centre and could cause problems in governance. 

There are two additional comments on issues to do with the co-operative banks. It is true that there are conflicts between the bank that was set up in 1964 and the bank that came up in 1997. Therefore, they need to be harmonised. 

The complaints of the directors and members of the co-operative alliance should be properly resolved. I support that Bank of Uganda, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Development and Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives should sit together and resolve this matter as quickly as possible. They will have the full support of Government in that respect. (Interjections) It is not a question of responsibility; it is the offices that are involved in this matter.
	
As I conclude my few remarks, let me just say that –(Interjections)– There is no doubt, my brother, hon. Paul Mwiru, that the Government is very strong and it is moving on. There is no debate about that. 

The way forward is that the Government of Uganda, Cabinet is going to take up this matter, follow up the issues and get some of the areas further investigated so that more facts can be established. There is no doubt that people who are found culpable the law will take its course. I thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, I listened in confusion and dismay how the Leader of Government Business is supporting the position of the committee of Parliament on this matter. Would it not be procedurally right for the Leader of Government Business in this House, to pronounce himself on a letter that I suppose is deliberately written by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) to the Director Internal Security Officer (ISO), to investigate the conduct of the members on the committee which, if you look at the intention of the letter is simple to pour water on this very excellent report that you even agree with us on?

Therefore, I would like to seek for your indulgence to prevail that the Leader of Government Business should make a pronouncement and say something about that letter because -

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I received a copy of the letter written by the IGG to the director ISO, asking him to investigate members of the committee. Therefore, I will give it to the Prime Minister because this is really a breach of separation of powers. This is our work and now the - I will give you the letter Prime Minister.

6.30
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said and we are about to go on these recommendations one by one and make our resolutions. However, unfortunately, we have made a lot of resolutions in this Parliament and you find that nothing is done about them.

I would like to also ask that there are people who have died because of closure of these banks, what is going to be done about them? They should be compensated through their family members and their lawyers should be heard. 

However, Bank of Uganda has a broader responsibility. Therefore, it is important that Bank of Uganda need to be investigated in its broader responsibility; it should not be just focused only on that closure of the banks.

There should also be naming and shaming of the individuals. Unfortunately, when my people wrote this report, they feared to name. I would put number one as the governor Bank of Uganda because it is his responsibility to see that the right thing is done. How can you close banks without even taking due process, without having even documents and without minutes as if you are just doing a personal transaction? It is your personal thing that you can say, “Let me pull this personal money from my pocket and do this or let me close this personal shop of mine.” All those who are there should take responsibility.

I would also like to interest us as Members of Parliament that we should insist and put pressure on resolutions that we make in this Parliament. A lot of time we make resolutions and they are not followed. 

I would like to say that in the Eighth Parliament, we made resolutions on former abductees and they were ten resolutions that came from Members of Parliament here. They said PRDPIII would answer and it was given three months but to date - if anything is going to be done, then it is still in the future. We need to help out people better.

However, I would like to thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister very much for not just hiding but accepting probably because he was part of those bankers. He was an executive in one of those banks. We must always call a spade a spade if we have to fight corruption because it has really eaten fabric of this country.

Our people would be living a little better than what we are right now. It is us in the towns, offices but the greater population of our people - if cooperative was not closed, probably they would be accessing something a little better for their farming.

Therefore, let all of us work for our people and let us not try to protect some other people. The President himself was against this investigation and you people said Government, nothing, the President was against it. 

He should also know that we would like better service delivery to our people that is why we follow up. For COSASE Committee, I would like to interest them to always go even - they should not just say this is the term. Their term is oversight; they can go up to everywhere and should not be limited by - Who limits you? Is it Parliament which was limiting you that you must stick to these terms? You can go outside the box and not just remain inside the box only. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Leader of the Opposition. Now, about the terms of reference, this was about a special audit of particular banks and they had terms of reference.

Honourable members, we have 52 recommendations, they were uploaded today but during the debate I heard Members saying they had proposals for amendment. I would like to give an opportunity to those who have proposal to circulate them so that we can complete the recommendations tomorrow. Let me invite honourable chairperson if he has closing comments.

6.35
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Bugweri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank all colleagues for the detailed submissions they have made. Today is going to be one of those good days for me and my colleagues on the committee. This load we have been carrying for a long time has eventually been concluded.

What is happening is that tomorrow, whoever has got any recommendation as the Speaker said, we will look at it and we concede. However, I would like to thank the Government side for- I take it that they have accepted the recommendations of the committee. You see this this process leads to four things: 

    1. Policy report
    2. Legal report 
    3. Improvement of governance at Bank of Uganda and 
    4. Accountability. 

You may call for accountability but without policy and legal reforms, you are wasting your time because tomorrow you will have the same problems. Therefore, anybody who is serious should first think about reforms that are necessary to make sure that these challenges do not re-occur in the bank.

The committee’s view was that we need to prioritise. What is required at the Central Bank to make sure that these challenges do not re-occur? Those are the reforms we identified and put on the record. 

I see that so many of the colleagues were so much interested in accountability. Yes, you may hang people but the system will remain the same. You must address those bottlenecks. I hope that tomorrow, as colleagues are improving on the recommendations, they focus so much on the forms necessary to make sure that we have a Central Bank that works better.

Madam Speaker, I have had the opportunity to read the two letters written to you by M/s J.N Kerkland and Mr Ssekabira. Let it be on record that - there is nothing new they raise in those letters - We did consider those views and disagreed with all of them. I see it is quite voluminous; this is purely stationery. 
When you look at it, there is nothing much in this one from J. N Kerkland. First of all, it is even contradictory to the evidence, which he gave to the committee. I will give you an example without wasting so much time. In this letter, he says – he is the one who handled the transaction between Nile River Acquisition Company and Bank of Uganda – that the portfolio, which was sold was a non-performing asset and therefore it was very difficult to raise any useful amount of money from that sale. 

However, when you look at his response in the committee, he clearly comments that, “We demonstrate that a lot of collection had been made from unsecured loans. We also show that 70 per cent of the 1.1 billion collected this year came from unsecured loans. Therefore, Bank of Uganda (BoU) is not exiting because the portfolio has no value….” This is what he says. 

Now, he is writing saying that by the time they sold this, this portfolio literary had no value. We considered all this; there is nothing useful but we think he was being economical with the truth and we do ask colleagues to adopt our recommendations as stated in the report.

Regarding compensation, I did say yesterday and I repeat it, that it is true that these banks were distressed but that did not mean that somebody should take advantage of the problems to cheat and kill them. That is what happened. Somebody saw that these banks had problems and then he took advantage and started scavenging on them. We have all these scavengers coming in and literary looting these banks.

We said that much as these banks had a problem, they also had rights. That is why the Financial Institutions Act does clearly spell out how a distressed bank, which has been closed, should be managed. What happened is that all rules and laws were breached. 

Therefore, do they have a remedy? Of course they do. The point I made yesterday was about a prisoner who committed a crime and he is in prison. Doesn’t he have rights? Do you have to remind him that he is not going to eat because he committed a crime? You do not do that.

In our view, we think compensation – (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, for giving way. Honourable members, you realise that during the observations, there is missing money. This is the missing link. 

During the closure of banks, it becomes a cash bonanza. They create a situation where they say that there is a run on the banks and therefore they are suffering from liquidity. They send liquidity, for example, in the case of Crane Bank; they send liquidity of about 500 billion. What happens is that there are no actual customers coming to collect this money. Fictitious accounts are created. That is why the Auditor-General cannot trace the beneficiaries of the money sent during the liquidity stage.

When you get this evidence from whistle blowers, when they take over the commercial bank, fictitious accounts are created because money has been sent by Bank of Uganda, it is credited on these accounts, withdrawn and accounts are closed. That is why when the Auditor-General is looking for the beneficiaries of the liquidity that was sent during the time of lack of liquidity, you cannot trace the 169 billion.

Clearly, if you go ahead to investigate, you will find that, that money has never got beneficiaries. That is why after every seven years when this money is finished they close another one, create a liquidity crisis, a hole, and accounts, pick this money and enrich themselves. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, who will pay the compensation? Once you have Government agents messing up, Government takes responsibility. In law, we call that vicarious liability. Ordinarily, the public officers who hold those offices will take personal responsibility.

When you read through this report, personal responsibility also means criminal responsibility because you are accounting. I do not know whether many colleagues have read this report in detail. We have made many recommendations of people taking personal responsibility. What is missing in that is to start naming X, Y and Z. I tried to explain that yesterday –(Interjection)– I know those names appeared.

Let me tell you one thing; if you are in a process like this, you need to appear as judicious as possible. Do not give them an opportunity to attack the dignity and integrity of your report. Madam Speaker, you know that this House has been taken to court four times about our reports. Some of those decisions are not very good so we have to keep that in mind. How do we draft a recommendation that will not actually be challenged? We do not give them a chance for what they call judicial review. 

We were having that legal mind while drafting this report because we have to. When you write any recommendation because you want to please somebody on the street, it will not pass the legal test. 

Whether we amend the Constitution to give ourselves more powers, that is another matter because the Constitutional Court has actually in four occasions decided the powers of Parliament- what Parliament can do and what it cannot do. We had that in mind. 

Madam Speaker, tomorrow, I want the legal minds on both sides of the House to participate in this debate when we are drafting those recommendations. I do not want this report which has taken us all this to compile to be dead on arrival. It will be work gone down the drain.

We want this report to be a permanent record of this House and having been upheld by the court of law. That is what we need to. Because the sort of precedent we are setting, is a landmark in the political accountability of this country.

The Central Bank –(Interjection)– you know it, nobody had ever opened up there. We have done it and everybody is now saying by the way- somebody was telling me what is going on at the Bank of Uganda. Whatever they are doing now, they are like I do not want to go and appear before COSASE. It is now in their mind.

Today it is Katuntu; tomorrow they will be appearing before hon. Munyagwa. Therefore, the issue is that we need to be very careful the way we handle these issues. Some of us who were there and were looking at this situation live, it was very annoying. Some of the things you see written here or you watched, you could not be in that room to see and wonder how a public officer of a Central Bank can do that.

Madam Speaker, as a committee, we are open to any amendment. However, we will advise on what we think maybe is not correct. It is your report as a House; the recommendations are not committee recommendations anymore. They will be parliamentary recommendations. 

It is only today that I had somebody proposing some amendment but yesterday, it was general debate. I did not hear any proposal of any amendment to the recommendations. However, I hope tomorrow –(Interruption)

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, I respect hon. Katuntu and we have worked together for some time. Now you did not elaborate on compensation. You just said you fell short of mentioning names but you did not conclude on compensation and by who? The pubic, the banks, who compensates who? We beg to know.

MR KATUNTU: It is about the law. What does the law say? It is not our wish as a Parliament. Compensation is a legal obligation and who in law compensates who- vicarious liability. That is why I mentioned it. 

Therefore, yes, Government has a responsibility to pay for the mistakes of its public officers. That is why Government should supervise its public officers to make sure that they do not commit these mistakes because eventually it will dig in the public funds.

However, after that, if these officers are criminally responsible, they should be investigated and charged in courts of law. Madam Speaker, I think that is all. I would like to thank colleagues who have contributed to this debate. I imagine this is the beginning and I wish those who will come after us success in their endeavours. God bless.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu and honourable members. Members if you have any proposals they should be in writing and circulated in advance. There will be no ambush on this floor. This is now how we operate. If you want something, think about it, circulate.

Secondly, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there has been a lot of concern in the public that our recommendations are thrown in the dustbin. However, we amended the Rules of Procedure and under Rule 217, you are required to present a report of actions taken on our recommendations. 

I now want to remind you that you are late by two sessions. We are way into the third session. We require from you the report of the first session and the second on actions taken.

Now we passed the other motion on the violence but there was something I had wanted to talk about. I want to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is entitled to lead cars. You find a Premio with a lead car. It is not ambulances anymore; I think we need some information on what is going on.

6.53
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. (Rtd) Jeje Odongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter that you have requested me to respond to requires a little bit of crosschecking the law.

However, what I can say at this point is that some of the actions and decisions that have been taken have been taken considering the situation at the moment. However, for me to say who and why somebody is entitled to a lead car, I will need to go back, check the regulations, the law, then I would be able to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. House adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(House rose at 6.54 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
