

Tuesday, 12 February 2019

Parliament met at 2.01 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I congratulate you for what you have been able to achieve with the budgetary issues that were before us. We have come this far and we can only do better. We expect the Government, especially the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to meet his part of the bargain so that we are not delayed again like last time.

Honourable members, in the Distinguished Strangers’ Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of Members of Parliament and staff from the Budget Committee of the Parliament of Tanzania and they include:

    1. Hon. Mashimba M. Ndaki
    2. Hon. Andrew Chenge
    3. Hon. Suleiman A. Sadiq
    4. Hon. Albert Obama Ntabaliba
    5. Hon. Martha Jachi Umbulla
    6. Hon. Abdallah Bulembo
    7. Hon. Oran Manase Njeza
    8. Dr Immaculate Sware Semesi
    9. Hon. Amb. Adadi Mohamed Rajabu
    10. Hon. Maria Ndilla Kangoye
    11. Amb. Dr Diodorus Buberwa Kamala
    12. Hon. Marwa Ryoba Chacha
    13. Mr Hassan Mohamed
    14. Mr Angelus Lucas Turuka
    15. Ms Diana Festo Ulomi
    16. Mr Adam Mshangama
    17. Mr Wilson Ngao
    18. Mr Agathon Kipandula
    19. Mr Eric Rwambura

They are on a benchmarking visit to share experiences with their counterparts here and engage other Government institutions towards the process of improving the functions of their system. They are very welcome to the Parliament of Uganda. Honourable members, please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) Thank you. 

There are some issues that Members wanted to raise. We could deal with them quickly so that we go to the Order Paper. 

2.06
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance; I am specifically concerned with the move by the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to use women as objects of tourist attraction – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, first of all, I told my sister this morning that the way hon. Kiwanda was asked by this Parliament to use Ms Quinn Abenakyo to promote tourism is the same way he allowed people who are big in size to promote tourism. (Laughter) The only difference is that they are not skinny. Is the honourable member in order to put it on the record of Parliament that hon. Kiwanda is using women as sex objects? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamugo, would you like to restate what you said before I rule? (Laughter)

MS KAMUGO: Thank you. That is not what I said. Before I completed my statement, hon. Ssemujju was already on the Floor –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What did you say?

MS KAMUGO: Mr Speaker, I was rising up specifically to condemn the move by the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: To do what? 

MS KAMUGO: Over the past one week, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, I have to rule. Repeat what you said on hon. Kiwanda’s move. 

MS KAMUGO: His move is to use women as tourist attraction –(Interjections)– I did not mention “sex objects”. His move to use women bodies as tourist attraction is my concern. We were here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a point of order I have to rule on. I just needed your help on what you stated in case I did not hear you properly.

Honourable members, sometimes, we may need to think through some of the things we say; we may not say them properly. I have witnessed lots of these kinds of competitions: Miss Tourism and Miss Beauty Pageant. I have even witnessed Miss Universe in Colombia. If you look at what they do – it is basically to allow people to appreciate the uniqueness of the female sex. Those who present themselves properly are the ones who win eventually.

So, I do not know the concern here. Maybe, the Member had something else to say. However, to say that “using women as tourist attraction” may not be necessarily wrong. Perhaps, the words used could have been inappropriate in one way or the other. 

Therefore, I would like hon. Kamugo to finish what she was saying. Otherwise, we have Miss Tourism, Miss Universe and Miss World. We basically have “Miss Everything”. Hon. Cecilia Atim was runner-up for Miss Uganda. It is a bit complicated when we push them too far. Please, finish what you were saying.

MR OKUPA: Thank you. To remind Members, we have also had Mr Ugly from Lwengo. There was a contest for the ugliest man in Uganda at Nakivubo but no one made noise.

Additionally, Mr Speaker, I do not know why people are making hullabaloo about these things – about Miss Curvy. This is discrimination against women who are not skinny. As you have stated here, Mr Speaker, when Abenakyo came here, we praised her and we asked hon. Kiwanda to take advantage of her to promote Uganda and tourism. However, now when we want to use a different size, there has been a lot of noise – hullabaloo attacks and calls, including from colleagues. I saw honourable members in this House attacking the honourable colleague. I know he has a partner who is very curvy. Therefore, how do you go attacking and discriminating against women of a different size?

Personally, if we want to ban this issue of beauty contests, let us ban or attack it across the board – whether you are skinny or curvaceous or half what – the other day, hon. Jacqueline Amongin said here that “we are well-endowed”. She made it here the day when we were recommending, praising and recognising Quinn Abenakyo. Why now come with this entire burden? I have not seen those who are not skinny attacking hon. Kiwanda –(Interruption)-

2.15

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, colleagues and the chairperson of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association, I am standing on a point of procedure. One, hon. Kiwanda is not in the House. Two, we are using this time to raise matters of national importance and at the same time that require urgent attention. 

The tourism state minister is not here; I am seeking a procedural point whether it will not be okay if - (Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is the duty of the Government Chief Whip to ensure that the side which she whips is in the House. She should be embarrassed that the ministers are not there and only two out of over 82 ministers –

Mr Speaker, the Government Chief Whip should even have apologised to you first for failing to do her work – that she did not whip the ministers to come here to give a statement on the matter which has been contentious for the last two weeks.

Is the chief whip therefore in order to stand up and waste Parliament’s time, derail this House and run away from her responsibility as a whip in this House when we are discussing this serious matter? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What was the point of order again?

MR NZOGHU: Is she in order, Mr Speaker, to fail to whip her ministers so that they are here and then she puts it to you as if you are the one supposed to whip the ministers to come to this House? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Government Chief Whip, that is a very bad way to come and plead guilty for failures of bringing your ministers here. You should have come with some level of meekness and politeness and sought proper forgiveness from the Chair instead of coming and asserting a right to tell us that your minister is not there – a responsibility which is yours to ensure that he is here – and to try using that to affect the proceedings in this House. You rose on the procedure.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I know where hon. Kiwanda is and he informed me. However, the point of procedure I was making was a matter of the way forward. The issue the chairperson of UWOPA is raising can best be raised when the minister is here so that the minister can explain where his intervention came in because we want to know - is it a Government policy?

Therefore, as he was raising the point, Members started debating yet the person called hon. Kiwanda was not in the House. He is upcountry and his senior, Prof. Kamuntu, is also not available. When they are not available, it is the chief whip to stand in. However, this particular matter, which is not a policy passed by Cabinet, required the presence of hon. Kiwanda. 

Therefore, I was asking, as a matter of procedure, whether we cannot have more time to see where hon. Kiwanda was coming from and then we decide, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. The Member rose on an urgent matter of public importance and our Rule 46 is clear about such matters; what amounts to a procedure that would be allowable under this. It must be urgent, such that it cannot be handled by any other procedure of Parliament; it cannot be handled with notice. Therefore, all you need to do is come to the Speaker and say, “This matter is urgent; there is a disease outbreak, a bridge has collapsed or people are dying of starvation in some places.”

However, this particular one does not clearly fall within the definition of the exception under Rule 46. Therefore, I will ask the Member to prepare a formal question in writing to be submitted to the minister then the minister will respond also to the House in writing. Thank you.

2.19
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on a matter of national importance relating to the collapse on Cholol Bridge that has had great negative impact on my community and the neighbouring districts of Nakapiripirit and Moroto.

This matter has been known by the Government for the last seven years and Government has been promising to reconstruct the bridge but up to now, nothing has been done. I have written to the Minister of Works and Transport; she has promised me that she is going to do something but nothing has been done.

The economic activities of Amudat have been seriously affected by the collapsed bridge. In this regard, there is limited movement of people and goods from Amudat to other districts, especially during the rainy season. During the rainy season even those heavy tracks are swept away because of that.

Mr Speaker, the referral of patients seeking specialised medical and surgical care to referral hospitals like Matany and Moroto has been cut off during the rains. Therefore, people cannot even be referred because the road is impassable.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, my prayer, through you, is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should construct the bridge before the rainy season starts. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Government Chief Whip, I actually saw that bridge and I wonder why it is like that. As you leave the tarmac going to Moroto – towards Amudat – there is no bridge. It has been like that for long.

2.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I am going to find out from the Ministry of Works and Transport what arrangements they have for this bridge. I will be able to brief this House tomorrow. However the urgency has been noted. I will be able to get more details from the Minister of Works and Transport and I will be able to – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We would like to hear the report saying that the teams are on the ground and works have started. That is the report we would like to hear and not of plans for the next financial year. That would help the community there. They are grossly affected.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Most obliged.

2.22
MR DAVID LUKYAMUZI (Independent, Busujju County, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the issue of insecurity in my district, particularly in Busujju Constituency.

Last week, we had two issues that were raised in the district council meeting. Unfortunately, the answer we got from the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) was not clear. They are telling us that after the creation of Kassanda District, they reduced the police personnel by 40 per cent and they were sent to Kassanda. The death toll has now risen. Yesterday, we lost Mr Ssali Willy but they are telling us that they cannot solve that problem immediately. 

My humble request is that let the ministry concerned come out and solve this problem as soon as possible because we cannot leave our people to die at the expense of those at Kassanda. Thank you.

2.23
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, police has already given out a programme to do more recruitment because we have been having this problem of –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is the minister.

2.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I had not heard about the killing that took place in Busujju. We will get in touch with the police and get the details and what exactly the police are doing in investigating that murder. 

It is true that generally in the country there is a shortage of police. Particularly with the creation of new administrative units, every district would require a district police commander and every sub-county that is being created would also need a police post or more. The force that we have of about 43,000 policemen is very limited. 

In the short run I will find out the numbers that have been deployed in that district and in Busujju and whether we can shift forces to be deployed in the immediate areas of danger.

The long-term solution is that – I thank Parliament that we are getting funds for the recruitment of policemen; we expect to recruit about 6,000 policemen. These will be immediately recruited but the total interest is about 10,000 policemen who will be recruited. Other police auxiliaries will be recruited but for these 10,000, we think that within nine months or so, will be able to graduate. Therefore, we will be able to address the issue of shortage in the police more comprehensively.

However, we still have problems of deployment because the funds that we have are not adequate to service, provide fuel and maintain our fleet but we shall at least have resolved part of the problem. We shall be able to brief Parliament from time to time as we go along. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister.

2.25
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am rising on an issue of urgent national concern. This particularly concerns the biggest and oldest university of this country.

On 19th January, Makerere University was supposed to open its gates to the students to continue with their studies for the second semester. Today is 12th February and soon it is going to be 19th February, which means that a month is elapsing since this university was supposed to start teaching.

Students had reported and many of them are hostel-dwellers. They are continuing to stay around, spending money hoping the problem is going to be solved soon but it seems a solution is not in sight.

It is also of great concern to the nation that the ranking of Makerere University on the African Continent and even the East African Region has slumped. The university, which has been the fifth on the African Continent and has always been the leading university in the East African Region, has slumped to the 11th position being surpassed by Nairobi University. This is something which has not happened before. The glory of Makerere University and the pride of Uganda is being eroded. 

As a nation, we need an explanation from the Minister of Education and Sports. Let the minister tell the country when this university is going to open. What about those students who had reported and are staying around idle, spending money? What should they do? Should they go back to wherever they came from? What should happen to the international students who had reported?

It is my humble prayer that the minister explains to the nation the status of Makerere University lecturers’ strike and when students are starting their studies. We need that for the knowledge of the country, the students who are affected and their parents. Thank you.

2.27
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, hon. Kenneth Lubogo has demanded an explanation as to why, first of all, the institute called Makerere University is not opening while students have reported; and secondly the performance of the institution. 

I will make sure that the minister in charge of education makes the statement in the House on Thursday, probably –(Interrupted)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I raised this as a matter of national importance but the Ministers of Education and Sports were not here. It was listed on the issues to which they are supposed to make a response in the subsequent sittings of Parliament but they did not show up to answer.

The procedural issue I am raising is whether the Government Chief Whip is now saying that by disregarding Parliament and not answering – Moreover, it has been on the Order Paper. Isn’t she buying time so that they do not answer this matter that has been raised here before? 

Ordinarily, Government would even have briefed Parliament about the closure of Makerere without being prompted. However, even when we did, they did not answer. Is she procedurally moving well by telling Parliament that she is going to speak to the minister now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, each time there are urgent matters to be raised, you know by statistics, which areas come. We all know that it is going to be mainly internal affairs, education, health and works. You have the numbers of ministers in those sectors. Can’t they at least make a person available to deal with these issues?

Urgent matters have got to be handled urgently. (Applause) Otherwise you reduce us to the normal procedure of questions. If an urgent matter has got to be responded to tomorrow then is it still urgent?

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, I humbly apologise for the ministers who are not responding on time. Yesterday, in Cabinet – our procedures do not allow us to lay Cabinet documents to Parliament - but I presented a document indicating the issues raised in Parliament that are pending response from January to February. I submitted to every ministry yesterday and I thought that was the only way. 

Secondly, Mr Speaker, when I sit here, I am supported by staff who sit behind there who take note of the issues that are raised by this House. We follow with phone calls as well. I am pledging that I will continue whipping the ministers.

However, when the Members raise the matter, where I do not have an answer, I feel I should take an obligation to physically go and make sure that that answer is brought forward. This is what I have pledged when hon. Kenneth Lubogo raised the matter on Makerere University. 

On the rest of the pending issues, ministries that are supposed to respond here are aware; they have this information. I will continue with making sure that they report here. Otherwise, I also do not feel comfortable when I am here and my bench is half-full. I promise to do better. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of Makerere has gone beyond the level.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But we cannot begin debating it now.

MR LUBOGO: The procedural point I am seeking, Mr Speaker, is whether it would not be procedurally right for the chief whip to be given five or 10 minutes to go outside and at least whip one or two of the ministers. All Ministers of Education sit around here. 

Therefore, if she is given around 10 minutes to at least whip one to come and give a statement related to this issue. Otherwise, they will promise like they have been promising and it will end the way it has been ending.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. You know, each time these matters are raised, we expect the Government Chief Whip to communicate immediately and those that can be dealt with should be dealt with today before pushing it to tomorrow to crowd our Order Paper. We have business already scheduled for tomorrow but now you are creating for us more business by ministers who do not show up.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Lwamata, Kiboga District, represented by hon. Kiwanuka Keefa and hon. Nankabirwa Ruth Ssentamu. They are here to observe the proceedings of the House. Please join me in welcoming them – they have come at the right time. (Laughter) 

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I am moving under rules 8, 25 and 51 in regard to the question which I raised at the end of January when you were chairing. It was about the delay in the release of money to the regional offices of the Ministry of Works. The money meant to maintain the roads in the various regions of this country given the bad condition of the road network in the country.

At that time, I did mention that the Ministry of Finance had released only Shs 400 million to each of the regional offices and yet by that time, they should have released at least Shs 1.2 billion to each of the regional offices. The Minister of Finance was not in the House at that time. By the time he came, it was no longer possible for him to make a reply.

Mr Speaker, I wish to seek your indulgence; now that the Minister of Finance is here and our roads are in a deplorable condition all over the country and they have not released money which this Parliament passed, can the honourable minister explain to us why they have not released the money that was budgeted and yet it should have been released? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, could you help with that matter?

2.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, it is true; we are aware of that situation. The good news is that towards the end of last week, we did process resources to the ministry and we will follow up together with him to ensure that the money actually reaches where it is supposed to reach in time. Therefore, we did handle that matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is no longer in time. It is now quickly because time has already passed.

2.38
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. Recently, Uganda Wildlife Authority invaded my people in Rushoroza Parish, Kihihi Sub-County, in Kanungu District and chased them from digging in their land, alleging that they were digging in a park reserve.

Mr Speaker, those people have stayed there for long; they are the original Banyabutumbi you hear about. They have been there since 1934. They gave that history to us. They are the ones who started fishing on all those lakes of Rweshama and other parts in Kanungu and that park.

Mr Speaker, we have been disappointed because those people have stayed there for long. They even showed us their great grandparents’ graves. However, the way Uganda Wildlife Authority came and chased them away is very surprising.

Those people had already prepared their gardens for this season. It is also the area that was affected by drought the other time and people started eating grass tubers. Now, they have been stopped from tilling their land, meaning if it continues, we are going to face serious issues concerning hunger in that area again.

Mr Speaker, what surprised me when I contacted Uganda Wildlife Authority is that they just made a map for that area making it part of the Queen Elizabeth National Park. The map was made in 1964.

Mr Speaker, one of the oldest people there who is 90 years now, told me that they heard that one time, an airplane came and passed there and people disappeared to the bushes because they did not know what was happening. In the later years when they tried to ask, they told them that they were the whites who wanted to take their land from them.

We have made some investigations and found out that maybe this is the plane which was trying to make that map those days. In addition, at that time, people used to stay in grass-thatched houses. Therefore, when that plane came, we thought that maybe it never realised that people were already there.

Therefore, it is a big problem, Mr Speaker. We need Government intervention because people first need to have their food to keep them alive.

Secondly, if no intervention is made, there is a serious problem in that there is nowhere to put those people. They are also being disturbed, especially the school-going children, who cannot now go to school. The situation is horrible – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what is the urgent matter you are raising now?

MS KARUNGI: The urgent matter, Mr Speaker, is that I am requesting the House to intervene on our behalf and cause Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to stop chasing away our people. This is because they have stayed in that land for all those years and UWA had never bothered to take over that land. However, it is just coming in now to tell them that they are within the park when actually it has been their land for all these years. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

2.42
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, I have taken note and the issue of boundaries is not very difficult to establish. Parliament has urged us to make sure that we open the boundaries, forest reserves, wetlands and national parks. This programme has started. In Kiboga, people are being talked to and asked to leave wetlands from Bukomero and Lwamata. 

I think what we have to do is to make sure that we do not displace the people on the ground right now without talking to them first. Government is going to draw a programme to sensitise the people as well as bring its maps. Establishment of boundaries should not be rocket science when maps are in place. 

I am going to sit with the three key ministries involved in this matter: the ministries of Lands, Housing and Urban Development; Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities; and Local Government. They should sit together and see how they can handle the case in Kanungu without displacing the people. I have seen cases where people have been given a time frame to leave within a given period so that they can be able to harvest whatever crops they have. 

Therefore, I am going to make sure that the three ministries sit together, quickly find a day to go down to Kanungu and talk to the people instead of taking technical people to begin implementation, without probably doing the necessary sensitisation. I know that when our people are sensitised, they comply because we are all in support of making sure that the environment is preserved – (Interruption) 

MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is in relation to the matter that is being discussed now. If what the honourable member from Kanungu has said is true – that people have lived in that area for over 80 years – and the Government Chief Whip says that we can give them some time during which to leave, where do we expect these people to go? Are we saying that we are trying to respect animals more than the human beings, who were actually empowered by God to take care of the rest? Are we moving procedurally right in displacing the people for the sake of animals? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, when you rise on a procedural point, it is about the procedure of the House. However, when you talk about the procedure of eviction, it is not part of the procedure of the House. That becomes a point of clarification for the minister to deal with. 

Government Chief Whip, when you do the right thing badly, it ends up bad. You could be doing the right thing but if you are doing it badly – in an inhumane way – the whole thing ends up being bad. You do it badly, it ends up badly. Is there a more organised way of dealing with people who are in this situation? Is it possible?

Honourable minister, I hope you are not speaking as a member from Kanungu but as a –

2.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Mr Speaker, I am speaking as a minister from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Like the honourable Government Chief Whip said, the ministry responsible for wildlife is in the process of opening the boundaries of many protected areas. We have completed the process in the Elgon sub-region, where the Bagisu and Sebei sub-regions are affected. 

I also know there is a process in Kanungu as the Woman Member of Parliament has reported. They usually work with our ministry through the department of surveys and mapping because they have the technical information where the boundaries of these national parks are. 

What we undertake to do is that we are going to link with the Ministry in charge of wildlife and support them to open the boundaries. But this should be done harmoniously with the people. It usually requires sensitisation so that the local population and the local leaders know what is going on and participate in the process. 

Once the boundaries have been opened, then together, we determine whether to sensitise people and to get them out of the park – those who are found inside the park. We also determine if there is any decision to be taken; like what we have done in the Elgon region. We worked with the people and enabled the technical people to open the boundaries. Thereafter, the decision was taken on how to shift them. There are those who are found inside the park and those outside. Then, a decision is taken on how to rearrange settlement. 

Therefore, I just want to assure my Member of Parliament that we shall work together, as Members of Parliament from Kanungu, to support the local leaders and sensitise the population. We shall also urge the ministry responsible for wildlife not to harass the population, as they do the technical work. 

Therefore, I would like to support what the Government Chief Whip has said. We shall meet as the three ministries: Lands, Wildlife and Local Government. Thereafter, we shall guide the process so that people are not disturbed, until the boundaries are opened. Thereafter, the settlement arrangements will be worked out. Thank you.

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. Listening to my colleague from Kanungu and what the two ministers have said, I am not getting something right. What happens in a situation where you have a national park but with low population of wildlife? Do you still move people or do you move the wildlife?

2.50
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have listened to the Woman Member of Parliament from Kanungu and the minister from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The minister has explained the ideal situation; what ought to be done. 

However, the Member of Parliament from Kanungu is explaining the situation where people have already been evicted before that process you are talking about, honourable minister, takes place; before the people are sensitised and before a technical team comes on ground to open the boundaries. 

Therefore, in the circumstances, what happens now to the people that are already evicted even when the boundaries are not yet opened to determine whether these people have been staying inside the national park or not?

DR BARYOMUNSI: The way we have been handling it is that we allow the process to get concluded by way of erecting pillars which clearly show the boundaries. However, it is also true that in some situations there are obvious cases where our population invades the national parks because there is pressure on these resources. 

What we are going to guide is that we are going to meet as the relevant ministries and call for calm. The evictions should stop and we first open the boundaries. Once that process is completed, usually a political decision is taken; do we de-gazette part of the national park to allow settlements there –  which function is done by Parliament – or do we relocate and resettle the people found in the park like the process we are doing for the Elgon Sub-region? 

In the Elgon Sub-region, there are people we found inside the park and they were resettled outside. There are areas which may require de-gazettement because the density of settlement is high. 

The assurance which I was giving my Woman Member of Parliament is that we are going to intervene as the Government to stop any disharmony which is being created by this exercise so that people remain in peace until the exercise is completed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. In the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Artisanal Fish Processors and Dealers Association in Buvuma, Buikwe and Mukono districts. They are represented by hon. Robert Migadde, hon. David Mutebi, hon. Johnson Ssenyonga, hon. Nantume Egunyu, hon. Judith Babirye and hon. Peace Kusasira. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MS KARUNGI: Mr Speaker, these people are already evicted from the land. They cannot dig and we depend on agriculture to get food for eating. I am happy my honourable colleague has said something nice. However, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for Uganda Wildlife Authority to leave these people to continue tilling their land up to when everything is sorted out?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I thought that is what the minister has said – they are going on the ground to see how to deal with this thing so that people are helped. (Ms Karungi rose_) No, you have already raised it. Let me hear from the minister.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, the Government is going to go on the ground. Tomorrow at 11.00 a.m. we are going to have a meeting between the Ministry of Local Government and the ministries in charge of wildlife and lands so that we plan how to go on the ground; find out the facts and devise means of making sure that our people stop suffering. There is no way I can make a pronouncement this afternoon before finding out what is happening on the ground. 

I beg that we are allowed do this. We will have a ministerial meeting tomorrow to plan to go on the ground. If it requires halting the exercise done by UWA, as Government, we will do that. If it requires looking for food for the people who have been evicted, we cannot leave Ugandans to die. We will use the Office of the Prime Minister and make sure that we take food to the people. This is the best we can do.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

2.57
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. There is an Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Recently, some refugees from DRC have been entering Bunyoro Sub-region and some parts of the country, bordering DRC.

Mr Speaker, we Members from the areas that border DRC are not getting any information and are not even seeing any measures put in place to protect our people from this Ebola outbreak. It is crucial and urgent and I understand that the Ebola epidemic is worsening in DRC. We would like to know how far the Government has gone to protect our people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister?

2.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is true that there has been an Ebola outbreak in the eastern part of the DRC.

Mr Speaker, I would like to confirm that we do not have Ebola in Uganda. All that we are doing is surveillance to ensure that we do not have cases spilling over into our country. We updated this Parliament on the interventions we had put in place. We have actually established surveillance points in districts along the border with the DRC, specifically those closer to Beni Region – Bundibugyo, Kasese (specifically at Mpondwe), Kanungu, Rubirizi and Fort Portal. Of course, we are also working with our partners in the districts of Zombo and Nebbi and Bunyoro. 

Mr Speaker, we have the refugees coming in and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is screening the refugees that are trekking into the refugee settlements. Therefore, we are on alert. 

Let me also inform this House that yesterday when we received information that somebody from Tororo had died in DRC, we actually tracked the vehicle – this has been circulating on social media. I would like to update you that we managed to get the vehicle and ensured that before this body could be lowered into the grave, necessary actions were taken to ensure that the family members did not get in contact with the body.

Mr Speaker, allow me to inform the House that for this specific case, various tests have been done and so far it has been confirmed that this person did not die of Ebola.

Mr Speaker, the Government is on alert. The Ministry of Health is on alert and surveillance is ongoing. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the minister that while they have put measures to screen refugees and other people who criss-cross the borders, the Uganda-DRC border in Nebbi stretches up to Koboko and they have not put any measures after Nebbi. 

We have border posts in Vurra, Lia, Odramachaku and another one in Koboko and all these do not have screening gadgets and we have a lot of small crossing points used by people who do petty businesses.

I think it is important for the minister to take measures to ensure that screening gadgets can be put for these other border points. Anything to do with health will even compel a smuggler to come and pass through the screening machine. It is important that the ministry takes measures to address those other remaining points in West Nile. I thank you.

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. To add to what my brother, hon. Atiku has stated, I would like to say this. First, at Arua Airfield, I saw and I passed through a system screening for Ebola at the airfield connecting from Arua to Entebbe. At Entebbe the same thing was done. However, the border points raised by hon. Atiku are more important than the one of the airport because fewer people use the air transport system than those who walk on foot. Therefore, I would like to confirm that the minister is doing something, but it is not enough.

Secondly, borrowing from the experience of the Ebola outbreak which occurred in Northern Uganda where Dr Lukwiya died and where I was the team leaders for students who participated in the mobilisation for the prevention against Ebola, I saw the effectiveness of community participation in prevention of Ebola.

In this case, through you, Mr Speaker, I suggest that the minister works in collaboration with the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo local governments –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on information but now you are debating. Give the information, please.

MR FUNGAROO: The information I am giving is that the best way is to mobilise the people and I suggest that the minister works with the local governments of the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, and the local governments on the Ugandan side of the border. We need a joint taskforce on this.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The information I would also like to give is about the surveillance in Kanungu. Kanungu has two border points with DRC: Butogota and Ishasha. Around 15th of January, there was a suspected Ebola patient who died at Bwindi Hospital at around 10.00 a.m. but the surveillance team that came arrived at around midnight from Kasese. That means Butogota and Ishasha together with Bwindi Hospital have not been involved in that surveillance system you are talking about. 

This means the collaboration with other agencies you are talking about is not yet really harmonised, especially with local governments. I would urge the minister to intensify their engagement, especially on the Ebola surveillance. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker and I also thank hon. Sarah Opendi. I would like to provide additional information that the measures which are being described by other colleagues from the upper part of the country are also taken in Rukungiri and Kanungu because – as my colleague has said – Kanungu borders DRC. 

I have always interacted with the team from the Ministry of Health and Centre for Disease Control (CDC). I actually own a hotel in Kanungu – if I can say – and the CDC has been staying in that hotel, working with the officials from the Ministry of Health. There is a lot of sensitisation going on especially on the radios. Even when you go to public places such as banks you see infection control measures. 

Therefore, there is work going on, on the ground. I wanted to give that information to assure my brother hon. Roland Kaginda that the mobilisation is also there in Kanungu and Rukungiri and we commend the Ministry of Health and urge them to do more to ensure that we do not get Ebola in Uganda.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I indicated, we are on high alert and a lot of surveillance is on the ground. The Village Health Teams (VHTs) have been engaged and the communities are on alert. That is why we were actually able to get the case of this body that came from DRC, being transported to Tororo yesterday.

Whereas we have porous borders, Mr Speaker, there is a lot of community engagement and there is no cause for alarm. To assure hon. Fungaroo, let me say that we have joint cross-border engagements with the local governments on the DRC side. We have also had inter-ministerial meetings at the ministerial and technical levels. There is even a WhatsApp group that has been created for our teams in Uganda and DRC and we have been able to track those who have been in contact with suspected cases that have died the other side and have run into the country. That is why we were even able to follow up a case that came all the way to Masaka and the other parts of the country.

Mr Speaker, the situation is under control. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTION TAKEN TO REINSTATE MR APOLLO KAZUNGU, THE COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES AND MR GODFREY SASAGAH WANZIRA, THE DIRECTOR, CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL, TO THEIR POSITIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Public Service? Please, draw the attention of the minister to this particular issue. Next item.

PRESENTATION OF PROPOSAL TO ISSUE PROMISSORY NOTES NOT EXCEEDING $379.71 MILLION TO FINASI/ROKO CONSTRUCTION SPV LIMITED FOR THE FINANCING OF THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SPECIALISED HOSPITAL OF UGANDA AT LUBOWA

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Procedure?

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, as a point of procedure before we consider this matter of giving guarantees on behalf of companies, I would like to raise an issue of procedure where this Parliament last year authorised the guarantee on behalf of the Government of South Sudan for Government of Uganda to pay our traders who lost their money and property while doing business in South Sudan.

I have got information that on 28 January 20019, the Government of South Sudan issued a sovereign guarantee on behalf of the Government of South Sudan to pay only $41,623,513.

Mr Speaker, at the time this matter was raised, many traders were on the list and the amount claimed was over and above this amount. However, I have got information that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is planning to pay this money to only 10 companies or individuals.

I would like to request that before the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development pays this money and considers this other promissory note, they should give us a list of the traders it intends to pay and the respective amounts. 

This point of procedure is of paramount importance. Otherwise, the traders affected cut across the entire country but the information I have is that the 10 traders who are going to be paid are a selected few.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table a copy of the sovereign guarantee, which I have and was received by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 28 January 2019 to that effect. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, we passed a ratification that was signed between the Government of Uganda and the Government of South Sudan, where a list was presented in that request and that list was enlarged by Parliament, by an addition of 23 companies. We stand by what we passed and if there should be any deviation from what we passed, that would be breach of this House’s position and it would not be acceptable.

I am saying this because it was raised as a procedural matter. May the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development be able to clarify more on the matter?

3.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, we signed a bilateral agreement between the Government of South Sudan and the Government of Uganda. This agreement was brought to this House and it was approved. The House made a resolution and this resolution was forwarded to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for implementation.

I would like to assure the House that we shall implement the bilateral agreement and approve the resolution of the Parliament as it was. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We passed the list here. Please, let us not generate –

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, anyone who wants the resolution we passed - it is in the Hansard and they can access it. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Madam Clerk, please, extract for us the resolution and post it on the iPads so that Members can see what they passed. If there are any variations, we will be able to deal with them. At least, we passed a list with an addition of 23 companies. That is the list that we know; we do not know of any other list. (Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose.)

Honourable members, can we manage this matter the way it is? We should not throw too many things into this matter.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am very happy that Members of Parliament are very inquisitive and awake on issues being done in this country.

When the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brought that resolution here, they said it was urgent. We resolved to urgently get money and pay those traders. I am getting information that Government of South Sudan has agreed to the same date we passed and is ready to implement it. Yet, I am seeing another motion coming that we should pass something else for another group.

The procedural matter I am raising is: when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came here - they actually did the verification with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives - where were the other people that the ministry is talking about? Why did they miss on the list?

The second procedural issue I am raising -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what list are you talking about?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, the Shadow Attorney-General has raised an issue to the effect that the date we dealt with has been guaranteed by the Government of South Sudan. Now, on the Order Paper, I am seeing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development asking for more money - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: These are separate issues. (Laughter) I think you are taking the vigilance a bit too far. You are too awake now. 

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

PROPOSAL TO ISSUE PROMISSORY NOTES NOT EXCEEDING $379.71 MILLION TO FINASI/ROKO CONSTRUCTION SPV LIMITED FOR THE FINANCING OF THE DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND EQUIPPING OF THE INTERNATIONAL SPECIALISED HOSPITAL OF UGANDA AT LUBOWA

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, before I lay at the Table this request by Government in line with Rule 32(3) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, I would like to make a brief explanation on what I am going to lay on the Table.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is the other way round. You first of all lay the document and then you explain what you have laid. 

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, I beg to lay at the Table a request by Government to issue promissory notes not exceeding $379.71 million to Finasi/Roko Construction SPV Limited for the Financing of the Design, Construction and equipping of the International Specialised Hospital of Uganda At Lubowa.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Do you want to make a statement?

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, the proposed International Specialised Hospital of Uganda is intended to be a 264 bed world class facility for the treatment of medical conditions that have been refereed abroad. This includes treatment of Cancer, Heart diseases, brain and neurosurgery, organ transplant including kidney, fertility treatment, highly specialised surgeries and bone marrow transplant.

The hospital was launched at Lubowa in Kampala in June 2016 by His Excellency, the President. Finasi Construction Limited will be responsible for its construction and equipment over a two-year period, while Finasi partnerships with a hospital in Milan, will operate the hospital for eight years after construction is completed.
	
Finasi is owned by an Italian investor who has been helping us on a number of initiatives in the country. In order to ensure world class treatment, the hospital operator is required to obtain accreditation from the Joint Commission International (JCI) within three years, for the commencement of the operation and maintain the JCI accreditation throughout the eight-year period of operation. 

To-date, I would like to inform you that on the African continent, there are only eight hospitals that are accredited to this international standard. One is in Nigeria and other two are in Kenya. 

As I conclude, the cost –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The minister has laid a document at Table in which he wants Government to issue promissory notes to the tune of $379.71 million to a private company. This note falls in the category of either a guarantee or a loan. 

The reason I am raising a procedural issue is, usually, matters relating to borrowing are matters that are referred to the relevant committees for scrutiny after which the committees report back to Parliament. The minister usually presents the kind of document he is presenting here to the committee. Thereafter, he can speak about his motion, either to guarantee or borrow, later when the committee has processed the request. 

Therefore, the procedural issue is whether the minister should not stick to the practice of this Parliament of laying a document so that it is referred to the relevant committee like we have done in all cases. Then, he can justify the request when it has properly been processed by the committee of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The minister cited Rule 32 (3). Mode of Laying Papers under Rule 32 (3) states that “If so desired by the person presenting a paper, a short explanatory statement may be made by him or her upon its presentation”.  That is the rule the minister has quoted and that is what he has used. I do not know why he is doing that but the rule allows him to do so. 

I just read the rule. He cited the rule under which he wants to make the explanatory statement. That is why I had told him he could not make the explanation before he laid the document. If he wanted to make an explanation, he should lay the document first as directed under Rule 32 (2). 

MR NIWAGABA: Mr Speaker, if you look at that rule critically, it does not envisage a matter that would require an action by Parliament in form of a resolution or otherwise. The kind of proposal the minister is laying leads us to something else. I would have expected him to come with this explanation accompanied by a motion for a resolution of Parliament. 

However, if he makes the explanatory statement after he has laid the document, under sub-rule (3), you do not even refer this particular paper to a committee because you have the discretion under sub-rule (5). What happens then? Will he just be informing us? Why does he want to beat about the bush and not come directly to what he wants this House to do? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, first wait. Let us take the minister according to what he has requested. I do not want to assume anything the minister wants to do because the minister has said he wants to use Rule 32(3) to give a short explanation about the document he has laid and the rule allows him to do so. Why are we reading beyond what the minister has requested? Honourable minister, have you finished? Please, let us go on systematically.  

MR BAHATI: In conclusion, the construction, equipping, training of Uganda’s staff and medicines for the first year of operation have been estimated not to exceed the amount I have stated. This will be paid over six years after the construction of the hospital.

The resources for repayment of the construction, equipping and operational costs will be sourced from the funds that the Government currently uses to spend on medical treatment abroad. Currently, according to the statistics of 2014, the ministry uses $ 73 million to refer people abroad. It is this money that we would like to use to pay back the developer after the construction has been concluded. This excludes travel and upkeep costs of the people that we refer abroad.

The authorisation of Parliament to the Government is of urgency in view of the execution of the project agreement that was concluded on December 2018 and launched in 2016. (Interjections) 

I, therefore, -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can the minister just finish the statement he is making, please? You will still raise the point of order.

MR BAHATI: Given the statement that I have made, I am, therefore, seeking your guidance in light of the importance of this matter and the facility to the population of Uganda. As I have stated, this matter should be considered in light of Rule 32 (5) of the Rules of Procedure. I seek your guidance.

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity you have accorded me. Whereas the information given to us is not bad, it would only be fair that as per Rule 32 (1), sufficient copies of the paper including his justification for the request be distributed to the Members. Secondly, he is going into the merit of what the committee would have discovered when they interface with those people. The committee would then report to us and make this a subject of debate. This is pre-empting a debate at the moment. 

We seek your indulgence on this matter, which I know is in your hands to refer it to the relevant committee according to our rules. It is pre-emptive to debate what the minister has presented here. Since the minister has also presented his point, we should also now start dissecting this loan they want to give a private entity. The country yearns for referral hospitals in every region where our qualified doctors can work rather than funding a private venture for a private person.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you still on procedure?

MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO: That is the real procedure. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. A promissory note more or less of this kind is a loan and guarantee. This Parliament and the minister are constrained by the dictates of our Constitution. 
Article 159 of the Constitution clearly spells out what the ministers ought to do because what the minister is doing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which article?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Article 159 of the Constitution and I am also going to refer to the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 to make my procedural point.

Mr Speaker, a promissory note is a guarantee by Government and therefore, requires approval of Parliament. It should be a formal approval and not a mere presentation of papers. 

Secondly, when you look at section 36, “Authority to raise loans” and section 39 “Authority to guarantee loans; 

(1)	The minister may, where she or he is satisfied that it is in the public interest, in the manner and conditions he or she may think fit with the approval of Parliament, on behalf of the Government, guarantee the repayment of the principal money and the repayment of the interest and the other charges on the loans raised within or outside Uganda by - I will go straight to “(d) by a private sector entity.”

This is a private sector entity. For the minister to come here and just lay at the Table and then give an explanation note defeats the actual meaning of the Constitution and the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. 

The minister intends to borrow over Shs 1 trillion guaranteed by the Republic of Uganda and therefore, the people. Therefore, we ought to be very certain about the terms and conditions of this guarantee in the form of a promissory note.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, my humble procedural appeal is that this matter ought to come here through a formal motion and a committee needs to clearly look through this promissory note and examine the terms and conditions of this guarantee that the Government wants to give. I beg to move Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are jumping the guns. You are already dealing with issues we are not yet dealing with. – No. You have not started anything honourable members. Sometimes, we read out of the vigilance that hon. Nandala Mafabi -(Laughter)

Sometimes, we read beyond what we should be reading because all the minister has so far done is to use Rule 32(3) (Members rose_) wait. Use the rule because he is laying a document. All he has used is Rule 32(3) to give an explanation to the document he has laid; period.

The only thing he has done, which is additional, is what he said he is seeking the indulgence of the Speaker, which, I am sure hon. Nsereko did not listen to because he was already raising a procedural matter. – Yes, you were reading the rules; you did not hear him talk about sub rule (5). Am sure you did not hear that one because he talked about it. That is the only new thing he has brought and sought my discretion on. 

That is the opportunity I wanted to give you because if he has now said his explanation is to the extent that he now wants to go further enough to invoke sub rule (5), “Papers laid on Table may be referred to the relevant committees”. You can read it to me; may not be referred to the relevant committee. That is the point he is making.

That is why I am asking what you think because he has asked me and I do not want to take that decision. We have not started yet.

MR SEMUJJU: I am rising on a point of procedure.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But what procedure now, honourable member? He has asked me or sought my indulgence that this matter should now not be referred to a committee. I am not going to take that decision. I want a discussion on it. That is all I am saying. 

MR SSEMUJJU: The Procedural issue I am raising, Mr Speaker, is that hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has read the relevant article of the Constitution and the relevant sections in the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. The minister is aware and he has on numerous occasions - that is why at one time, I referred to him as a minister for borrowing.
Therefore, the procedural issue I am raising is whether this minister should burden the Speaker by feigning ignorance that he does not know how to process loans through Parliament. Would this be the right procedure?

He is aware that the moment you want to seek clearance of a matter like this, there is a relevant article of the Constitution to follow and sections of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015. He is now feigning ignorance and saying, “Mr Speaker, I am seeking for your guidance”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, the rules are for this Parliament. There is no particular rule for the minister, especially hon. Bahati, who has been doing this thing. They are the same Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda and that is what he is citing.

I have guided and said all he has asked is now if we can invoke sub rule (5) and I am not taking that decision. Let us discuss it. (Members rose_) Now, which procedure agai? Let us discuss the procedural matter the member has raised.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, thank you very much. Rule 31 is on laying of papers and a paper is defined under the definition clause, “any documents in any form that may be laid at the Table.”

These are the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and they are the hand maiden of justice. We have a primary law on matters of dealing with borrowing; that is the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015”and we have a constitutional mandate. 

In other words, the paper, which is being laid here is a paper, which is not necessarily a document per-se but it has what we call a primary law and constitutional requirement that such a matter be taken to the committee because it is a fundamental issue. When we are making this law -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, when you are raising legal matters, raise them properly. I would like you to quote for me from the Constitution and also for the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 where it says refer to the committee. It is only the Rules that say that because that is the procedure we have adopted as Parliament, that such matters must be referred to the committee.

However, the rule that makes reference is here. It says “may”; that is what the minister is saying. Let us not just grab things because the Public Finance management Act (Amendment), 2015 and the Constitution do not say that. The only document that talks about referring to committees are our Rules of Procedure.

May be, I have not read the Public Finance Management Act; can you quote for me if there is a section that says that business will be referred to the committee?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, the command that the Constitution and the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 refers to is approval of Parliament. How does Parliament approve? It is through laid down procedures in our Rules of Procedure.

Our hands are constrained as Parliament and even anyone in this House on what they can do by dictates of what the Constitution says. If it commands us to do a job, then we do so. If the Public Finance Management Act commands us to do our job, there is no harm in a minister moving in a straight path. Why does he go through a panya? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now exceeding the point and that is where the problem is. I think your point was not properly made. Let us do it this way; I think we are on the same page. A request has been made. We have a responsibility to deal with it. That is all I am asking. 

The minister has requested that we invoke Rule 32 (5) in the process of doing the approval required by the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act (Amendment), 2015.

MR ANYWARACH: What is the urgency? Let him tell us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Wait. Unless you were not listening to what the minister has said. If you did, he told you it was urgent as some documents were signed or something like that. I heard that but it is beside the point that the minister has made a request that we should deal with this and expedite it according to his request so that we can take that decision of approval as Parliament now. 

He has asked me to take that decision but I have said, “No”. There is no violation of the Constitution or the Public Finance Management Act. There is even no violation of the rules. So, we are proceeding properly, except that we have to take a decision that I have declined to take as Speaker but that must be guided by the House. That is all I am doing. Therefore, can we debate? Hon. Lyomoki was already on the Floor.

3.43
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to debate Rule 32 (5) where the minister is requesting you to take a decision whether to refer this matter to the committee or not. This is the first time that the minister is moving that way. Most of the time, he has been coming clearly without using that motion and I will tell you why.

This request he is moving has very controversial and contentious issues. First of all, the Minister of Health does not support that motion –(Interjections)– Yes. I am very sure about that. There are documents I have that I can lay at the Table later.

Secondly, the Attorney General has also moved against this position – (Interjections) Yes. We can tell the Attorney-General to specify.

Right now, we lack $6.5 million to finish Mulago Referral Hospital, which is being constructed. You are taking of giving $379.71 million guarantee to a private entity when we are stuck with Mulago. This type of request is a shame to the Government and that is why the minister is not clear. His speculation was that he would make you pass the request immediately without going through the requisite procedure – (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: The information I would like to give to this House is that –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rose on a point of procedure. Hon. Lyomoki was very passionate and referred to two Government ministers, which ministries are represented here.

Are we proceeding well, leaving this on record unrebutted, whether the Minister of Health and the Deputy Attorney-General who are here - hon. Lyomoki stated - I do not want to say he alleged that those two do not support this request for a loan. Can we have this record straightened? - Can we continue with this pertinent issue that has been raised and the other ministers are opposed to it and they are here nodding either approvingly or unapprovingly?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I was listening to hon. Lyomoki who said that at the conclusion of what he was going to say he would lay some documents. I was hoping that there would be a correspondence from the Ministry of Health and that from the Attorney-General so that I can ask them later to deal with the document that the hon. Lyomoki has laid. That is why I decided to leave it that way.

So far, we are proceeding properly – (Laughter) - let hon. Lyomoki finish laying those documents, which he says are from the Ministry of Health and the Attorney-General then we proceed.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Lyomoki for being kind enough to give way for this point of information.

This country deserves more than what we are talking about. We deserve better training facilities for doctors to build a human resource; that pool that will enable us have surgeons and experts that can carry out these activities in better conditions. This same money, if well split and if audited –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you rose on a point of information. Please, give the information.

MR NSEREKO: The information I would like to give hon. Lyomoki is that this sum of money, if well split according to the five basic regions of Uganda – this is a guarantee for a loan that is going to be footed by the tax payer whether today or tomorrow, to a private venture. If we did a referral hospital in the mid-Central, another in Northern Uganda, in the West and the other in the East, we would get referral hospitals with professionals to conduct these services where both the local person and the Government shall benefit. 

In any case, the question should be, as we are giving this promissory note, is Government acquiring shares? Is it a Public-Private Partnership? How do we moot the trust of all Ugandans in form of guaranteeing a private individual when we can give our own Government institution?  

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you for that information. As I conclude, I would think that you refer this matter to the committee –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The documents. (Laughter)

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, I am getting to that. I have the documents that I referred to. The only challenge is that I did not know that this matter is on the Order Paper but I have them –(Interjections)– given chance, I can lay them tomorrow or to the committee but I have them and I am sure about it.

Mr Speaker, therefore, I request that you pursue a line that allows this type of documents to be interrogated either through the committee or delaying a decision on this matter until we look at all the factors. Thank you very much.

3.50
MR MARK ANGEL DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Your indulgence was sought but because of your generosity, instead of taking your own decision, you have extended it to us so that we participate. I am extremely sorry to say that but it appears we have already abused the offer that we should participate into decision-making. You should have done it and it would be in order as per Rules 32 (5). In my opinion, now that we have abused your offer to participate in this matter, I request that you rule. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

3.51
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You have guided well on the technicalities of the request of the minister. However, the most critical things to look at are the merits of the project and the structure of the guarantee.

According to the minister’s request, we are guaranteeing to pay after the project has been established. In addition, we are dealing with a specialised facility. This country has been committing a lot of money on taking Ugandans abroad for this specialised treatment. What the Minister is saying, the amount of money that we have been committing every year will be consolidated and paid back after the facility has been established.

I do not see anything harmful in undertaking such a project- (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. I would like to agree with you that the minister promised that payment is after construction. However, I also want to remind you that it is six years after construction. That kind of structure is for street moneylenders. Therefore, if you are talking about payment after construction after six years, you know what you are talking about. Therefore, it is really a kind of informal money lending - I find that a bit problematic. Thank you.

MR DAVID MUTEBI: We know very well that every single year money is appropriated for this specialised treatment outside Uganda and it is not going to stop tomorrow but will continue every other year until such a time when we have such facilities within the country.

Therefore, I would implore the honourable members to read the details of this guarantee for them to appreciate that we really need to give Government support to guarantee this loan in order to have the project done. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.54
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have difficulty reconciling Rule 33 with our Rules of Procedure 175 (2) (b) and (e). This is what I want to read to the House.  Rule 175 provides for the functions of the Committee on National Economy. Rule 175 (2) (b) states, “to examine and make recommendations to the House on all loan agreements required to be authorised or approved by the House under Article 159.” Rule 175 (2)(e) Says, ”to examine loan guarantee requests and assess the performance of the existing ones by Government.” 

Mr Speaker, whereas the minister brought this request and laid the paper, we have all noted that a promissory note is a form of a guarantee. Our own rules say that our Committee on National Economy must assess and recommend to us.

At this stage, I want to beg the indulgence of the Minister that I have also looked through the document that has accompanied it. It appears to me that there is nothing urgent as of now that requires us to waive and say that we are going to pass it from here. Why don’t we apply rule 175(2) (b) and (e) so that this can go to the committee and then it recommends to us so that we are able to pass it? I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, you raised a procedural matter that we might not be proceeding properly in view of 175 of our Rules of Procedure. You know there are similar procedures in relations to Bills. Bills read for the first time are referred to the committees but under certain circumstance, also Bills may not be referred to the committee. Therefore, there is no contradiction. It is just the way the House decides to proceed, it is within the rules.

However, the other point that you have raised in terms of debate is okay; it can be accommodated and then, we see how to proceed.

3.37
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two things have happened here. First, papers have been laid at the Table by the Minister of Finance - you understand the purpose for which papers are laid.

Secondly, a question has been asked by the Speaker as to whether or not these papers should be referred to a committee and that is where the debate is. I answer your question, Mr Speaker, that this matter should be referred to a committee. We should never attempt to complete it here within Parliament for the following reasons:

The document laid at the Table is here in my hands. This is the only copy that was laid here. I got it from the Clerk to Parliament. It needs to be understood by the Members first even if the issue is supposed to be passed or completed from here. You are supposed to read it and understand what you are approving even as Parliament- (Interjections) If it is on the iPad, you are supposed to read it and understand it first. 

Secondly, attached to this document is a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to issue a promissory note. Mr Speaker, therefore, I say that we should take this to the committee so that we have time to ask questions as to whether and why you need to build a private hospital when you have Mulago here. (Interruption)

MR GUMISIRIZA: Mr Speaker, THE Speaker in this House is the custodian of these rules, which are quoted by honourable members. I find it extremely strange that colleagues here challenge a ruling of the authority of this House - authority embedded in the Speaker. Is it in order, Mr Speaker, that you rule, rule again and again but Members continue challenging your ruling? Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I guided that there has been a request by the minister, which I was supposed to have considered. However, I said that I would not consider it myself but I would leave it to the House to debate. Therefore, I have not substantially ruled where this matter should go but I have guided that we have a consultation as Members and then, I take the decision. 

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for the wise ruling, Mr Speaker. You asked us whether we should complete this matter here or refer it to the committee. This is what we are doing here. We are answering the question of the Speaker, not the one of my honourable colleague hon. Guma here. 

I still give the reasons why we should refer this matter to the committee. We would like to understand the company that has been offered this money. Who are the owners of this company? 

We would like to know the terms and conditions between this company and the Government of Uganda. We would also like to understand whether this company falls in the category of investors and whether investors come to Uganda to invest money given to them by Uganda. Why do we call them investors? Why do we invite them to come and invest in Uganda, if they do not have money? Why don’t we invest our money ourselves without inviting people called “investors?” (Applause) 

With all this, Mr Speaker, the reason I say that they should refer this matter to the committee is to find out why we have chosen a place called Lubowa, which is some few metres away from Mulago? Why don’t you say that you want to build this hospital in Karamoja or in Nakasongola? You are complaining of traffic jam in Kampala. Instead of decongesting Kampala, you want to congest it. Why? 

Who are the people that are referred abroad for treatment? Are they the rich? Why don’t you make sure that you build a hospital – first of all, the purpose for referring people abroad is that our own hospital could not handle the conditions. Instead of improving our hospital so that nobody is referred abroad, you are still maintaining the weakness of our hospitals and we continue referring people to a hospital owned by a private entity.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, let us refer this matter to the committee and see how to proceed from there. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I am sufficiently informed now. Let me guide as follows; the minister certainly made a request and he cited circumstances that make this matter urgent. The House is of the feeling that they need to ventilate this matter further and that can be done through a committee. 

I am now going to give guidance on a compromise that will take into consideration the request by the minister that this matter is urgent and it should be considered. Whether we decide one way or the other, at least, we should take that decision in time to deal with this issue. 

The House also wanted to refer this matte to the committee. Our Rules of Procedure stipulate 45 days. On this specific matter, where a specific request has been made and where we had a discussion, I refer this matter to the Committee on National Economy for a period of 20 days. (Applause) The rules say 45 days but I would like to take slightly less than half of that time so that the committee can expeditiously handle this matter, according to the request by the minister and come back and advise us on how to proceed with this matter. 

Chairperson of the committee, you will need 20 days to deal with this matter since it has been said to be urgent. 

4.04
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This is the first time we are going to handle this kind of request. It needs a lot of research. We really need time to consult and so, 20 days may not be enough for us to do a competent job. At the same time, we have other equally urgent loans, which are getting time barred. We have already started on them and they need to be concluded. 

Therefore, my request is if you found it necessary for it to go to the committee, allow us the full 45 days. Personally, if the minister preferred to have this request presented to the House directly, under the rule which he quoted, considering that this is a multi-year activity, it could be treated as a budget item and appropriated money through the budget, if the House deems it so.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, the request has been made for this promissory note to be issued with the approval of Parliament.  I have directed that in view of the request by the minister, which we will not like to ignore in total and also in light of the responses from the House, I am giving you 20 days. Please, report back in 20 days and you know what to do in case you fail. Please, help us so that we finish with this matter. Thank you. 

DESIGNATION OF MEMBERS TO STANDING COMMITTEES IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 15(10) (C) AND RULE 157 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

4.08
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, you remember that I stood on the Floor of this House and designated Members to various committees. However, we were advised by the Speaker to make changes because some committees were oversubscribed. 

Therefore, I have made changes and I would like to call upon honourable colleagues to listen to the names as I designate them to the standing committees. Some of the Members I am designating are new and therefore, had missed out. 

In line with Rule 157 (2) of our Rules of Procedure, I would like to designate the following Members as follows: 

    1. Hon. Christopher Kalemba has been removed from the Committee on Budget to the Committee on Appointments. 
    2. Hon. Wilberforce Yaguma has been removed from the Committee on Budget to the Public Accounts Committee (Government Assurances). 
    3. Hon. Jane Avur Pacuto has been removed from the Committee on Budget to the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government). 
    4. Hon. Judith Alyek has been removed from the Committee on Budget to the Committee on National Economy.
    5. Hon. Sylvia Nayebale has been removed from the Committee on Budget to the Public Accounts Committee (COSASE). 
    6. Hon. Aboud Kitatta has been removed from the Committee on National Economy to the Public Accounts Committee (Government Assurances). 
    7. Hon. Sam Bitangaro has been removed from the Committee on National Economy to the Committee on Human Rights. 
    8. Hon. Paula Turyahikayo has been removed from Committee on Com­mis­sions, Statu­tory Au­thor­i­ties and State En­ter­prises to the Committee on National Economy. 
    9. Hon. Paul Chelimo has been removed from Committee on Equal Opportunities to the Committee on Human Rights. 
    10. Hon. Esther Anyakun has been removed from the Committee on Public Accounts (Central) to Committee on Public Accounts (Government Assurances).
    11. Hon. Fredrick Angura has been removed from the Committee on Local Government to Public Accounts (Central).
    12. Hon. lsaac Etuka has been removed from the Committee on National Economy to the Committee on HIV/AIDS.
    13. Hon. Veronica lsala has been removed from the Committee on Human Rights to the Committee on National Economy.
    14. Hon. Cosmas Elotu has been removed from the Committee on National Economy to the Committee on Human Rights. 
    15. Hon. Dorothy Azairwe has been removed from the Committee on Appointments to the Committee on National Economy. 
    16. Hon. Hope Mukisa has been removed from the Committee on Public Accounts (Central) to the Committee on Appointments.
    17. Hon. Fred Angella has been removed from the Committee on Public Accounts (Government Assurance) to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central).
    18. Hon. Cissy Namujju has been removed from the Committee on Equal Opportunities to the Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE).
    19. Hon. Judith Babirye has been removed from the Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE) to the Committee on Equal Opportunities. 
    20. Hon. Bonny Okello has been removed from the Committee on Com­mis­sions, Statu­tory Au­thor­i­ties and State En­ter­prises to the Committee on HIV/AIDS.
    21. Hon. Lawrence Mangusho has been removed from the Committee on National Economy to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government Accounts). 
    22. Hon. Gordon Arinda has been removed from the Committee on Local Government to Committee on Public Accounts (Central).
    23. Hon. James Baba was unaccounted for and he is now designated to serve on the Committee on Human Rights.
    24. Hon. Peace Kusasira was unaccounted for and she is now designated to the Committee on Appointments –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do you mean by unaccounted for? 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA:  When we designated, I gave a preamble, Mr Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, just say she or he did not belong to any committee because “unaccounted for” is for dead people. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Mr Speaker, thank you for the guidance.  

    25. Hon. Peter Lokeris who joined us later is now designated to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government).
    26. Hon. Grace Namukhula is designated to the Committee on Public Accounts (Government Assurance).
    27. Hon. Godfrey Onzima is designated to serve on the Committee on Human Rights.  

Mr Speaker, I beg to designate. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Government Chief Whip. Honourable members, we are required to approve these changes and make the Members to start operating in the committees they have been put to. I put the question to the approval of these names.

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.14
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Mr Speaker, we are making changes for the same reasons. 

    1) I am withdrawing hon. Nabilah Naggayi from the Committee on Equal Opportunity to the Committee on Appointments. 
    2) I am withdrawing hon. Deogratius Kiyingi from the Committee on National Economy to the Committee on Appointments. 
    3) I am withdrawing hon. Wamanga Wamai from the Committee on Public Accounts to the Committee on Local Government Accounts.
    4) I am withdrawing hon. Florence Namayanja from the Committee on Local Government to the Committee on Public Accounts.
    5) I am withdrawing hon. William Nzoghu whom we did not designate to the Committee on National Economy. 
    6) I am withdrawing hon. Paulson Luttamaguzi from the Committee on Budget to Committee on Appointments.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the approval of those Members to belong to the committees they have been designated to. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

4.15
MR EDWARD OTTO (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In accordance with Rule 157 (5) of the Rules of the Procedure of the Parliament and for the reasons that have been stated, on behalf of the Speaker of Parliament, we are withdrawing and designating the following independent Members of Parliament to the respective standing committees as follows;

    1. Hon. Anita Among is designated to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central).
    2. Hon. Jacklet Atuhaire is withdrawn from the Committee on Public Accounts (Central).
    3. Hon. Samuel Okwir is withdrawn but we are yet to - Mr Speaker, as it was stated earlier, some committees are oversubscribed. It is also anticipated that a new committee is most likely to be created later. At that point, some Members will be – According to Rule 158, there can only be a minimum of 15 Members and a maximum of 35 Members in a committee as it was stated by the Government Chief Whip and this process has been conducted.

Hon. Samuel Okwir is withdrawn from the Committee on Budget and he is yet to be re-designated. 

    1. Hon. Julius Mukasa is withdrawn from the Committee on Budget and he is yet to be re-designated.
    2. Hon. Rosemary Nauwat is withdrawn from the Committee on National Economy and redesignated to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central).
    3. Hon. Reagan Okumu is withdrawn from the Committee on National Economy and he is yet to be redesignated. 
    4. Hon. Andrew Kaluya is withdrawn from the Committee on National Economy to the Committee on HIV/AIDS.
    5. Hon. Hood Katuramu is withdrawn from the Committee on Public Accounts and re-designated to the Committee on Appointments.
    6. Hon. Abdulatif Sebaggala is withdrawn from the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) and is yet to be re-designated.
    7. Hon. Beatrice Anywar is withdrawn from Committee on Public Accounts (COSASE) and re-designated to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government).
    8. Hon. Gideon Onyango is withdrawn from the Committee on Com­mis­sions, Statu­tory Au­thor­i­ties and State En­ter­prises and is yet to be re-designated. 
    9. Hon. Veronica Babirye is withdrawn from the Committee on HIV/AIDS and is yet to be re-designated.

Mr Speaker, about nine Members are yet to be re-designated. Thank you. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I will not deal with the Members that have not been given committees right now but for the Members that have been designated or re-designated to committees, I put the question for them to be approved to belong to those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, there are Members that have been designated to particular committees. I will not deal with the Members that have not been given committees right now but for the Members that have been designated or re-designated to committees, I put the question for them to be approved to belong to those committees.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

4.20
DR SAM LYOMOKI (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019”. It is moved under Article 94 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? Would you like to state your motion in full and then we seek secondment?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

“WHEREAS Article 79 the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter of peace, order, development and good governance;

AND WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and Rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a Member to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE THAT Objective XIV (b) of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provides that the state shall endeavour to fulfil the fundamental rights of all Ugandans to social justice and economic development and shall, in particular, ensure that all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, work, decent shelter, adequate clothing, food security and pension and retirement benefits;

COGNISANT that Objective VII of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy provides that the state shall make reasonable provision for the welfare and maintenance of the aged;

NOTING that the National Social Security Fund Act Cap. 222 establishes the National Social Security Fund and further provides for its membership, the payment of contributions to, and the payment of benefits out of the fund and for other purposes connected therewith;

FURTHER NOTING that the National Social Protection Policy, 2015 seeks to promote effective coordination and implementation of relevant social protection interventions and as an integral part of the Uganda Vision 2040 which underscores the importance of social protection in addressing risks and vulnerabilities;

CONCERNED that Cap. 222 does not provide for representation of workers and employers as is required by international standards and gives the minister the preserve of determining the category of employees eligible to contribute to the fund rather than leaving it open to all categories of employees;

FURTHER CONCERNED that the minister is vested with all power to approve any investment and expenditure of the fund and the numerous stages the fund should go through before an investment is approved;

CONVINCED of the need to streamline the management of the fund and expand the scope of coverage and benefits, in particular, to provide for representation of workers, changes in appointment of the board, changes in composition of the board, limitation on membership to the fund, change in control of expenditure and investments and change in the fines and penalties;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House:

    1. Grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill for an Act entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019” a draft of which is hereto attached.

    2. Do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first Reading.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by Member for Manjiya County, Workers Representative and the Member for Kitagwenda County. Would you like to speak to your motion?

DR LYOMOKI: Mr Speaker, the purpose of this motion is to seek leave for a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019” to amend the National Social Security Fund Act Cap. 222. 

As you may know, the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) was established by the NSSF Act in 1985. NSSF has grown to be the largest player in the retirement benefits sector with assets worth over Shs 10 trillion as by the end of 2018, representing approximately 80 per cent of the traded shares on the Uganda Stocks Exchange and over Shs 4 trillion in Government securities and over Shs 220 billion in fixed bank assets. 

The total membership of the National Social Security Fund is 2.1 million but only about 880,000 are active members. The fund has, therefore, grown exponentially but we still have challenges. 

For about 10 years now, the fund has been able to operate well and last year, it was able to give members up to 15 per cent interest on their savings. However, about 10 years ago after pressure from the workers, the Government accepted to have representation of workers on the NSSF Board. 

However, this membership on the board runs for three years and every time there is new membership, there is contention between Government and workers because the law does not specifically provide that there should be representation of workers and other stakeholders, including employers. The law is silent and just gives the minister powers for appointment of the board.

Additionally, there are challenges in terms of the scope of benefits. Certain benefits are left out and workers have been pushing to have them included.

We also have no possibility of mid-term access to benefits. Sometimes workers have their savings but when they run out of employment, they have to wait until they reach the mandatory age of 50 to get the benefits. Those who are employed have to wait until the age of 55 in order to receive benefits.

There has been a discussion and consultation among the stakeholders and there has been an argument to bring on board new benefits in tandem with the current economic realities and dynamics and also to cater for mid-term accessibility of benefits.

Additionally, the minister appoints members of the board and the managing director as well as the deputy managing director. Therefore, the board has no power over the staff under them because the board and managing director, deputy managing director as well as the corporation secretary are appointed by the minister. 

This has caused a situation where sometimes it is difficult for the board to take certain measures and supervise the funds because there is a challenge in the principle of management where you find the managing director and the staff are answerable to two bosses - the minister and the board. It becomes very challenging –(Interruption).

MR ABBAS: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As one of the seconders of the motion, I painfully raise a point of procedure.

Mr Speaker, rule 121 of our Rules of Procedure provides for Private Members’ Bills and 121(1) is to the effect that a Private Members’ Bill shall be introduced first by a way of a motion, to which shall be attached a proposed summary of the Bill. 

It is procedurally right that the mover of the Bill details what is intended to be carried in the Bill at this stage or shouldn’t it be as stated in rule 121(1) that the summary of the intention of the Bill is given when the Member is granted the leave and then we can come back with the details of the Bill? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is correct. The motion is that you should be given leave; all you need to do is to justify why that leave must be given to you. As you justify, you state whether there are gaps which are affecting people or reluctance from the Government that the leave be granted. Please proceed and justify your motion.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was trying to justify by reference to some of the amendments. Maybe I am going too much into the details.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have not yet been granted the leave and so, you cannot go into the details of the Bill.

DR LYOMOKI: The draft Bill has been attached and it has the details. Before leave is granted, we shall engage in discussions, consultations and then improve and add whatever is necessary.

In summary, the Bill is seeking to expand social security coverage, to enhance efficiency and effectiveness, improve governance, streamline the appointment of staff to key positions of the fund, remove inconsistencies in the law and harmonise it with other labour laws, streamline the benefits regime under the Act by providing for additional benefits including maternity, unemployment and other specified benefits, streamline the appointment and tenure of the Board and to allow participation of the members of the fund including providing for the right to recall a board member.

Mr Speaker, the other details are attached in the draft.  However, the important information I would like to give as I conclude is that about 10 years ago, we had two very serious challenges in this House, where we had the Nsimbe Saga and Temangalo. Government went into discussions with the workers and as a result, a conclusion was made that this Bill must be amended because we have challenges due to certain gaps within the Bill.

Mr Speaker, up to now, Government has not moved and yet according to a resolution of Parliament 10 years ago, the Government was supposed to expeditiously bring amendments to this Bill. As workers, we have waited and even participated in serious discussions but the Government has not moved. Of course, they always tell us that the process is in the pipeline. It is therefore, in the wisdom of the workers and for the better management of social security in this country that an amendment is made.

In the past two years, there was an attempt by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to bring an amendment to this House. That amendment was resisted because it was riding on the challenges of the workers instead of closing the social security gaps within the law. In fact, they brought another amendment that was in favour of the insurance interests where the players were more interested in liberalisation and not the safety and social security concerns of the workers.

The most recent attempt which was defeated was trying to take advantage of the cries of the workers. They created other problems where the workers’ savings were not safe. 

Therefore, we move this amendment so that we can resolve the challenges within the sector, improve the scope and make sure that workers’ benefits are secure and well-managed in a participatory and consultative manner. I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Lyomoki -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

MS NAKIWALA: On a matter of procedure. I wish to inform the House that I have listened to his concerns and although valid, Cabinet has already considered all the regulations and amendments to the National Social Security Bill and it was passed by Cabinet for onward transition. 

Mr Speaker, right now, the Bill is with the First Parliamentary Counsel for publication. Therefore, I would like to request the Member representing the workers to urgently get in touch with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and the First Parliamentary Counsel to ensure that whatever he has talked about is embedded within the Bill.

Mr Speaker, I thank you and I would like to request the House to give us two extra weeks so that the Member representing workers  can compare what the First Parliamentary Counsel has in order not to duplicate the legal process that is going on. I beg to submit.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to raise a procedural matter on this particular motion. Part of the records by Dr Lyomoki is a letter to the Clerk to Parliament and in the letter, he states that in 2009, this Bill was tabled but it was shelved by Parliament and he is seeking to reintroduce it.
	
My understanding is that since he said he tabled it, it means that it is part of the records of the House either at committee stage or some level. The procedural matter I am raising is whether it is necessary for him to again come to the House to request for leave when this particular Bill is already in the possession of the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, would you like to clarify? If you had already been granted leave and you presented the Bill, would you require more leave?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In 2009 when we faced the Temangalo challenge, the Bill was brought to the House. However, like the minister has said, we were told that we should wait; they asked that we give them two weeks and the matter would be handled.  

We came here and went up to this stage but the leave was not granted because the minister had requested for two weeks. Mr Speaker, what I request is to come back to the same stage where we were because the House did not grant us leave. The Executive said we should give them one month to conclude, which they have not yet done up to now. In fact, that is about nine years ago.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, you said the National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2009. When it is called an Amendment Bill, it means that it was already gazetted as “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2009”; it is not a draft.

DR LYOMOKI: No, that was what was presented here as an attachment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, there was a Bill already? 

DR LYOMOKI: There was a draft of the Bill. Of course, on the draft, you just attach the content. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In other words, you are not resurrecting anything; there was no decision. That Bill hit a dead end and it could not be saved as business of the House. So, you are just giving a background that in 2009, you made a futile attempt and now, you would like to make another attempt to bring it back. (Laughter)

DR LYOMOKI: That is the point, Mr Speaker.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime last year, we had some haggling on matters relating to workers and I recollect that a Social Security Regulation Bill was tabled here, sent to the committee and it was processed –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which Bill?

MR MPUUGA: The Social Security Liberalisation Bill. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, it was something else.

MR MPUUGA: It was the Pension Sector Liberalisation Bill, I beg your pardon. The Bill was tabled and processed by the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I wonder whether it was officially withdrawn because listening to hon. Lyomoki, the intention and contents of the Bill hitherto look more or less similar. 

Therefore, was the Bill officially withdrawn so that we can engage in processing something new? The chairperson of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development actually came on the Floor because that matter was on the Order Paper but somehow, it never came to fruition. We only had quarrels between Workers’ Representatives and ministers in the corridors of power.

What was the consequence of the Bill? Was it officially withdrawn so that we can process this one? Otherwise, we seem to be going round as Parliament on the same matters and yet the intentions are the same; to create more products in social security to secure workers. Was the Bill shelved? I need your guidance.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. That Bill was eventually withdrawn and that is what I referred to here. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Was it withdrawn from the House? 

DR LYOMOKI: The purpose of that Bill was to repeal the NSSF Act and bring liberalisation - that is what the argument was. Whereas the workers wanted the NSSF Act amended, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was bringing a Bill that would repeal the NSSF Act and bring in operation something different, which was not social security. It was bringing competition in the financial aspect. That was the debate. 

There was a stalemate and it was agreed that the Bill should be withdrawn and it was withdrawn. So, as far as we are concerned, there is nothing right now in Parliament in terms of the National Social Security Fund. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. That is where we are. 

Honourable members, I recognised a group that was not yet here. Let me do that again. In the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Artisanal Fish Processors and Dealers Association of Buvuma, Buikwe and Mukono districts. They are represented by hon. Robert Migadde, hon. David Mutebi, hon. Johnson Muyanja, hon. Janepher Nantume Egunyu, hon. Judith Babirye and hon. Peace Kusasira. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please, join me in welcoming them.

On the same note, while I am still at it, you will notice that it was done before but I will do it again. One of us has been redecorated. Hon. Byekwaso who joined us as a Colonel is now a Brigadier General. (Applause) Congratulations, honourable member. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank hon. Lyomoki for the motion. The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development who handles NSSF has given us information, which we confirmed, that Cabinet has considered amendments to this law. She has assured us that within two weeks, she will be here to present an amendment Bill. 

The issues seem to be the same as what hon. Lyomoki is raising in this amendment Bill. Would it not be procedurally correct that we give chance to the minister? We have had situations here where we get a Private Member’s Bill and a Government Bill and both talking about the same thing -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Also from the same ministry.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Absolutely. The procedural point I am raising is whether it is not proper that we give chance to the minister, as she has pledged, to process the Bill which she said is now with the First Parliamentary Counsel and bring it on the Floor. Then, hon. Lyomoki’s concerns can be assessed to see whether they can be incorporated into the Government Bill so that we move properly as Parliament. 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Sam Lyomoki stated clearly that the minister requested for one month earlier but the Bill did not appear within the timeframe requested. Right now, the minister has again requested for another two weeks. 

Mr Speaker, you have ever told ministers to come up with Bills and you have ever quarrelled with the ministers because they are not doing what is expected of them. Therefore, is it in order for the minister to request for more time again and yet the other time, she requested for one month and nothing was seen?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: First of all, for the record, I do not quarrel with ministers. I give authoritative directives. (Laughter) 

However, as long as there are facts to what is being stated, it is still in the same spirit that we harmonise. We ended up with a situation here from the same ministry. I do not know whether it is becoming a habit from that ministry. We had the Children (Amendment) Bill. We gave authorisation to a private Member to come back with a Bill. The Member went ahead and got the Bill processed, gazetted and brought it here for first reading.

The next week, I do not know how that happened, the minister shows up here with another Bill; the Children (Amendment) Bill. So, we ended up with two Children (Amendment) Bills in the same Parliament. It really became a clumsy procedure to handle. However, I see a minister from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and I wonder why she is reluctant to speak and instead, it is the Minister of State for Lands, Housing and Urban Development (Housing) Speaking for her sector. 

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I informed the House that the Cabinet has considered amendments and proposals to the Bill and passed them. We have proceeded to the First Parliamentary Counsel, which has finished the draft and sent it for publication. Therefore, we believe that in a week’s time, we are going to appear before Cabinet again. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to help us because all I know is that once Cabinet has cleared documents and forwarded them to the First Parliamentary Counsel for drafting, there are instructions that are given to the First Parliamentary Counsel. A copy of those instructions would help us confirm that you are telling us the truth. This matter was on the Order Paper.

MS NAKIWALA: With your permission, Mr Speaker, I am going to lay the same tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Once beaten, twice shy. We do not want a situation - you knew about this and you actually came prepared to shoot this motion down. The only thing that would have assisted you in shooting it down would have been a letter to First Parliamentary Counsel saying -

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, for your guidance. I will lay it tomorrow.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Attorney-General. The instructions were to your department.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, you are very right. There ought to be evidence of the instructions. However, in the absence of that evidence, since I am here and the First Parliamentary Counsel is in my office, I would like to give information that it is true that the First Parliamentary Counsel received instructions. She has worked on the Bill; I looked at the draft this morning. The Bill is on its way to the printers and in a few days, the Bill will be ready.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Lyomoki, let us do it this way. We will pause this matter here. Tomorrow at 2 o’clock, we will start with it. If there is proof regarding what the minister is saying and what the Attorney-General has confirmed, then there may be no need to proceed with leave for you to process another amendment Bill because the changes we would like to propose can then be carried by that Bill.

However, if there is no proof by 2 o’clock tomorrow, we will proceed to grant you leave and you proceed. (Applause)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I appreciate your ruling. The only addition that would be -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Addition to my ruling? (Laughter)

DR LYOMOKI: No, some information would be that - You know, last time the futile attempts you talked about will also reach this level -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I have said 2 o’clock tomorrow. This motion will be on the Order Paper. Clerk, ensure it is on the Order Paper tomorrow. The Attorney-General or the minister will come with a document to show us that these matters are in process and are about to come to Parliament and then we will take a decision. If there is nothing by 2 o’clock tomorrow, we will proceed with your motion and finish it. We are weary of the past so we do not want -

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your ruling and also for the support regarding this attempt. (Laughter) As workers, we hope that this time it is going to be successful. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA TO GUARANTEE LINES OF CREDIT OF US $5 MILLION FROM THE EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF INDIA AND US $15 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK LIMITED

4.53
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the Government of Uganda to guarantee lines of credit of $5 million from the Export-Import Bank of India and $15 million from the African Development Bank (AFDB) to Uganda Development Bank Limited.

Mr Speaker, this is a very important project and loan. The matter was referred to the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Tom Alero – No, you handled this in Cabinet. You seconded it in Cabinet; you cannot come and do it again here. There is secondment from the Member for Moyo East and hon. Rwakajara. Those are sufficient secondments. Would you like to speak to your motion, honourable minister?

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, this matter was referred to the Committee on National Economy. We interfaced with the committee and had very fruitful deliberations. The committee is ready with its report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is your motion about? You have not spoken to your motion.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the motion is for a resolution of Parliament to authorise the borrowing I have expressed to the House. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is your motion; you have to justify it. It is not the committee’s motion. 

Honourable members, this matter came before this House and this request was referred to the Committee on National Economy. The motion that is before us is for adoption of the motion to authorise Government of Uganda to guarantee lines of credit of $5 million from the Export-Import Bank of India and $15 million from the African Development Bank to Uganda Development Bank Limited.

That is the motion for your debate and to kick off our debate, we will ask the committee to report and then we see how to proceed with this matter.

4.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Syda Bbumba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am presenting the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal for Government of Uganda to guarantee lines of credit of $5 million from the Export-Import Bank of India and $15 million from the African Development Bank to the Uganda Development Bank Limited.

Mr Speaker, before I give the introduction, I would like to thank my colleagues with whom we worked in analysing this loan. I would like to proceed and lay on Table the papers supporting this report. The first one is the brief to Parliament, which was presented by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The second one is a copy of the report duly signed and the third is a letter from the National Planning Authority confirming compliance with the National Development Plan. The fourth is a list of pipelines on the guarantee from Exim Bank. 

Next is the pipeline of the project to be financed under the African Development Bank loan and the terms and conditions of the Export-Import Bank of India, the agreement between the African Development Bank and Uganda Development Bank, the agreement between Uganda Development Bank and the Export-Import Bank, a list of beneficiaries of the lines of credit of the $5 million from the Export-Import Bank and the $15 million from the African Development Bank. 

We also have a strategic plan of the Uganda Development Bank and this first project. We also have the UDBL annual report and the minutes of the meetings. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes of the meetings of the committee and the supporting documents presented by the chairperson.

MS BBUMBA: Mr Speaker, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to guarantee lines of credit of $5 million from the Export-Import Bank of India and $15 million from the African Development Bank to Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) in accordance with rule 175 (2)(b) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

The request was presented on 4 December 2018 by the relevant minister. The committee considered and scrutinised the request and I now beg to report. 

The methodology used was that we held meetings with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL). We also had documentary reviews, which are provided under paragraph 2.

Background

Development finance institutions like Uganda Development Bank (UDBL) are important instruments of Government through which socio-economic transformation is promoted. Development banks provide relatively low cost capital compared to commercial banks and also have a wider range of advisory services, capacity building programmes to small and medium size enterprises (SMEs), larger private corporations and state-owned enterprises.

UDBL is a limited liability company, which was set up under Statutory Instrument No. 26. It was set up as the main Government arm for attracting and administering affordable financing to long term projects in agriculture, tourism, services and other industries.

UDBL has a renewed vision of being the preferred and trusted development finance services provider for socio-economic development. The bank currently finances projects in various sectors of the economy that include agriculture, production and manufacturing, education, health, tourism, infrastructure and housing.

The bank’s lending portfolio is mainly funded by the Government of Uganda, except for the line of credit from Kuwait Fund of $10.4 million and a grant of $7 million and a line of credit from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) and the private sector long term loan of $6 million.

Mr Speaker, these lines of credit from BADEA and ADB are fully utilised by the bank. We all know the high demand for affordable finance on the market and that is what makes UDBL relevant.

Under paragraph 4, we have indicated the key bank performance indicators. Under the development impact of the bank, the overall goal of UDBL is to promote sustainable growth and remain a key player in socio-economic development. Paragraph 5 expounds on that.

Given the crucial role of the private sector in the economic growth path of the economy, it is imperative that Government accords the necessary support to strengthen the financial sector by on lending direct loans borrowed by Government and also under guarantees.

Status of UDBL capitalisation 

Mr Speaker, the authorised capital is Shs 500 billion and out of that, about 40 per cent - Shs 200 billion is subscribed. This comprises direct capital injection by Government and capitalisation from the Kuwait Fund.

The low paid-up capital limits the chances of UDBL to access funds from lenders because first and foremost, it is judged on its size of capital. Going by what Government has so far subscribed, it is a small bank and it looks like Government does not take it seriously.

Table 2 shows the UDBL capitalisation in detail. For UDBL to have adequate resources for its business, the Government has to continue capitalising the bank using its own resources in addition to borrowings on concessional terms from outside.

Purpose of the proposed lines of credit 

UDBL, the executing agent, has a pipeline of Shs 306 billion of Small and Medium Enterprises, which are in need of long term dollar and Uganda shilling base financing. The funds will be used largely to increase their capacity in SMEs in the various sectors. Over 47 SMEs have applied as well as over 30 large industries with an average of between $200,000 and $5 million per project.

Purpose of the ADB line of credit to UDBL

The African Development Bank (AfDB) will extend a line of credit of $15 million or its equivalent to the bank. UDBL shall utilise the proceeds of the line of credit for the purpose of on lending solely in US dollars or shillings and exclusively to eligible projects in various sectors in Uganda with priority targeted sectors that include agriculture, manufacturing, human capital development (education and health; and tourism).

Purpose of the EXIM Bank line of credit

Mr Speaker, the EXIM Bank line of credit of $5 million will finance import of engineering goods and services from the Republic of India to Uganda. The loan terms are provided under paragraph 8.

The borrowing rates are 5 per cent and 3.3 per cent from the EXIM Bank of India and the African Development Bank respectively. The bank will on lend the money to SMEs at an average interest rate of about 8 per cent. This includes exchange risk because they have to pay back this money in dollars and we all know that the Ugandan shilling keeps losing value so there must be a provision to cater for that loss in value.

The conditions for both lines of credit are covered under item 1 but these are more or less standard conditions given by lenders. 

Regarding the current debt, we are still within the permissible level at 41.6 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

Observations and recommendations

The committee noted the Government’s objective of partly using UDBL as a channel to promote sustainable and inclusive growth of the Ugandan economy and to produce quality jobs and strengthen industrialisation in the country.

Government participation in the ownership of the bank is a critical factor for their success and sustenance from the role that goes beyond banking that they play. The world over, Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) are heavily funded by Government using long term funds at low interest rates. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that given Government’s  Vision 2040 and that of UDBL, which articulates infrastructure as fundamental and industrialisation as one of the vehicles to achieve middle income status, it is critical that the Uganda Development Bank be supported with a view to provide credit facilities for long term infrastructure projects and industrialisation.

Mr Speaker, we were not very excited to process these two lines of credit were it not for the directive of this House because these are just tokens to what UDBL needs; these are very small amounts. We know that in 2016, quite a number of businesses appealed to Government to give them bailouts but it could not. The reason many of them were going under was that they were borrowing very expensive money and yet the returns were not commensurate with the interest rates that they were being charged, hence the need for UDBL to be fully funded. 

If UDBL is fully funded, which is a sign of Government commitment, it can attract external funding. Therefore, we strongly recommend that Government pays up its capital. 

On operation and financial performance of the bank, based on the report of the Auditor-General on financial statements of UDBL for the year ended 2017, the committee recommends that UDBL Board urgently devises appropriate and effective policy and strategies towards improving the bank’s risk management and development of outcomes capturing and reporting.

On the financial sustainability of the bank, the committee noted the Government objective of partly using the bank as the main arm for financing development.

The committee, therefore, recommends that in order for Uganda Development Bank to enhance its capacity of providing development finance solutions, as enshrined in their mandate, Government should adequately capitalise the bank, as I have already stated, pay up the Shs 5 billion fully and also increase the share capital.

In addition, Government should encourage shareholding or selling of shares of UDBL to institutional investors as a way of raising more capital for the bank to enable it finance big infrastructure projects that will facilitate the transformation of Uganda’s desired levels of development. This is a project where the National Social Security Fund can invest and augment the money for borrowing because they have the capacity to access the loans and also to collect them.

However, precautions need to be taken as it brings on private sector shareholders in the bank, since it is for social welfare of the citizens of Uganda rather than for profit motives.

On the productivity of the bank, the committee noted that due to the limited availability of development banks in the country, UDBL’s recruitment is largely from commercial banks and therefore, the people they are recruiting are not fully geared to development banking. They are more geared towards commercial banking.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the UDBL Board should urgently optimise staff productivity and enhance their competitiveness to match those required in DFIs settings and that address development challenges.

Mr Speaker, UDBL has only one office, which is in Kampala yet the demand for their money is from all over the country. Some people from far regions do not get the opportunity to access this bank to be able to get funding and yet there are very good projects all over the country.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of procedure.

MR AGABA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Often times when issues are raised, ministers are not available to attend to queries raised by Members of the House. This time round, the shadow Cabinet is significantly absent in the House.

We are dealing with a motion to enable Government borrow money from outside. It has always been our colleagues from the Opposition who question the usability of the money and the indebtedness of the country, as they always allege. 

Mr Speaker, are we proceeding rightly when the front bench of the Opposition is practically empty? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Certain things are sometimes better left unsaid. Proceed.

MS BBUMBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for emphasising the importance of the business we are discussing. 

As I conclude, the committee recommends that the request by Government to guarantee the lines of credit of $5 million from the Export-Import Bank of India and $15 million from the African Development Bank to Uganda Development Bank Limited be approved, subject to the above recommendations. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is the report of the committee that should guide our debate on what the committee has been able to find. I have already proposed a question and debate starts now.

5.15
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the committee’s recommendations. However, I am concerned about our budget support to capitalise our own bank. I still remember that our earlier proposal was Shs 500 billion but what was given was less than 60 per cent. Therefore, as we keep on borrowing, the more sustainable way of strengthening this bank is by improving the budgeting provision.

We are aware that many of our young investors have the motivation and spirit to grow but the major challenge is lack of fair capital. Therefore, as long as we rely on borrowing, although we would like to promote the local content, the financial capacity of our investors will not be able to support the demand that our country is moving for.

Mr Speaker, I support the recommendations of the committee because of the sectors that are going to benefit from this borrowing, although the money is so little. My request to Government is that these areas of borrowing need more money. Why are we only narrowing to $5 million and yet the sectors are many? Thank you so much.

5.18
MR FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to be part of the discussion on borrowing. Whereas I agree that it is important for this country to empower small and medium term enterprises, the fact, which came out very clearly in the committee report and for which I would like to thank them, is that most of these SMEs that are likely to benefit from this facility are concentrated mainly within the central region.

I would have loved that the committee outlines to the House and the country at large, a list of the SMEs that will benefit from this project. This is because the amount of money we are borrowing seems little but the number of SMEs that are going to benefit countrywide - 47 is also quite small. 

I would like to emphasise that the committee would have done this Parliament a favour by providing - I am standing here and speaking on behalf of the people of Agago and I am going to participate in borrowing this money, which I will not pay myself. The people of Agago and other Ugandans are going to pay back this money. Therefore, they should understand why the money is being borrowed. 

It looks like Government is beginning to play a Ponzi scheme. When I say that, I mean we are borrowing for the sake of borrowing. We are going to pay interest to the EXIM Bank but at the same time, the Uganda Development Bank Limited is going to lend to Ugandans. That means that the interest rates are not going to be very favourable. I do not know whether the lending rates of UDBL were stated in the committee because I did not see them but I stand to be corrected.  

Finally, I would like to thank the chairperson and her team for making that last observation. UDBL would be a champion in empowering SMEs but it only has one branch countrywide and yet Uganda is quite big. As such, SMEs in Adjumani, Kisoro, Tororo, Agago and Kaabong all have to come to Kampala to access these facilities, which is not favourable. It is not going to benefit them. 

Therefore, I would like to emphasise the fact that Government should put UDBL to task to ensure that they open branches countrywide. They should also make sure that they sensitise SMEs on some of their activities so as to empower them. It is important for them to engage SMEs upcountry as well. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.22
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report. 

Mr Speaker, any business entity would definitely go for resources at an interest rate of 8 per cent. I remember we appropriated about Shs 55 billion of the request of Shs 500 billion that had been made by UDBL. However, to date, Government has only released Shs 27 billion, which puts UDBL in a very difficult situation. 

Whereas we are approving this money, I think it is not a loan; it is a guarantee. The beauty about these resources is that those who are going to benefit from this money are the ones going to pay these loans. 
Therefore, if it were possible, I would even request Government to see to it that it improves the capitalisation of UDBL to enable them access more money from development partners and institutions to spread across the country. 

Many enterprises in Tororo, Omoro and many other places also want these resources. Unfortunately because their capitalisation is not good enough, it remains in the hands of a few. Even this $20 million can be accessed by only two people so you can see the challenge that we are facing. As a country, we need to take a strategic direction to recapitalise UDBL with a bigger portion of resources to enable them improve on their balance sheet and be able to access more resources in the near future. 

I would also like to agree with my honourable colleague from Agago that UDBL needs to spread its face across the country for people to know their whereabouts. Even here in Kampala, if I asked honourable colleagues - members of Parliament, whether they know where UDBL is located, many of them will definitely not be sure of its location and yet they are offering a very good service that many SMEs and enterprises are waiting to benefit from with an interest rate of 8 per cent. 

Therefore, I would like to thank the committee and the chairperson. I would also like to request Government and UDBL to open up and borrow as much money as possible to enable many enterprises to be financed by this cheap credit for the good and development of this country. I beg to submit.

5.25
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to begin by reminding this House of the state of indebtedness of this country. Just last year, this House put the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to task to make a statement detailing the status of indebtedness of Uganda. He made the statement and said that Uganda’s debt, both external and internal, stands at Shs 43 trillion. 

Mr Speaker, together with the state of poverty in the country, we are highly in debt. In fact, this is the worst in the history of this country since 1962. I am beginning to see Government behave like a high indebted village investor. When he comes to you for the first time, he tells you that he wants you to lend him some money. If that becomes too much, he changes from that to ask you to help him with some money. If that becomes too much, he changes to something else. 

Government would initially say “borrow”. Today, the language is changing to something else; it is guaranteeing investors or guaranteeing a loan. If you borrow and default on payment, it is the guarantor to pay. Somebody said, “No, this is not a loan to Government but we are only guaranteeing…” It means in case of default, it is the Government and the taxpayer that is going to pay this money. Therefore, this puts us in a vicious cycle of borrowing. 

Today we are talking about guarantees, lines of credit and promissory notes but it is not any different from borrowing; it remains the same. 

I represent part of Kampala City and we are talking of recapitalising UDBL. However, I have not seen a single branch in my constituency and yet I am within the capital city of Uganda. Therefore, how can you assure the people of Agago that there is somewhere you are injecting money for them when somebody in Rubaga North has not seen any branch of theirs? 

I have another example of a project that was undertaken near my constituency; the Busega-Entebbe Express Highway. We guaranteed large amounts of money but today, there is traffic in Nateete along Masaka Road while that road is empty. 

It was launched several months back and it is supposed to be paid for but even before the charges take effect, there are no vehicles. This is despite the fact that we are going to be paying billions of shillings of taxpayers’ money for this project. 

Therefore, we should not get excited by some of these projects because they are not worth it. We need to do more than what committees of Parliament do. You say the percentage of our borrowing is 41 per cent of our Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and so we can take this loan; what is this money going to do?

I would like to repeat that the Busega-Entebbe Express Highway cost billions of Ugandan taxpayers’ money. Today, it is one of the finest roads that we have. However, who are those people travelling from Busega to Entebbe that cannot go via Kibuye so that we waste a lot of that money there? Today, there are no vehicles on that road. Some of you have gone past it and you will see that hardly 100 vehicles use it in a day while people are still experiencing traffic jam. 

We need to examine the worthiness of some of these projects before we change from borrowing to guaranteeing credit lines to promissory notes. Those may not help us; they are only putting us in a vicious cycle of poverty and borrowing. Thank very much, Mr Speaker.

5.30
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion but with the following observations:

One, Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL) needed Shs 500 billion, which is about $1.5 million. How much are we borrowing here? How much are we guaranteeing? It is $20 million. If you want $1.5 million and you are getting $20 million, are you on the right course?

To the committee, what was so difficult for Government to ask UDBL to look for more money so that they come here and we give them at least $500,000? Even during the appropriation, I remember that Government had planned to give about Shs 50 billion but what did we give? If I recall, we gave about Shs 20 billion. Therefore, are we serious with what we want this country to do? Are we ready to support the projects, which the chairperson read here?

I think this is the reason why the bank is located in the capital only. Do we need every project to be concentrated in the capital? As a country, I would like to call upon us to open up and begin with what they want; if it is $1.5 million, can the Government try to look for at least $1 million – (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Mr Speaker, I would not love to subject my friend, the Member of Parliament for Usuk, to a point of order but he has repeatedly exchanged Shs 500 billion for $1.5 million, without declaring the exchange rate he is using. When you calculate Shs 500 billion against the dollar, it is more than $1.5 million. Therefore, is the Member of Parliament for Usuk and my good friend in order to say that Shs 500 billion translates to $1.5 million? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need to find out from the Member what base he is using. However, he has taken note. (Laughter)

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I would like to correct the record. I am talking about $35 million. I need that record to be corrected. Thank you very much, honourable colleague.

My emphasis is that as a country, we need to, first of all, develop this bank. Secondly, we need to appropriate money for this bank –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Member of Parliament for Usuk for giving way. 

I would like to say that UDBL means Uganda Development Bank. If the Attorney-General is not aware, Uganda Development Bank is the one to give long-term credit, which is supposed to be at the lowest interest rate. It is incumbent on us, as Members of Parliament, to capitalise UDBL and not to go and borrow. In fact, it is us who are supposed to go where you are going and not the Government of Uganda.

Therefore, the information I am giving is, if it is agreeable to the House, we should reject this loan request and put Shs 500 billion in the budget for purposes of capitalising UDBL.

MR OGWANG: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude by asking Members that while it is true that we need more money, let us receive what we have got. However, in this coming year’s budget, I would like to call upon us to support UDBL by putting in more money so that we recapitalise our own bank and avoid going to commercial banks to give us expensive money, which cannot help our country to develop. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

5.36
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we follow the genesis of recapitalising UDBL, I would like to quote the President from the State of the Nation Address. He said that because of NRM Government’s foresight, they were not able to privatise UDBL. Therefore, he is going to ensure that the bank is capitalised in order to fight the interest rates of commercial banks. Because commercial banks are a challenge, there is need to recapitalise UDBL so that some of our critical sectors that will transform us into a middle income status can borrow money at a low interest rate.

Remember, this Government went for privatisation because they said Government should not do business. However, what we are doing now is involving Government in full business. You go and borrow from India, African Development Bank and China and you come and lend to Ugandans. Government is now actively involved in business. In terms of policy, has this administration relegated the position they had when they assumed power in this country?

Mr Speaker, I would like to concur with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that it is not fair for UDBL to go around borrowing money. The report of the committee has clearly stated that they would like to ensure inclusive growth. How do you ensure inclusive growth with borrowed money when your own revenue collection here cannot ensure inclusive growth? We should not be using words for the sake of beautifying a report. It does not make sense to promote inclusive growth using borrowed funds, which are conditional and have interest. This Government is borrowing at an interest rate of three to five per cent and they are lending to Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) at eight per cent. We should define our policy position. Otherwise, we are not running Government in the interest of Ugandans.

Finally, it is very unfair for us to say that this kind of borrowing is aimed at achieving middle-income status. Middle-income status is now a mockery. We are in 2019, which is one year away from 2020 when we should have become a middle-income economy. Let us be very careful, otherwise we will end up being called liars. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

5.40
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the committee for the report presented. 

We have been crying for a local development related bank, especially an agricultural bank, in this country. Now that UDB is targeting the same sector, – true, that money may not be very cheap – I think they are better than commercial banks. I am an expert on risk management in financial institutions. I was reading the report of the Auditor-General and I found out that the repayment rate on these loans of UDBL is above 85 per cent. In the matrix of risks, it means it is either amber or green. Therefore, the bank would be doing well in that area. 

Therefore, as other Members have said, we should recapitalise that bank and also allow all financial institutions to borrow, especially now that the interest rate is only two per cent. I think we will benefit. 

I would like to give you an example. There is a subcounty called Ddwaniro in Kiboga District, which has a cooperative society called Ddwaniro Cooperative Society. They borrowed money from UDBL and today their income, after every 15 days, is Shs 300 million. They are trading in milk. This is on record. That means in a month they get Shs 600 million. You can go and find out. I would like to assure you that some areas could have already attained the middle-income status that my brother is worried about. Thank you very much.

5.43
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Mr Speaker, as Parliament, we now need to change our method of operation. If am not mistaken, about 90 per cent of Members of Parliament have borrowed money at an interest rate of 25 per cent and some at even 10 per cent per month, which translates to 120 per cent. 

The reason they are borrowing at those rates is because some of them are putting up hotels, rental units, grinding mills so that they can generate more income. Part of the income they are generating could be to make their wealth grow or to help their constituents to develop. 

Why do they go to moneylenders or commercial banks to borrow money for development projects? It is because Uganda Development Bank is not able to give them money. Uganda Development Bank is a bank which is owned by the people of Uganda 100 per cent. If it is owned by the people of Uganda 100 per cent, it is like a public hospital where one goes for medical services for free. Therefore, for long-term financial services, one is supposed to go to Uganda Development Bank. 

Mr Speaker, this report mentions inclusiveness but I do not see the inclusiveness. To me, the inclusiveness would be that we put money in Uganda Development Bank, people borrow it at an interest rate of five per cent and then they grow their wealth. If one borrows money at 25 per cent, to be able to repay that loan they must be a smuggler. What would the return be? The normal return on investment is about 10 per cent in a year. If the return is 10 per cent and one is paying 25 per cent interest, it means 15 per cent of the interest must be part of your capital. That is why you see they are advertising houses and businesses for sale in newspapers every day. If such people went to the Uganda Development Bank, they would be better off.

I would like to plead with Parliament. We all agree that Uganda Development Bank must be recapitalised. We are handling the budget process. I am happy that hon. Oboth is a member of the Committee on Budget and he loves development. I can see the deputy chairperson of the Committee on Budget here too. I would request that the first call on our budget, which is coming in a few months, should be Uganda Development Bank.

Why am I insisting on that? I heard a colleague saying this money is borrowed at an interest rate of eight per cent. Let me tell you that at eight per cent, you would not have computed exchange loss, which alone would be about 10 per cent –(Interjection)- Of course, when I talk about exchange loss, it takes care of inflation. Please, I went to school. (Laughter) It is the reason we are saying that at the end of the day if one borrowed say $100 million at an exchange rate of Shs 3,650 and they pay it at Shs 4,500, the difference will already be a loss and most likely one will lose their property.

This is my plea: For the first time since the Tenth Parliament began, I am requesting you to reject this loan request. This is not because we want to throw UDB out, but because we want Government to put money in the budget for Uganda Development Bank. When Shs 500 billion is provided for, those who are investing will go and borrow at a five, eight or 10 per cent interest rate. 

Recently, somebody was saying they are creating jobs. The reason jobs are not being created in Uganda is because the interest rates are very high. A person who would have put up a maize mill at Shs 20 million and employed 10 people or bought maize from the famers may fear that if they borrow that money, their small house, which is security for the loan, may be sold. Therefore, at the end of the day, they fold their hands. That means with such an interest rate, 10 jobs would have been – (Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. I have listened very carefully to the submission by the expert accountant and economist, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. He has mentioned that all of us agree that we must capitalise Uganda Development Bank for the general reasons we all know. However, he says that we should not accept this loan request but since we are in the budgeting period, we should provide for money to capitalise UDB in our budget.

Mr Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. As far as I know, we finance our national budget through our own money collected locally from our revenues. However, since that is not enough, we also borrow from external and internal sources. Also, the third way we may finance our budget is through the grants we get from our development partners. Therefore, what difference does it make if we do not borrow directly to capitalise UDB but we capitalise UDB through the budget by borrowing? I ask this because I know we shall not finance our budget 100 per cent from our local revenues. I would like to get that clarification.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. You may not be aware but if you go to the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Uganda, I am No. 32. If you mention the people who have gone to school, I am sure I am among them. Therefore, I am not lying.

If we invested money and people made profits, they would be taxed and we would get revenue from this income tax. I know what I am saying. What I would like to say is that the entity who should give us that growth faster is UDB. We are also saying we should use the taxpayers money to capitalise UDB, so that the taxpayer benefits. My colleague, I am speaking from the wealth of knowledge of an expert.

Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, the point is still not yet made. The concern of the honourable member – Maybe I leave it because it looks like you did not want to deal with it. I know you; if you do not want to deal with it, then it is fine. 

The concern of the Member was that we still finance our budget by borrowing. Part of the taxpayer’s money is there but we also we finance the budget partially by borrowing, so we will still be borrowing to do the same thing. Why not borrow directly then? That is his point.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Mr Speaker, I knew what I was going to say. I am saying let us borrow to finance our budget but not have UDB borrow.   

Mr Speaker, it is our bank and we must capitalise it. Why should we borrow? Do you know what will happen now? Hon. Mawanda, you go to India –(Laughter)– At this rate we are talking about, UDB will have a portion to pay as interest. In fact, we are just guaranteeing but they will be paying interest on top of what they are going to borrow. That is going to be even more expensive.

However, if we borrow and fund our budget and then we give them money, we would have given them interest free money, which will be our capital. Therefore, whatever portion they will add will be for operations. What is important is generating – (Interruption)  

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, the honourable member on the Floor has boasted not once but several times that he went to school. I have no reason to doubt those credentials. Having gone to school, is it in order for him to confuse us by stating that when we borrow to finance the budget, we should get the borrowed money from the budget and capitalise UDB?

He has stated that a person who is borrowing from UDB is taking the money interest free and yet if we borrowed to support the budget, it would be subject to interest. Doesn’t it follow that since the money is borrowed with interest, whoever borrows is still subjected to the same interest we borrowed at.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I sensed that hon. Nandala-Mafabi did not want to answer those questions. He was trying to – Honourable member, let us conclude this matter and see how best to go on. The issue is that UDB requires Shs 500 billion to recapitalize, but we have not been able to find that money. This request is not coming here for the first time nor has it been brought to our attention only today. We were not able to do it. They are now saying we should make a partial intervention through this mechanism to start the process. 

Honourable members, you have just handled the Budget Framework Paper; was there any money that was set aside to recapitalize UDB? The answer will definitely be “no”. We cannot talk about recapitalising UDB, which we all want to do, yet at the same time we are saying we should adopt a method of recapitalising, which we have failed at achieve in years. 

They are now trying to be creative by saying let us start with Shs 500 billion. We cannot borrow the full amount but we can start with some money through this mechanism. I think that is the argument that they are trying to advance - start it and then see how we can raise funds from the budget to top up the Shs 500 billion. 

Therefore, why don’t we deal with the specific issue instead of enlarging the argument to go beyond what we should be dealing with?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I know they are borrowing from Exim Bank in India and that is why hon. Mawanda is very interested. (Laughter)

Anyhow, if we are borrowing as Government and giving it to UDB as capitalisation, I have no problem. However, if we are guaranteeing and UDB will be the one to pay the interest, that is where my problem comes. The reason I am raising this matter is because UDB is our bank. Maybe what we should do is change it here and say that it is Government of Uganda that will be responsible for paying the interest.  

Mr Speaker, we want this money. Even if UDB puts 10 per cent, they will use five per cent for operational costs and the other five per cent on building the capital stock and that would be fair. Otherwise, to say that they are the ones to pay the five per cent to Exim Bank, which could translate to over 10 per cent, and then it is lent to a developer at 20 per cent, we shall come back here after people will have sold their factories –(Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to the expert on this matter relates to the fact that when one turns $20 million into Ugandan shillings, it would give them only Shs 74 billion. Is it very hard for us to get this money from our budget during this budgeting process? We can, as part of capitalising UDB, provide Shs 74 billion so that we do not put this burden of borrowing to the bank and the Government. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: That is the argument we are putting up. I think you have seen it, hon. Mawanda. Recently, we passed a supplementary budget of Shs 380 billion. Can’t we get Shs 74 billion from the supplementary budget and give it to UDB? 

For this kind of borrowing, let us allow people like hon. Oboth who can go to India Exim Bank to borrow. We are blocking lines of credits for local investors who also go to these banks to borrow. If they discover a country has over exceeded its debt ceiling, we will have a problem. You know, even hon. Mawanda is one of the borrowers from the Exim Bank of India –(Interjections)– Okay, he is not.

Mr Speaker, we are pleading with you. Why can’t we have a supplementary budget of Shs 74 billion to capitalise UDB so that they start lending people money at a fair rate, other than staring with an expensive one? I rest my case.

6.00
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I must thank hon. Nandala-Mafabi for putting up a case for capitalising UDB. The only point of departure I have with him is that the bathwater should be thrown out with the baby. It is suicidal for us to process it up to this level and then you say because of this importance, we should reject the loan request. 

I think you guided rightly, Mr Speaker. This is my second term and I found hon. Nandala-Mafabi here but he has not been giving us these brilliant ideas. In the Ninth Parliament, we had the same challenge when we asked for Shs 50 billion and UDB got less than that. I strongly believe, as you guided, that this request is based on the experience that through the normal budget process, this has not been possible. Nobody wants to borrow when you can get money free of interest. 

Honourable members, this is not a new matter to us. The one good thing unifying us – bipartisan - is that we need Uganda Development Bank to have enough funds so that it can lend out to many people including the Bugisu Cooperative Union, which is not doing very well. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. In Uganda, there were many cooperative unions, some of which were called North Bukedi and South Bukedi. I do not know even when those became extinct. Now, Bugisu Cooperative Union, which is limping, is the only cooperative remaining. Is hon. Oboth in order, therefore, to abuse ours, which is limping, and not abuse theirs, which is dead?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the point the honourable member was making is that Bugisu Cooperative Union is limping. That is all he has said, which you also confirmed. (Laughter) 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for that wise ruling. In addition to that, we do not want the limping ones to also die. That is why if we are making a case, inclusive development or growth should not be used as a yardstick. You can do anything with the money that you borrow and whatever you do with it is development to you. You enumerated grinding mills and so on; people borrow for various reasons. Sometimes people borrow just to buy a better jacket, which can also be development to that person.

As we conclude this matter, Mr Speaker, the guidance you gave and the spirit of this loan is out of experience that UDB has failed to get these funds through normal financing. Therefore, we have to borrow to make funds available to UDB. However, like hon. Nandala-Mafabi said, we should make a case for next financial year so that we avoid this and make sure we provide for these kinds of funds in the budget. A success story from Kiboga –(Interruption) 

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you, hon. Oboth, for giving way. Mr Speaker, the information I would like to give to my brother is that hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Nsamba are right. We can go ahead and give a supplementary on top of the loan we are asking for. The information I have is that UDB has a line-up of SMEs yet there is us who also want to borrow from UDB. The money will not be enough. Therefore, it would even be more important that we add more money so that all these projects are financed. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Thank you for that information. I think a case has been made for this loan and we cannot wait for a better moment where the whole House agrees that there is need for Uganda Development Bank to have more money. 

We are talking about branches. A Member from one of the constituencies in the city said he does not even know of a branch of UDB in his constituency. How about us? How will UDB open branches when they do not have enough capital? Therefore, Mr Speaker, I will comply with your guidance. I believe hon. Nandala-Mafabi - without inciting him - knows that we cannot throw away the baby with the bathwater. 

6.06
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we talk about capitalising UDB, we are talking about the development of our country. We have been struggling to make Uganda Export Promotion Board active. They have been asking questions like, if we go out and find buyers, what are we going to sell to them? We need agricultural and industrial products to sell but we must use money that is cheap enough to make us competitive in the world. 

Therefore, capitalising UDB at this moment, to the tune of only Shs 500 billion, is not even enough. When Shs 500 billion was suggested then, the population of Uganda was not the same as it is today. The people who want capital for their businesses at the moment are more than those who wanted capital then. When we guarantee at the moment, we must have it in our minds that since we do not have enough money, we have to plan to get more as soon as possible, otherwise the country will remain behind as far as competition is concerned. 

I will give the example of China and India. We are importing a lot of products from them but they are the same countries from which we borrow. This means that if we keep on just borrowing from them and yet we do not have a very strong bank, at a certain point Ugandan investors will not be able to compete with those countries at all. Therefore, we have to be very careful; we have to plan ahead and make sure this bank is fully capitalised. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.08
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for coming up with this report. I stand to support this loan request. However, I wish the chairperson had given us the list of the benefiting SMEs. This committee has told us about 30 to 47 SMEs will benefit from this loan but at times when such funds come, only a few from a specific region benefit. Now that the bank is located in Kampala, my fears are that some SMEs will not get the opportunity to benefit from this loan.

Mr Speaker, when you look at the sectors that must benefit, agriculture is one of them. In this Parliament, we have been crying for an agricultural credit bank to help our farmers. This loan request is only for $20 million; if we gave it to only the agricultural sector, this money surely would not be enough. Now that we have agriculture, health, tourism, my fears are that maybe only the smallest sector will benefit. 

Now that agriculture is out there yearning for such money from a bank like Uganda Development Bank, I do not know how much will go to the sector from this $20 million. That is my very big concern. As a committee on agriculture, we have been asking Government, time and again, to get some money specifically for our farmers to develop the agriculture sector. 

Secondly, in addition to this loan, I have been wondering whether it is not possible for us to get only about Shs 30 billion provided for in this current budget for recapitalising this bank, so that at least we have a starting point. Yes, we have a loan request for $20 million, but as a country that needs this service so much, why can’t we use this budget to get something small, even though our resource envelope is small, so that we start from somewhere with at least Shs 50 billion.

I, therefore, urge the Government to use this Parliament during this time to get something reasonable for our people. I thank you.

6.12
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank my dear colleagues and the chairperson for their report. I also would like to thank all those who have supported the loan request. I also support the request the loan from the African Development Bank to the Uganda Development Bank for the following reasons:

As earlier on said, we need this loan for agriculture, education, infrastructure, industrialisation, et cetera. However, I would like to limit myself to agriculture specifically. More often than not, Members have been appropriating money under the Committee on Agriculture but this money has not been going to the rural areas. The emphasis here should be on rural areas, so that people move away from subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture. This can only be done through agricultural mechanisation. We need tractors in rural areas like Moyo and others where people need to move from subsistence to plantation agriculture.

Secondly, I would like to request the managers or leaders of this bank to consider being very flexible on the issues to do with borrowing especially in terms of securities. They should consider both moveable and immovable items so that people from the rural areas can be able to borrow this money. 

However, as said before, if we limit this only to the urban areas or the city, it will not benefit our people. Therefore, there should be flexibility when it comes to borrowing, so that those in the rural areas - the poor - can also access this money and move away from subsistence agriculture to commercial plantations.

Thirdly, we have vagaries of weather; these days we have unreliable rainfall. I feel that some of this money should go for irrigation. There should be emphasis on irrigation so that those who go to borrow this money should always have some amount of money for irrigation. Thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

6.15
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would not be one of those people who do not support the loan request. At least I should be able to support the loan request. However, which loan request are we supporting? Are we supporting guaranteeing UBD to borrow or we are supporting borrowing by Government so that we give the money to UDB?

We have budget support loans, project support loans and today we have heard of this loan, which is about guaranteeing the bank to borrow money to support it. The Attorney-General is here, I think that if we want to make this bank work the way we are claiming, we would take up the loan as Government and then give the money to the bank so that it can operate normally without stress. Once we stress the bank, we will indirectly stress the borrowers and at the end of the day, if UDB fails to pay, it is the Government that is going to pay. That is what it means by guaranteeing. Secondly, if UDB fails to pay, it can as well be mortgaged, so we can lose the bank at the same time. 

Therefore, why don’t we, as Government, take up the loan? If it is Shs 74 billion, let us borrow it as usual and put this money in UDB to lend it out to people at a fair rate; otherwise, the burden is going to be on the borrowers who are going to fail in business. Our intention –(Interruption) 

MS AKURUT: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. In line with what you are saying, I have two ideas. Are we borrowing to recapitalise Uganda Development Bank as Government or is it UDB borrowing this money? Which way should we go for? Do we include it in the budget? 

I think there have been two proposals and that is why I am seeking clarification. Do we include it in the budget since we are still in the budgeting process, so that we own it as Government, or are we just approving the loan request as it is presented before us? Thank you.

MR GAFABUSA: Hon. Kaberuka, I seek quick clarification. You are saying that it is better for us to borrow money as Government and give it to UDB so that Government takes on the responsibility to pay the interest. Is there a difference between Government and UDB?

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, hon. Kaberuka. You have said that UDB should not be borrowing money because it gets stressed paying back this money with interest. I appreciate the whole concept of recapitalising UDB but I also would like to say that it is good for the bank’s efficiency because it knows that it has got the money and it has to pay it back. I am not saying that we are not going to recapitalise the bank. I am talking about what could be the hidden good in this loan. 

You were also wondering if the bank can be mortgaged. I would like to say that this is the very reason Government is coming up to guarantee, so that in case of any other unforeseen event happening, it means the bank cannot be liquidated for that purpose. Thank you.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, honourable colleagues. The whole issue is that when UDB borrows this money, it will have to lend it at a higher interest to the borrowers. The cardinal interest of the Government is to facilitate UDB to lend at a low interest rate to the borrowers so that we have inclusive development. If we borrow as Government and recapitalise UDB, it will be able to lend at a lower rate as opposed to the bank borrowing from these sharks by itself to lend at higher interest rates, which will be a burden to the borrowers and to the development at the end of the day. That is why I am saying that – (Interruption)

MR OSHABE: Hon. Kaberuka, the information I would like to give you is that out of the money we are able to give to UDB through appropriation, they are only able to give out loans at 12 to 14 per cent. What will happen if they have just borrowed the money? At what rate will they lend to the borrowers? If they lend at about 20 per cent, will it still be a development bank or a commercial bank?

MR KABERUKA: Finally, for the interest of Ugandans, I would think the Attorney-General should withdraw this and we take it up as Government because if we want –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can somebody help us with what a guarantee means? From the way we are debating, I am completely not following.

A guarantee means that some parties outside Government have reached an agreement about what they need to do but the other party is concerned that in case you fail, I need a sovereign guarantee. That is where we are. Attorney-General, would you like to say something? Please guide us on this matter.

6.23
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Mr Speaker, you have explained it well. A guarantee connotes an undertaking by a third party that in the event a borrower fails to pay, the third party will satisfy the borrower’s obligation to the creditor. That is that.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In essence, EXIM Bank and UDB have already reached an agreement. Uganda Development Bank did its own thing, got its own sourcing, had negotiations and agreed but the other person is saying, “We do not think that you are stable; we need a guarantee.” That is why we are here. So, let us wind up.

MR KABERUKA: Mr Speaker, I would like to conclude.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No.

6.24
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me first correct the impression that was created by my colleague who said that the Shadow Cabinet members were absent and the Minister for Public Service and the Presidency in the Shadow Cabinet –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Use the microphone.

MR ODUR: Mr Speaker, I think anything to do with financing UDB, we need to support it as a House wholeheartedly because I have seen its impact on SMEs, especially in the north. I have seen Opit Traders who have developed very much. I have also seen a number of SMEs in Lira - we have about 35 industries that are operational. I would like to, therefore, urge colleagues to support this line of guarantee because UDB itself is supposed to be self-sustaining. They are a Government entity but they are supposed to make their own money and see how they survive and float in the market. 

If you have been able to go to commercial banks to look for money, many of our competitors in the East African market come to Uganda. They borrow from their countries cheaply and then they come and establish businesses in Uganda and expect to compete with us who are borrowing highly. Therefore, if we have an avenue to borrow and also allow our small businesses to borrow at a cheaper rate, then we should be able to support this. That does not take away the responsibility from this Parliament to look for funding to capitalise UDB as and when the opportunity appears.

I would like to raise a concern from the recommendation of the committee that Government should withdraw or sell off their shareholding in UDB, if I understood well – (Interjections) - Maybe I got it wrong. I would like to say that Government has shares in other commercial banks.

Maybe it is the right time Government lost interest in those commercial banks that are not helping us and focussed more in putting those resources in UDB. I will give you the example of Dfcu Bank, Housing Finance, which has not been able to address the challenges that we are having as a country. Government should prioritise; instead of putting money in commercial banks, they should do more to get money for UDB.

I would like to conclude by stating that Members have raised concerns about awareness of UDB. Maybe it is the right time to create regional desks. If we cannot establish offices or physical banks, they should have liaison contacts for the north or east so that they can go to radio stations to sensitise members of the public that they have facilities and resources so people can go to Kampala and access them. I would like to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think we have had a good debate because the matter is important. However, we cannot lose track of our declared policy that Uganda is a private sector led growing country. The private sector does not have corresponding cheap finance to finance its operations.

The only institution that can come and stand in the gap is the Uganda Development Bank, which is almost limping. That is why they are saying that there is need to support it more with whatever resources we can get so that it becomes a boisterous bank that can support the development needs, the private sector interventions, to lead the growth in this economy. 

That is why we are having this discussion and that is why we need to understand it properly. If we can transfer this discussion to the budget discussions - The Budget Framework Paper has come but the budget is coming on the 1st of April. We need to look at it and see if there is an avenue that can be found so that more support could be given to UDB. 

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government of Uganda to guarantee lines of credit of $5 million from the Export-Import Bank of India and $15 million from the African Development Bank (AfDB) to Uganda Development Bank Limited (UDBL). That is the motion. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Motion adopted.

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I think sometime last year or the previous year, there was an issue of recapitalising UDB and they were asking for $20 million or $30 million. This House said if they wanted to recapitalise, they ought to ask for real amounts and Parliament would give them the permission to go and borrow to recapitalise UDB. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that as these guarantee requests are coming, we also keep track of our records on the Hansard about what happened when this House advised that we should borrow more, and not just $30 million, to recapitalise a bank that we think will spur economic development in the country? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to ask the committee or the minister about what happened, especially when one follows the Hansard when the House debated the same issue of recapitalising UDB, because it looks like nothing has happened? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was proposing that in the course of the budget discussion, all these matters should be brought back in relation to how we support UDB - whether there have been previous proposals. I know of a figure of Shs 500 billion that has been floating around and was never anchored anywhere. Therefore, all these things could be considered together in the budget process to see if we can have other avenues to support this bank.

Honourable members, thank you very much. We have sat up to this time. This House is now adjourned until tomorrow at 2 o’clock.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 13 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
