Wednesday, 18 February 2015

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. As we approach the end of the Fourth Session, I would like to draw your attention to a number of outstanding issues that have not been completed and remain before this House. Among these is the Marriage and Divorce Bill, 2009. 

On 1 April 2013, I adjourned the House to permit Members do consultations with their electorate and stakeholders. We were supposed to consider our findings on that Bill in a period of three months but due to other national demands, this was not possible.

While the delay was not ideal, it has given us more time to interact with and consult our electorate on the Bill. The country as well has long been eagerly waiting to hear our findings and pronouncements on the same. We need to reflect the sentiments of our voters in our debate. Therefore, we need to comprehensively debate this Bill. It is the duty that we have.

While I would love to put both the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition to immediately explain and report their findings from various sides of the House, I am conscious that they might have been engrossed in other matters of national importance. So, I will not ambush them but I am giving notice that at the next convenient sitting, I will request a report from both the Leader of Government Business and the Leader of the Opposition. I am asking them to liaise with the various party whips so that they can give us a report to enable us understand how we are going to move. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TOXIC CHEMICALS PROHIBITION CONTROL BILL, 2015

2.54
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker and members, I wish to lay on Table the Toxic Chemicals Prohibition Control Bill, 2015. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have the certificate? It is supposed to accompany the Bill. 

MS KAROORO: No, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Let us defer the reading to tomorrow when the certificate will be presented.

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

2.56
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General as follows:

    i) Makuutu Sub-County, Iganga District 
    ii) Nakigo Sub-County, Iganga District 
    iii) Nabitende Sub-County, Iganga District 
    iv) Nakalama Sub-County, Iganga District 
    v) Kyazanga Sub-County, Lwengo District 
    vi) Lwengo Sub-County, Lwengo District
    vii)  Kisekka Sub-County, Lwengo District 
    viii) Olok Sub-County, Pallisa District 
    ix) Akisim Sub-County, Pallisa District
    x) Kasodo Sub-County, Pallisa District 
    xi) Kabonero Sub-County, Kabarole District 
    xii) Ruteete Sub-County, Kabarole District
    xiii) Kichwamba Sub-County, Kabarole District 
    xiv) Mugusu Sub-County, Kabarole District 
    xv) Luweero Sub-County, Luweero District
    xvi) Kalagala Sub-County, Luweero District 
    xvii) Ndaiga Sub-County, Kibaale District 
    xviii) Kyebando Sub-County, Kibaale District 
    xix) Matale Sub-County, Kibaale District 
    xx) Mugarama Sub-County, Kibaale District 
    xxi) Rugashari Sub-County, Kibaale District 
    xxii) Nyakiyumbu Sub-County, Kasese District
    xxiii) Ihandiro Sub-County, Kasese District 
    xxiv) Kilembe Sub-County, Kasese District
    xxv) Bwesumbu Sub-County, Kasese District
    xxvi)  Karusandara Sub-County, Kasese District
    xxvii)  Mbulamuti Sub-County, Kamuli District 
    xxviii) Nabwigulu Sub-County, Kamuli District
    xxix)  Nyakayojo Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xxx)  Biharwe Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xxxi)  Kapyanga Sub-County, Bugiri District
    xxxii)  Bulidha Sub-County, Bugiri Distrct
    xxxiii)  Muterere Sub-County, Bugiri District
    xxxiv)  Bukabooli Sub-County, Mayuge District
    xxxv)  Bukulula Sub-County, Kalungu District
    xxxvi)  Nawampiti Sub-County, Luuka District
    xxxvii)  Budondo Sub-County, Jinja District
    xxxviii)  Kikyusa Sub-County, Luweero District
    xxxix)  Kisojo Sub-County, Kyenjojo District
    xl)  Ivukula Sub-County, Namutumba District
    xli)  Kinnuka Sub-County, Lyantonde District
    xlii)  Bwamiramira Sub-County, Kibaale District
    xliii)  Kyabarungira Sub-County, Kasese District
    xliv)  Kasenda Sub-County, Kabarole District
    xlv)  Kalangalo Sub-County, Mityana District
    xlvi)  Sigulu Sub-County, Namayingo District
    xlvii)  Butungama Sub-County, Ntoroko District
    xlviii)  Kyarumba Sub-County, Kasese District
    xlix)  Ruhija Sub-County, Kabale District, 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, commissioner Akol. All are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

3.01
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I have not changed my statement to this House; this is the third time I am saying it. This is Prime Minister’s question time not Deputy Prime Minister’s time. I am not ready to answer for the Prime Minister. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the absence of the Prime Minister, let us proceed to the next item.

3.02
THE OPPOSITION CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Cecilia Ogwal): Madam Speaker, Wednesday this time is the Prime Minister’s time and it is our tradition and culture in Parliament. This is the third time that the Prime Minister is tactfully absenting himself. 

The Deputy Prime Minister, whom we have always looked at as the Leader of Government Business and capable of stepping in the shoes of the Prime Minister, is defiantly and tactfully running away from facing the responsibility and challenge. I would like to know whether we should continuously put the Prime Minister’s question time - because we have a lot of business to do, we can as well do away with it. However, we thought this was a way of promoting dialogue in the House. The Prime Minister does not have to be intellectual, skilled and so well informed but he can answer a question to just prove that you are fit to be a Prime Minister. 

I feel that Parliament is being cheated of its time. Parliament should be given an opportunity to put any question to the Prime Minister. Now, this is the third time and this is a new Prime Minister and we are all very excited to dialogue with him. He is denying us that opportunity.

Madam Speaker, I pray that you guide us appropriately so that we know how we are going to move from now on. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we are caught by our rules of procedure. There is one Prime Minister who is presented here and approved by this House. These others are not approved by this House. I think they are not the same. I am constrained on what to do because he is not here. Our rules say “Prime Minister” and not “Deputy Prime Minister or Third or Second Deputy”. Let us wait for the Prime Minister. I will encourage him to be here next week to answer our questions. Let us go to the next item.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as we go to that work, I would like to introduce hon. Henry Mutebi Kityo, former Member of Parliament for Mawokota South. He is in the Gallery. He has come to watch the proceedings. (Applause)

Honourable members, yesterday, when we adjourned, we were dealing with the proposals for amendment of clause 9, which had been presented and debate had ensued.

MR KAKOOZA: On clause 9 (2) (d), “The Executive Director who shall have no right to vote”, I would like to amend it to say “The Executive Director who shall be an ex-officio and a secretary to the board.” The justification is for proper management. When the executive director is a secretary, he/she implements the decisions taken by the board. 

For instance, we passed an Administration of Parliament Act - Madam Chairperson, you are the chair of the Parliamentary Commission and the Clerk to the Parliamentary Commission is an ex-officio on the board. I would like it to be in conformity with other existing laws. That is my justification. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your amendment?

MR KAKOOZA: My amendment should read as “The Executive Director who shall be an ex-officio on the board and a secretary to that board” in conformity with other existing laws. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Isn’t there another provision for a secretary ahead?

MR KAKOOZA: There is a provision in section 19 but what do other laws say? Look at the Administration of Parliament Act, what does it say? I thought that to be consistent, it must be in conformity with other relevant laws we have passed in this House.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In relation to what my colleague has just raised, I am also looking at the Bill and when you look at clause 19, there is a secretary to the board. Also on board of the Authority, clause 9(d) says “The executive director who shall have no right to vote…” Clause 18 (3) “Functions of the director: The Executive Director is answerable to the board.”

Therefore, if he is answerable to the board, I do not think he can be at the same time the secretary to the board. That is my submission -(Interjections)- yes, there is a secretary to the board here in the law, different from the Executive Director and the Executive Director has his own functions and the secretary to the Board has his.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chair. What we should be looking at is the best practice in corporate governance. Is it prudent to fuse the functions of management with the functions of the board? Is it prudent to fuse the board with management? The Executive Director is the head of management; The board supervises management. It is imprudent, to put it politely, to make the Executive Director the secretary of the Authority that supervises him. 

In corporate best practices, there must be a stand-alone officer known as the secretary to the board who is more often than not a qualified lawyer or a chartered secretary -(Interjections)- among the functions of the secretary to the board is actually giving legal advice to the board. Therefore, I oppose the amendment of hon. Kakooza.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the amendment by hon. Kakooza. The justification is that if this Parliament created the National Information Technology Authority and under clause 7, on the NITA (U) Act, it says in section 4, “The Executive Director shall be the secretary to the Board” because NITA (U) Uganda has a board. 

It went ahead in clause 14 when it was defining the secretariat and it said, “The authority shall have a secretariat headed by the Executive Director.”

The functions under clause 19 do not convince me that we should create such a job. We have UCC, Madam Chairperson; the Executive Director of UCC is a secretary of the UCC board. Therefore, it is not an anomaly that we can make the Executive Director an ex-officio but the secretary of this board.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, hon. Nalubega. I brought up the same issue yesterday and it was not taken. In the same spirit she is arguing, we have, for instance, the Parliamentary Commission. We have the Clerk to Parliament who is the Secretary to the Commission. What we are doing now is not a new thing. Consider the Uganda Wildlife Authority, the Executive Director is secretary to the board.

Therefore, it is not a new invention that we are trying to do but we want to also make it cheaper and affordable for us to run this organisation rather than creating multiple offices.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the corporate governance principles, the Managing Director or Executive Director is usually the secretary to the board. If you want to create confusion - because if you look at the custody of the information of a company, who is the custodian? It is the Executive Director. You cannot go and create a secretary who walks from somewhere else and goes out maybe with the files of the company and then he is competing for information with the Executive Director. You are going to create total confusion in that company.

That is why when you go to clause (19)(3), it says of the secretary to the board,  “In the performance of his or her functions, the secretary is answerable to the Executive Director.” This clearly shows that the person who is the chief custodian of a company is the Executive Director. 

The Executive Director can come in with his secretary because as an executive director, you are entitled to have a secretary. So, you can come in a meeting with a secretary who can support you. I am just looking at - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ruhunda, differentiate between a personal secretary and corporation secretary. Yes, do not confuse us.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, that is why I find clause 19 redundant –(Interjections)- please, give me a chance. If we look at clause 19 (2)(d), the Executive Director, as amended by hon. Kakooza, should be the secretary to the board with no voting rights. When we have an executive director as secretary to the board with no voting rights, then we have these roles under the Executive Director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let me ask the minister the rationale for his proposals for executive director and also secretary so that we can clear this matt
er. What did you have in mind?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, as colleagues have said, legislating for an efficient institution, you will do much to ensure that there is no fusion of functions; that there is no possible conflict of interest whatsoever by not making an executive director an operational director of an institution to be part of a board so that in his performance of his duties, those functions are separated.
The appointment of the secretary, which again is well thought through by the board and the Executive Director, is not to have a stranger that can easily walk away with the documents or secrets of the institution. The appointment is well thought through and is part of the institution and the Executive Director is an operational director of an institution and the board is there for policy guidance and direction. 

We thought wisely after benchmarking internally and externally that the two should not be fused for creating an inefficient and perfect institution. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, of course, with the due respect of that concern, we have observed why we are lacking efficiency in the performance of many of these government institutions. It is this lack of empowerment of the individuals - when you try to spread a lot of power in many hands, the decision making and bureaucracy that go with that curtails performance. This is something we need to address -(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, most of the time, the board -  why these executive directors are ex-officios on these boards is because they are going to implement the decisions taken by the board. How do you do it? It is because the ex-officio without voting rights in the board is listening to decisions by the board and the arguments. As the chief accounting officer, you will go back and say this is what the spirit of the board is to implement a policy.

By all standards and practice, if I am an accounting officer and I am denied information, how am I going to implement the decisions taken? I have told you, I have been in the Parliamentary Commission – Madam Chair, you are the Chairperson of the Parliamentary Commission, the chief accounting officer is the Clerk to Parliament in administration. However, she has no right to vote but she implements the decisions taken by the Parliamentary Commission. That is the standard. (Applause) 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think the Commission is not comparable to the other corporate bodies.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Are we benchmarking now from within to try to invite us that - who is telling us that Parliament is doing very well with that model? Who is telling us that now, the Parliamentary Commission in this Act is equivalent with the Administration of Parliament Act?

Look at the functions of the board and then look at what the proposed secretary to the board is supposed to do. For sure, we have some boards where executive directors are secretary but also we have boards and authorities where these are separated. For example URA, Uganda Investment Authority, what are your examples in this? What is this inbreeding in Parliament, thinking that Parliamentary Commission is the best? (Laughter) (Interruption)

MR RWAKAJARA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, I would like to share my experience as someone who has been on many boards of serious organisations in this country.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Commission is also a serious one. (Laughter)

MR RWAKAJARA: The best practice is that an MD or ED will represent the management on the board and the Head of the Legal Department or the Corporation Secretary will always take minutes of the board. (Applause) I have this experience from the Housing Finance Bank where I have been a board member. I have also been a board member at NSSF and I have interacted with many institutions and that is the best practice world-wide. A corporation secretary should be the secretary to the board and the MD will represent management on the board as a member of the board but with no powers to vote. I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe, we should add that not only the secretary but the custodian of the records of the institution.

MR OBOTH: As I conclude, I have heard other Members talking about the functions of the secretary, which, when we get to it, we can modify and amend. 

I really want to thank hon. Rwakajara for the first hand information. I now know that he is the workers’ representative -(Interruption)

MR DENIS OBUA: Madam Chairperson, the approach the minister has proposed in the Bill is the spirit of the UCC Act. The UCC Act creates the position of the Executive Director and under section 18, it establishes the Secretary to the Commission.  Therefore, I do not see any harm whether we take the Parliamentary Commission approach or this approach; it is an entrenched system in our legal regime because section 18 of the UCC Act creates the Secretary to the Commission. But in addition, the same Act also creates the position of the Executive Director. Therefore, there is really no cause for alarm.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 9, be amended –

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at clause 19 (3) because we mentioned - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are on clause 9.

MS NALUBEGA: In relation to what we are going to vote on –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 9 and let us finish with it first.

MS NALUBEGA: It states that “The secretary in performance of his or her functions shall be answerable to the Executive Director” and yet he or she is appointed by the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the secretary and Executive Director work on a day to day basis in that corporation even without the meetings of the authority. 

I put the question that the clause 9 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you look through the composition of the board, it has seven technocrats and the only people coming there are the chairperson and another person. In effect, this is a board for technocrats. If it is a board composed of technocrats who are civil servants, then it ceases to be a real board because a board must consist of people from out who have better ideas as prescribed by the minister to come and help the organisation.

The proposals that I would like to bring are that if you are the chair, you must have a vice chair. In the law, it is not even prescribing who is supposed to be a vice-chairperson. 

In addition to that, the number of representatives from Government are too many and yet, we need only one or two people to represent Government and not the Solicitor-General, Information, Uganda Registration Services and so on because they are too many. If we have agreed to have a board, the people who should come from the public must be more and the people from the technical side must be one or two people.

Therefore, I would like to move an amendment that we create another slot for a vice-chairperson who will deputise the chairperson in their absence and three more people from the public to be the ones to represent – I could say the public since you have now agreed that the people come from the public. The three people from the public will make it five so that we have five people from out and we reduce the number of technical officers to have the Ministry of Internal Affairs because it is the one in charge. The moment we have somebody from Internal Affairs, he will even represent the National Citizenship and Immigration Board and maybe, one from the Ministry of Finance for purposes of funding. I would like to move that amendment, Madam Chairperson.

MR OBOTH: On the basis of the proposal by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we could actually trade off the representative from the Solicitor-General’s office since the board will have a corporation secretary who is a lawyer so that if there is any technical matter that would arise and requiring the Solicitor-General’s advice, they could actually write other than having a representative from the Solicitor-General. This will create more space for the vice-chairperson and members from the public. 

I do not know whether the minister would concede to that amendment and we move forward.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: On trading off the vice-chairperson for the Solicitor-General, I agree with hon. Oboth. However, if you look at the Ministry of Internal Affairs and then you go to the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration Board - these are the same areas and we need to also make a decision on reducing that. 

Likewise, if you are saying that these are going to collect information to be shared and even if the Electoral Commission wanted information, they would get it. You do not need to be represented on the board to get information. On that one, I concur with hon. Oboth.

I would like to also propose that we delete the Electoral Commission, the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration Board, the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and the National Information Technology Authority -(Interjections)- the reason I am suggesting this is that if you read clause 9 (3) “The Chairperson referred to in sub-section 2 (c) shall be appointed by the minister from among persons with knowledge and proven experience in any of the following fields; registration of persons, law, information and communication technology, public administration….” If you are talking of technology, the person we should appoint will come from that area of technology -(Interruption)

MR KABAJO: I thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. First of all, that a person who has got knowledge of information technology is on the board is not reason for removing the National Information Technology Authority. The reason that authority was put on the board was because of the need for that authority to work closely with this new authority that we are setting up here. 

The person with knowledge of information technology may have nothing at all to do with NITA (U). So, that is a very important reason that authority needs to be on the board. 

Madam Chairperson, if you could allow, I could perhaps - since I am on the Floor - continue with some of these other positions.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one, on clause 9?

MR KABAJO: Because I had also requested for permission from you. To add on the information, I do agree with hon. Nandala Mafabi about the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration Board because they are ably represented by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. And the Solicitor-General is also not very important on this particular board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Legal Advisor of Government is not important on this board?

MR KABAJO: Depending on the work they are doing, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The Legal Advisor of Government is not important?

MR KABAJO: However, Madam Chairperson, if I can conclude my information, I would very strongly urge my colleagues that in the direction that Uganda is going, there is an important role for National Information Technology Authority where it will be a coordinating centre that will set up a national data bank, which will coordinate all government bodies. So, you cannot leave out the National Information Technology Authority from this board. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the minister say about the proposal to delete and to enlarge the board in different aspects?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson. I think to propose which institutions or persons to delete from the board, one has to understand the purpose of the board. 

These offices are proposed because they are affected by the decisions that are taken by the board of the authority. Therefore, that is why I respectfully do not agree with my colleague, hon. Oboth, that, for example, we should delete the Solicitor-General because this is a government institution. 

The purpose of bringing the Solicitor-General on board is to enable him participate in the decision-making because in any case, the Solicitor-General has a constitutional obligation and duty to advise entities of Government. So, really we should not look at the number of individuals and offices on the board but also to understand that these are representatives of institutions and government bodies that are directly affected by the decisions of the board. To that extent, they should participate in policy formulation of the board.

MS KABAKUMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. On clause 9 (2) (b) (iii), I have no serious problem about this board. The technical arm is a directorate of the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration and not the board. So, if it has to have a representative, it should be from the Directorate of the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration not the board.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are trying to provide for a very effective board that is technical and multi-sectoral. Given the way the exercise has been undertaken and will continuously be, it should be managed by people who are experienced and technical enough. 

However, given what has been submitted, on Solicitor-General; he is the Legal Advisor to all departments of Government. In the event of this board or institution wanting advice, they will always go to the Attorney-General and he will always advise them. So that one, we can trade it off with an additional person from the general public. (Applause) 

However, on the Uganda National Citizenship Immigration Board, this is a technical person who is a member of the multi- sectoral approach and will always be very important in the matters of citizenship and aliens resident here. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, an additional person from the general public to be part of this is acceptable but the rest are very important. The removal of any one of them will render the board very weak and I would wish that we do not remove them.  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable minister, if you removed the Solicitor-General, why would I be compelled to look for him, if he is not part of this?

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I will painfully disagree with the honourable minister. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is very clear. The chief Legal Advisor to Government is the Attorney-General. The first law man of the Republic is the Solicitor-General. The question we should be asking ourselves is: what value does anybody in this Bill add?

The principal Legal Advisor of Government certainly adds value. If you have the principal Legal Advisor of Government at the inspection of policy, you are on firm ground. You cannot guarantee that whatever policies you come up with will be good at law and good in fact. For that reason, I oppose the removal of the Solicitor-General. And any other person here really with the exemption of the amendment made by the hon. Kabakumba. Since the minister has conceded that we can actually expand this board by the inclusion of members of the public, an additional two members of the public does not do any harm. You will still have a small enough board. It would be the size of a medium sized classroom, only two other members. (Members rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us hear from hon. Sanjay Tanna. I also wanted to remind you that in this very House, we have in many reports taken to task institutions that have neglected the advice of the Solicitor-General. So I also do not agree with the removal of the Solicitor-General. I am sorry, Minister. (Laughter)

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I thank you for the opportunity. I would want to support the amendment of hon. Kabakumba that the word “board” in clause 9 (2) (b) (iii) be deleted and we call it the “the directorate” because it will be unfair of one board member again being posted to another board. 

Therefore, it becomes Uganda National Citizenship Immigration Directorate because the minister has asked for a technical person. So, the word “board” be deleted and “directorate” be included.

I would also like to support hon. Nandala. I disagree with the removal of the Solicitor-General from this board. He is very important in this set up especially on matters pertaining to registration of persons, the legalities, how these persons are going to then relate with the Electoral Commission and the various other organs that we have included here.

Hon. Nandala’s submission is that while we have all these technical officers on the board, the other skill sets which may be necessary may not be included with the one member who we are proposing from the public. 

Therefore, we may call it the vice chairperson plus three others, to allow the minister earmark the various - for example, we have talked about the Solicitor-General for legal advice. We have also talked about NITA for IT purpose but we have not talked of finance and if we expand, somebody with finance skills may be brought on board.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that sub-clause (2)(c) be amended to read, “Three persons to represent the public.” One of them may be appointed the vice chairperson. We must take into account the odd number element –(Interruption)

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. We have had challenges where the Solicitor-General who is supposed to be giving independent legal advice being dragged into the daily affairs of this board. In view of that, could it be prudent for us to insist on having the Solicitor-General here?

MR TANNA: Thank you, hon. Alex Ruhunda, for that information. My understanding is that the Solicitor-General’s presence shall be to guide the board on legal matters to avoid the mistakes that may be made. Like the Chair has guided, we have on several occasions seen organisations writing to the Solicitor-General for legal advice, including ourselves in this House. We have also heard of the Solicitor-General delaying or withholding advice and so delaying the decision-making process. If the Solicitor-General is part of the board, he will be bound by the decisions.

Madam Chair, as I wind up, I would like to bring it to your attention that the chairperson with the seven members and these three from the public shall make a total membership of 11. Therefore, I would like to propose that we adopt the proposal to have a chairperson with the seven members. I also propose that we replace the word “board” with the word “directorate.” Further, I propose that we adopted an addition of three other members to represent the public, which will give us a total of 11 members. I beg to propose. 

MR AYENA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to begin by drawing the attention of the House to the object of the Bill, which is to harmonise and consolidate the law on registration of persons. That is the most important thing we should capture when deciding on the relevant persons to be on the board. 

However, before I go into that I would like to disagree, respectfully with my brother, hon. Sanjay Tanna, on the importance of the Solicitor-General only because he must be there in order to guide the board. The Solicitor-General is the handmaiden of the Attorney-General, who is the chief legal adviser on all legal matters. We risk getting the Solicitor-General influenced by his own decision and so giving wrong advice. This is because, if I am part of it, how can you expect me to go out of here and challenge a decision I have already been party to? 

Therefore, I would respectfully agree with my brother, who sometimes I disagree with. However, for this purpose, I agree with him completely that if we have to sacrifice somebody among these many people, I would go for the Solicitor-General because he has got a special role for purposes of advising on legal matters. 

Furthermore, if you go, one by one, on the number of persons who have been provided for - there was a very persuasive argument when they said, the object of this Bill is to harmonise the roles of different players on matters of registration of persons. The Ministry of Internal Affairs would definitely be interested in this role. 

However, if the Ministry of Internal Affairs is interested in this role, does it have to put one of its own children to go together with on the same board? If there is any second person to sacrifice, it should be the immigration people because they are part and parcel of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

In any case, if the reason which was advanced by my sister, hon. Princess Kabakumba, is right – and I seriously believe that it is right – that the board should not be represented, then we should look for technical people. 

In addition, I do not want to believe that, for instance, my brother in whom I am always well pleased, the minister, or anybody such as the permanent secretary in the Ministry of Internal Affairs is a technical person in this area. The technical person is the Immigration Board and my argument is along those lines. Let us be guided by the object of the Bill to arrive there. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before we go further, let us hear from the minister. Do you have any objection to adding more members to these, which you have to make them 11?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chair, we would not legislate for a very expensive board by adding on more people that are being talked about. However, I am persuaded by my colleague, hon. Chrispus Ayena. What I know in the practice of Government is that once there is a conflict between the board and the authority, which is bound to be, then the reference point will be the Attorney-General. So, he should not be found to have been in it before. Therefore, a trade-off for that position for another person is the way to go. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, honourable minister, are you saying that you are okay with one other member of the public coming in to replace the Solicitor-General?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes, I am.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 9 (2) be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, the committee proposes to amend clause 10 by deleting paragraph 10(b) and replacing it with a new paragraph to read as follows: “Has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged.” The justification is to align the provision with the drafting language.

The committee also proposes to amend 10(d) by inserting the word “all” between the words “minister” and the word “a member” in the first line and by replacing the lower case of the word, “member” of the Local Government Council, in the first and second lines of 10 (d), with title cases of the same word. In other words the redrafted clause 10 (d) should read as: “… is a Member of Parliament, a minister or a member of a Local Government Council. The Justification is for grammatical correction.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I read clause 10 and noticed that on several occasions some people who are not of sound mind have been appointed to these boards. For example, in the medical world, we believe that people who are above 80 years of age end up losing some of their neurons – (Interjections) – yes, I can tell you issues of cognition may end up being a problem. Therefore, I am of the view that this board should not have a member who is insane.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I do not have any problems with what the doctor is raising. The same applies to what the chairperson has raised. If you read (d), it says: “a Member of Parliament, minister or a member of Local Government Council.”

This means if you got another civil or public servant, they will be appointed to that board. To prevent any other civil or public servant, apart from those mentioned under 9(2)(b), from getting appointed, we have to tie them out in this clause.

I want to move an additional amendment on 9d) to read as follows: “Public servants, except those as stated in 9(2)(b)…” The justification is to stop the minister from picking any other civil or public servants to represent the public. This is because if the law has not prohibited, then it will be easy for the minister to do that. It may not be the hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakayirima; it could be me. I can choose to appoint one person from the Ministry of Agriculture to the board. But to avoid that, the borders should be expressly stated.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I thought (d) was aimed at elected leaders; people in active politics. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if (d) is for people holding elective offices, then (e) should state that it should not be any civil or public servants except for those as mentioned in 9.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, it is good to expressly tie the hands of the minister not to appoint any other public officers from any other institution other than those prescribed under 9 (2) (b). 

In my view, it is a prudent way of saying if you are not from probably Electoral Commission, Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration Directorate, the Uganda Registration Service Bureau or the National Information Technology Authority (NITA) - the Solicitor-General of course is already done away with- or the Uganda Bureau of Statistics; you cannot be appointed to that board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have any objections to that new clause blocking out other civil or public servants? 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chair, I want to know how hon. Nandala-Mafabi understands or defines the term public. There is a difference between a member of the public and a public servant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is aiming at public servants other than those who are named in clause 9(2). He wants to close with these ones. 

MR RUHUNDA: The worry which hon. Nandala-Mafabi has is that the minister could encroach on the two public positions by getting any other civil or public servants.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No.

MR RUHUNDA: Yes, that is what I had thought. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, if you have no objection, can we include the proposal that a new clause be introduced under (e) to close out civil or public servants? 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, if I read it clearly, it says, “A person shall not be appointed to the board who…” it is listed here. If you say civil servants are excluded it means -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Other than the group in clause 9(2). Is it okay? 

GEN. ARONDA: We go ahead with that amendment to strengthen this function.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed by the chair and -

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Chair, when I rose up several many times but the hon. Oboth was pulling my leg. That is why I delayed to catch your eye. (Laughter) I would like to move a very minor amendment to the chairperson’s proposal in clause 10(b), which reads, “has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda, and has not been discharged…”  for the deletion of the words, “or otherwise declared.”

The legal process for declaring persons bankrupt is what we call adjudged. This is just repetitive. I hope the chairperson won’t have problems with that. The new proposal would then read, “Has been adjudged bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: You do not want the words “otherwise declared?”

MR FOX ODOI: Yes, I propose the deletion of the words, “or otherwise declared.”

MS NTABAZI: Madam Chair, I would like to move a proposal on clause 10. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MS NTABAZI: The proposal is that because of the experience we have had and the challenges we have had in giving services, people above 90 years of age surely should not appear on this board. They are too old first of all and feel - I hope hon. Abdu Katuntu will support me on this. We have always had problems with - I had it here in Parliament; at UNEB and many other places. I am talking about people who have already aged but still chairing boards. A person of age above that of hon.  Muganwa Kajura should not be there. At least this age is okay but above that age, no way. (Laughter)

MR AYENA: Madam Chair, I had a curious look at clause 10 (a) which says, “A person should not be appointed to the board who has been convicted of an offence under this act.” My quarrel with this proposal is that- I wonder what will happen to those that will be appointed on the first board? My fear is that when we restrict ourselves to this Act only, we are leaving some open ends elsewhere.

My proposal would be that it should read thus: “A person shall not be appointed to the board who has been convicted of an offence, under any law related to registration of persons.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing you have been convicted of fraud, not related to registration, do you qualify? 

MR AYENA: Then this one does not deal with corruption.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I want to get into the mind of the drafters of this Bill and suggest that they appear to be proposing penalty or sanctions within this very Act. I think that is the spirit, because when you look at 10 (c), you realise that it is wider on other offences. This one specifically - if you have been convicted of an offence under this Act - the offence is already created or we are going to create it. It bars people from being recycled. 

It is a provision for barring recycling of plastic human beings who have gone through the furnace of court. That is what I wanted to share with my very senior colleague; we could leave it the way it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I know that hon. Ntabazi attempted to move but she did not quite move. I do not know what you want us to say. What is you proposal? (Laughter)

MS NTABAZI: Madam Chair, my proposal is that since there is the lower age limit of 18, there must be an upper age limit of, for example, of 90 -(Laughter)- or 80, or of  85 of course –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: I beg to move that under clause 10, we create a new sub-clause (e) to read as follows: “A person shall not be appointed to the board when is above 75 years.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are we not discriminating?

MR MADADA: Madam Chair, Article (32) of the Constitution talks about the affirmative action, or the marginalized group of people based on gender, disability and age. This Article was intended to essentially ensure that there is no discrimination based on those areas. 
Secondly, you are talking about an authority that will need to draw some wisdom from some people who have performed some intelligence work before. I believe this will be discrimination. It will bar people with wisdom from serving this authority. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us not make this witty legislation. I propose that we leave it to the minster to really know what the majority of the country wants. 

Honourable members, the proposed amendment is for the creation of a new clause, as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and the proposals moved by the chairperson of the committee; those are ones we are voting on.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, there was a proposal from Hon. Bitekyerezo, I thought it was essential; it was about person who is insane and does not qualify to be on the board. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to talk as a medical doctor. When we talk about orientation - if somebody is oriented in type, spirit, in person, that person is not disoriented at all. That person is very okay. I am talking about people who have had psychiatric problems or a person who is mentally unstable or somebody who has developed a Alzheimer’s disease - (Interruption) 

MS ASAMO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am just wondering how the minister will appoint a person hospitalised at Butabika Hospital to the board. When we go to the next clause, there are provisions where the minister can remove a person from the board, in case they got to that state. But also is hon. Dr Bitekyerezo in order to say that people who have psychiatric problems can never be good people at a certain point in time? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members we don’t need to labour with the issue of insanity. It is provided for in clause 11, under the wording, “deformity of body or mind.” It is covered there. So, let us finish with 10.

MS NTABAZI: As I earlier on moved, we have ministers and seniors ministers in this House - we have been well guided by hon. Sulaiman Madada that the law we are making must be in conformity with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, I wish to withdraw my earlier proposal on the age limit of hon. Muganwa Kajura and the rest. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, in everything we do,  we should treat each other with respect in this House. I really want to appeal to you, please. You know, the young today are also going to get old tomorrow –(Laughter)– yes, there is no permanent youth.

MR FOX ODOI: Just a polite reminder that I had requested that we delete the words, “or otherwise declared.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: In the chairperson’s submission, honourable members. I put the question that clause 10(b)1(b) are mended as proposed by hon. Fox Odoi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 (b), as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question Clause 11 –

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Clause 11(5), on tenure of office of members of the board, the committee proposes to amend clause 11(5) by replacing the words, “reference to sub clause 3” with the words “reference to sub clause 4.”  Justification is for proper referencing.

In sub-clause 11(5), the committee proposes insertion of the phrase “to be heard in person or represented by his or her lawyer,” immediately after the word, “minister” on the last line. The redrafted clause should read thus: “Where it appears to minister that there is cause to remove a member under sub clause 4, the minister shall notify the member concerned in writing and shall give the member an opportunity to submit his/her explanation to the minister and to be heard in person or represented by his /her lawyer.”

The justification is to give regard to the principles of natural justice as envisioned under Article 28 and Article 42 of Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which avail an opportunity for an accused person to be heard.

In clause 11(6) of the Bill, we propose the replacement of the words, “Where a member is removed from office under the section, the Minister shall a)communicate to the relevant agencies under paragraph nine 2(b) for replacement,” with the phrase,(b) “where the Member was appointed under sub-section 9(3), appoint another qualified person to replace a member and in both circumstances, the member appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of the previous member.”

The justification is to avail the mentioned minister an opportunity to appoint another member of the board as per the provisions of subsection 9 (2) and to eliminate possibilities of vacancies on the board level.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I support the amendments by the chairperson of the committee. But I also would like to propose an amendment in 11(4). In the justification for the rule of natural justice. I would think that (4) should read: “The minister may at any time suspend or remove a member.” 
I am saying this, Madam Chair, because there are instances where you have to suspend a person, but you cannot suspend a person without giving such a person  a fair hearing. I would like to propose that the minister should also have the mandate of suspending a person till further notice to find out the incompetence or any fault related to the person’s conduct. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Member, how would the minister know about the madness of the people?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chair, I agree with hon. Mariam Nalubega on that amendment.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. It appears to me that the decision of the minister to remove a board member shall be final. The member may have no recourse when he/she is removed by the minister. Therefore, I would like to propose that we insert another sub clause to allow the member appeal in case the minister has dismissed him/her unfairly. Some of these bodies are strong bodies and they can sometimes have disagreements with the minister. In case it happens unjustifiably to the member, he/she should have recourse. So, I propose that we add another subclause 7 to the effect that, a board member, who is unsatisfied by the decision of the minister, can seek redress in a court of law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am finding some difficulties especially since they are officers. I do not know whether, as civil servants, they have right to demand that they remain in the position. I am finding difficulties in the proposal but let us think about it.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. I join you in finding difficulties with that proposal. I invite you, Madam Chair and honourable members, to also find difficulties in appreciating the uses of clauses (5) and (6). What we are trying to do is to reproduce Article 42 without establishing the procedures in the administrative process. 

I do not know whether we are influenced by the fact that the minister is an Army General who does not know probably that, there is right to fair hearing. This could be the first legislation of this kind. So, I would ask the chairperson of the committee to fully drop this and make further amendments on clause (5).

GEN TUMWINE: Madam Chair, we have a number of Army Generals present in the House – Gen. Moses Ali, Gen. Aronda Nyakayirima, Gen. Katumba Wamala and many others. (Applause) There are many people aspiring to be army generals too. The history of UPDF, it has been to defend the rights of people, including fair hearing. 

So, is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order to start diverting the debate from what is being discussed and impute improper motives that Army Generals have tendencies of not granting fair hearing, when I, Gen. Elly Tumwine, as the Chairman of General Court Martial used to give people fair hearing? Is he in order?

MR SSEGONNA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. This information is very necessary before the Chair rules on the point of order. I was in the Court Martial when Gen. Elly Tumwine was its Chairman. He indeed convicted a lawyer, Mr Elias Lukwago, without giving him a chance to be heard and sentenced him to a fine. (Applause)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Chair, if the Chairman of the Court Martial’s decision did not satisfy any of the persons before him, that person had a right to appeal. Did the lawyer appeal?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the information will not affect my ruling. What I would like to say is that, this House had no opportunity to follow the proceedings of the court martial. We do not know what you did there.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, with my very wide knowledge on administrative law and processes, the right to fair hearing is guaranteed in any public office and the spirit in which I said that was to support the Army General. Army Generals are knowledgeable people . Whoever is trying to draft this law is actually saying, the Army Generals are not knowledgeable. Gen. Elly Tumwine, I am with you on the fact that matters of the Army Generals should be left to the Army Generals. (Laughter)

Madam Chair, we have an opportunity to be consistent in our legislation. Article 42 guarantees the principle natural justice. Article 28 is clear on the principle of fair hearing. Must we reproduce these Articles in this law? I am asking, those who drafted this Bill. Did you doubt the ability of anybody in this public office to adhere to the principle of fair hearing? For your information, matters of judicial review have, in most cases, been successfully challenged, where a right to fair hearing has not been complied with. 

Madam Chair, both clauses 5 and 6 should be deleted because they are redundant, unnecessary and just taking our ink and paper for no good reason. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I beg to disagree with hon. Jacob Oboth though he is a lawyer. Although the provision is in the Constitution, we need to respect procedure.

First, cause may arise that a member be removed except that it is unfair that the minister hires and fires at will. Therefore, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 5 to read as follows: “Where it appears to the minister that there is cause to remove a member under subclause 3, a report should be made by the chairman of the board.”

That way we are sure that the member will have a fair hearing. When the minister receives a report, he should write to the member to defend themselves. I beg to submit.

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am also disagreeing with my learned colleague, hon. Jacob Oboth. We should not delete 5; we should instead amend it to read as follows: “where it appears to the minister that there is cause to remove a member under subclause 3, the minister shall notify the member concerned in writing and give the member an opportunity to submit his or her explanation within 30 days.” There should be some time frame. If you allow somebody an opportunity to submit, without a time frame, a member will always deny having been given that opportunity. I suggest that it is backed up by a time frame of 30 days. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It has been the practice of this House to import a constitutional provision into legislation. There is absolutely no harm. The constitution provides for the principle of fair hearing but the details can come into the legislation; it is neither duplication nor a waste of time; it is for clarity.

Secondly, the users of this law ordinarily carry the statute; they do not carry the Constitution. It is for reference, it is better to be provided for within the legislation. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Katuntu, the Shadow Attorney-General for the sensitisation. However, I would like you to clarify whether you can give examples of the recent legislations, where we provided for administrative review mechanisms in the laws we make. 

Honourable members, I am too convinced of what I am talking about. And I am trying to help ourselves to appreciate a whole paragraph written probably with the greatest number of words in the entire proposed Bill.

Hon. Abdu Katuntu, whereas, I agree with you that that is the principle and that these bodies use statutory legislations, we are making an Act, which in the spirit of the Constitution that guarantees the right to be heard. Are you comfortable with the proposal as it is right now, re-introducing and even setting a procedure, which is crooked and can be abused?

We are making the Minister a judicial officer, where the moment it appears to the minister that there is a cause to remove a member - under subclause 4, the minister shall notify the member concerned - and this a member of the board   not a civil servant - in writing and shall give the member an opportunity to submit his or her explanation to the minister and to be heard in person or represented by his or her lawyer - the minister sitting in their office – hon. Abdu Katuntu, just help me, you are my senior because that is the difficulty I encountered when I was reading this proposal. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have just had another look at clause 5. There is a fundamental problem with it. I think the intention was to refer to sub clause 4 because sub clause 3 refers to resignation of a member. If I am resigning I do not need the minister to remove me. Maybe they wanted to talk about sub clause 4 instead of 3. Did you correct that in your amendment?

However, honourable members, in the Constitution, there is a provision for recall of members from the House, but it has never been activated because there is no substantive legislation to do it. It is in the constitution but no one can use it.

In the past we said that we should not send the public on a fishing expedition to check where the law is and fix others. I do not know why hon. Oboth does not want us to be explicit. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, the Floor is still mine. Under clause 4, you rightly point out that under clause 5, the right subcluase being referred to is 4. Under clause 4, the minister is being given the right to remove a member of the Board under circumstances spelled out from clause (a) to (e). However, I think what the law is trying to do is to give some guidance to the minister on how to exercise those powers, which are being vested in him under clause 4.

When the law provides that a person is given a right to be heard, it does not mean that you will walk in and say, I am going to be heard. A right to be heard is for you to present your side of the story and how can this be? For example, if the minister is convinced that this is a correct case for removal and she writes to the particular member and the member replies, the right to be heard has been respected because this is the basis upon which the minister takes a decision. 

It is not that the minister is going to sit and he is a judge and people are appearing before him with evidence, no. Before the minister takes that fundamental decision of removing a member of a Board, he should give him an opportunity to be heard and to explain himself. That is the basis upon which he exercises his powers.

I see no mischief or problem at all. My learned brother, we do not have to go into some of these administrative law procedures and so forth. The minister is actually a lay man in terms of law. What the law sort of gives him is -(Interruption) 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. I would like you to clarify something to me. There are some instances where if I am the chairperson of the Board and I disagree with the minister. How do I get protected when the minister is given these powers? Maybe I have very genuine reasons and then the minister walks up and says, you are dismissed or removed. When there is such a situation, how do you help?

MS NTABAZI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted clarification from my senior colleague. The problem here is appearing before the minister with a lawyer. Why do you have to appear before a minister with a lawyer? If it is just hearing from you, why do you come with a lawyer in this instance?

MR KATUNTU: What happens is that if I am a member of the Board, I may instruct my lawyer to give my side of the story. Therefore, it does not have to be you as a person. The lawyer will write to the minister and explain the circumstances; that is what it means.

Two, this law does not provide for appeals from the minister’s decision. Therefore, if a minister has taken a decision and you are aggrieved by that decision, you resort to courts of law to challenge the decision of the minister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are straying from what we are doing. Do you have objections to the amendments of the chairperson?

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not have a fundamental disagreement with the proposal. I think most of us were concerned with the argument brought by hon. Oboth and that is why we needed to clarify that cluase 5 and 6 are important. This is because, first of all, clause 5 is giving an opportunity to the minister to notify the person. In addition, it is already anchored on circumstances and reasons well spelt out under clause 4.

Therefore, the minister cannot divert on his own disagreement with a member. It is based on conditions spelled out under section 4 and besides notification, it also gives an opportunity to a member to argue the other side of his or her defence. Like hon. Katuntu has rightfully said, it does not remove the right for you to go for any other remedy in the courts of law.

Section 6 also clarifies that when you are appointed to replace a member who has been removed, you only serve the term of the previous member. Those two are really clarifying fundamentals that do not need to be removed from this Bill.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Amongi for giving me the Floor. Madam Chairperson, you observed rightly and I thought that we were going to respond to sub clause 4. I would be open to amending this so that principles of natural justice can be observed in case of removal. 

The minister has mentioned seven grounds: 

    (a) He can remove a member for inability to perform the functions. Remember this same minister is the one who appointed this person and he can remove the person only when there is inability to perform the functions of his/ her office as a board member.

    (b) For misbehaviour or misconduct and that is debateable. You want the minister to write explaining that a board member’s behaviour is unbecoming.

    (c) For incompetence. This minister has the discretion to appoint this person but now we are tagging it that if I want to remove an incompetent board member, I have to –(Interjection)- Yes of course in this country you cannot remove some - What is the form of removal? The removal will be in writing and any decision by the minister or public official under Article 42 is guaranteed whether we put it here or not. (Interjection) I am on clarification, I have just been given you the Floor.

    (d) On absence. Hon. Betty Amongi, Chairperson of UWOPA, somebody has been convicted of a criminal offence and the minister is aware. We are tying his administrative powers purely to what will be charged in a legal process. When you say that somebody should come with a lawyer or that you are entitled to representation, that is given. Can we just modify this to cover the principles of natural justice without widening and deepening the principles in this particular -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what are your proposals for deepening or widening so that we –(Laughter)-Please make concrete proposals.

MR AYENA: Madam Chairperson, I suppose that we are sober lets put ourselves to reason again. I have gone through many parastatals and looked at the so many legislations establishing parastatals but I have never encountered this kind of provision.

I know that from time to time we can improve on the latitude of our legislation but it must be reasonably done and for good reason. In this particular case, I do buy his arguments. Let us begin from the premise that a person who is appointed a minister and especially Minister of Internal Affairs is ordinarily a sagacious man in the things of the world.

He is a reasonable person and when he takes a decision to remove, he will be following what has been provided for in clause 4 but –(Interjections)- Can I be protected? Hon. Nantaba is so far away from here, I do not know why you are rising. (Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, we want to believe that a person who has been appointed a minister is appointed on a sound basis and that he is a reasonable person. We also want to believe that when he decides to remove a person from the Board, he is being guided by the provisions under clause 4. Of course we do know that there are inadequacies in human compunctions and that is why we legislate. Do we lack this kind of legislation?

Madam Chairperson, I want to agree with my brother hon. Oboth Oboth - I do not know why he doubles Oboth but I would like to agree with him. In law there is recourse. In case the minister fails in following due procedures or the minister becomes unreasonable and does some of these things without following the rules of natural justice, the person who has been removed is not left without recourse. There is recourse under what we call –(Interjections)- Can I finish?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what is the problem with giving clause 5 its due position here? Why don’t you want it? Honourable members, even well written agreements are taken to court. Why don’t you want the right of the person to be heard to be included here? What is the problem? 

MR AYENA: Madam Chairperson, is that your ruling or you are still -  

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am asking, why you do not want clause 5 there?

MR AYENA: I was still debating but - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we have spent so much time on this matter. We are wasting so much time on this matter. Why don’t you want clause 5 in the law? That is the answer I want.

MR AYENA: That is what I was coming to. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then come to it directly.

MR AYENA: That is the question, Madam Chairperson. Do I have a right to answer? I do not want clause 5 to be included in the law because it is clogging the legislation, it is redundant because it is dealt with in other provisions of our laws. We are not assuming, we are saying that in case the minister falls short of those provisions, which are given under clause 4, the person can go for judicial review. 

The other reason, Madam Chairperson is that a minister has so many -(Interjection)- Do you want to give me information when I am giving information? Let me finish this part then you can inform.

Madam Chairperson, by the nature of his functions, the minister is a very busy person and if you are going to allow the minister at one stage to constitute himself into some form of quasi-judicial function then it is going to be an extremely difficult task. 

Therefore Madam Chairperson, if we need this kind of provision, we should move this further and propose for the establishment of a tribunal to hear these kinds of cases otherwise it will be too much for a minister. Thank you very much.

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What we are trying to reorganise is treated under clause 3 where a person who has been appointed by the minister receives a letter asking him to resign the following day. Why? The reasons are stipulated under clause 4 where the minister is calling that person to come and defend himself or herself. He is given an opportunity to explain why. 

Therefore, I support hon. Katuntu’s proposal that the person is given an opportunity to explain why he is receiving the resignation letter for him to lose his office.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if we were discussing from outside Parliament I would understand this argument but on the Floor of this House, we have questioned the actions of the ministers. We have been here and said, why did he do this? Did you go with the law or outside the law? Why do we assume that – Please, this law is not about us, it is for other people. Let us make it clear to them on how they can get redress if they have a problem.  I now put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 13; functions of the Board. The committee proposes to amend clause 13 by deleting paragraph 2(d) and renumber accordingly. The justification is the objectives are determined by the Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, clause 17; Executive director. The committee proposes to amend subclause 17(2) by adding the word ‘or any other relevant field’ after ‘technology’. Thus to redraft the clause as, “The executive director shall be a person of high moral character and proven integrity with the relevant qualifications and experience in immigration management, public administration, law, information and communication technology or any other relevant field.”

The justification is to widen the scope of the qualifications in order to attract capable people as well as to give opportunity to emerging relevant qualifications. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 be amended -

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I have an amendment on clause 17. I propose that sub clause 2 be amended by deleting the words “in migration management, public administration, law, information and communication technology or any other relevant field” and adding the word “professional” between the words “relevant” and “qualification”. 

The justification is to widen the scope of qualifications for who qualifies to be an executive director. I thank you.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, the amendment of the minister would cater for what the chairperson has said and this would mean that the chairperson’s amendment would automatically drop. Therefore, the chairperson has to move and withdraw the committee’s amendment and we go with the minister’s because it caters for the chairperson’s amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think in addition to all those enumerated, the chairperson was adding other fields but now the minister says ‘relevant professional’. 

MS AMONGI: The minister has also deleted all the others. If you look at the amendment of the minister, he is deleting all the specific qualifications. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So you can be a surveyor, an engineer, a teacher – that is what the minister is saying.

MS AMONGI: Exactly. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the minister’s proposed amendment because it is widening – actually, I was surprised that the chairperson put a justification that it is widening. By naming those qualifications, you are actually limiting. The minister’s proposal is more widening. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 17 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
Clause 17, as amended

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 17, as amended, do stand part of the Bill -

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at Clause 10, which has a relationship with the area that we are handling.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The one we have passed?

MR NZOGHU: Yes, when you look at Clause 17(c) and Clause 10(c) where we are saying that disqualification from appointment is to the effect that one has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to a term of imprisonment for six months or more without the option of a fine by a competent court in Uganda or elsewhere. Clause 17(c) says that the executive director shall cease to hold office where he or she is convicted of a crime professed in Uganda or elsewhere in respect to which the maximum penalty is six months imprisonment without the option of a fine.

Madam Chairperson, the issue that I am raising here is if we are to consider Clause 10(a) regarding a person who is disqualified from appointment and has been convicted of an offence under this Act or of an offence involving dishonesty or fraud by a competent court in Uganda or elsewhere, isn’t there a contradiction between Clauses 10(a) and (c) and 17(c)? We need to harmonise that and move very well.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the contradiction? Is it about the sentence?

MR NZOGHU: The contradiction, which I am seeing is that if someone has been convicted of an offence under the Act, even though he has the option of a fine, does that negate the fact that he actually committed a crime?

MR OKUPA: I just want to seek clarification from hon. Nzoghu. You are referring to Clause 10, which talks about the board members and we are talking about Clause 17 concerning the executive director. Are these two related? I think that they are not related. Maybe what we would like to know from the chairperson or the minister is, what would be the reasons for the removal of the executive director? That is maybe what you would be asking because Clause 10 is mainly talking about the board members.

MR NZOGHU: I am raising this because whether you are on the Board or in management, it is all about appointment.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: The executive director is working there on a day to day basis and his terms and conditions are different but he is also a board member in the other capacity.

MR NZOGHU: That is it that the executive director is part of the Board and that is what we highlighted here. We therefore have to harmonise all these.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR NZOGHU: I propose that even though someone has been given an option of a fine, it is still a crime and, therefore, we should proceed to the effect that once one has been convicted, that is all and that person does not qualify for appointment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: In case you are convicted and cautioned, what happens? If they caution you and say, ‘You go for two days’, what happens? 

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 17 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 18; functions of the executive director. The committee proposes to amend the clause by: 

(1) Inserting a new sub clause (4) after Clause (3) and to renumber accordingly so that the new paragraph reads as follows: “The executive director shall be a secretary to the Board with the following responsibilities:

    (a) Arrange the business for meetings of the Board;
    (b) Taking minutes of the meetings of the Board.”

Madam Chairperson, allow me to make a note here that this has been overtaken by the previous debate and as chairperson of the committee, I want to concede to what transpired because what we were proposing here was merging the two offices of the executive director and the secretary to the Board. 

However, debate has already prevailed and what we thought has already been overtaken by events. I would like to propose that we stick to the original draft in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 18 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 19; secretary to the Board. Madam Chairperson, we had an amendment but it is covered by what I have just submitted; that we leave the secretary to the Board as it is in the original Bill.  

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 19 (3) states that in the performance of his or her functions, the secretary is answerable to the executive director. From the previous arguments where they were empowering the secretary, I thought that this time round, the secretary would be answerable to the Board.

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, I rise on the same point. I feel that it would not be right to have a board secretary who takes the details of the Board meetings and so on, to be answerable to the executive director who is an ex-officio member on the Board. I want to support the proposal by hon. Ruhunda that indeed the secretary should be answerable to the Board and not the executive director. I thank you.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I propose to amend Clause 19(2) by re-arranging the drafting. I have a fundamental problem with the drafting and I thought we would propose better legislative drafting to read as follows: “The secretary to the Board shall perform such functions as the Board may direct and, in addition, shall be responsible for: 
(a)	Arranging the business at the meetings of the Board.
(b)	Taking the minutes of the meeting of the Board.
(c)	Keeping the records of the decisions and other policy records of the Board.” I thought that would be better construction.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is okay as it is now in the Bill. This is because if you say the secretary is answerable to the Board, it means you are creating two people with parallel powers and that is very dangerous for an organisation. The only way the secretary is answerable to the Board is regarding recording minutes and keeping them. However regarding day to day operations, for example -(Interruption)

MR AYENA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to humbly inform the member holding the Floor that there is a provision under Clause 17 “staff of the authority” which stipulates that the secretary to the Board is also a member of staff. He is part of the management staff so how can he, at the same time, report to the Board? If we must ask the secretary to the Board to report on anything, we should restrict him in terms of reporting only on matters relating to the functions of the Board and not on everything.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Exactly. If he is going to be the secretary then most likely they will be lawyers who will be the ones to represent the organisation in court. When he comes from court, who does he tell what has taken place? Sometimes he may be one of the signatories to the accounts. If he is going to sign, whom does he account to for his or her signature?

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, unless we are saying that for purposes of the minutes to the Board and for the day to day management of the organisation, it should be the executive director but that does not look very neat. I think it is okay as it is now. The secretary to the Board shall be answerable to the executive director for his day to day operations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should avoid a situation where we have different centres reporting to the Board as they will all feel big; the secretary goes to the Board without the executive director knowing and then they clash there. I think we should avoid that.

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with you that the accounting officer of the institution is the executive director. I am also talking to you with the experience of having been a company secretary and also a managing director in some institutions. It is very dangerous to have two power centres in an organisation as it will create conflict and will be unattainable. 

Besides, I also wanted to support hon. Odoi’s proposal that we widen because the functions listed here in the Bill are just a few of those that may be delegated to him by the Board. So I would like to second the hon. Odoi’s proposal.

MR KAFUDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. It is really confusing because if you go back to Clause 19(1), it states that there shall be a secretary to the Board who shall be appointed by the Board on terms and conditions specified in instruments of the appointment. 

If you go back to Clause 19(2)(d), the secretary to the Board shall be responsible for performing any other functions assigned by the Board. It means that if the secretary is appointed by the Board then he is supposed to be answerable to the Board and not to the executive director. That is why I was agreeing with the amendments of hon. Ruhunda that the secretary to the Board must report or must be answerable to the Board not to the executive director.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, personally I got a chance to be part of the investigation of NSSF and I got to learn the confusion that was therein. When you look at the corporation secretary and the roles of this secretary vis-à-vis the executive director, these are two powerful individuals within the same institution but having direct dealings with the Board. 

If you look at the terms, which are clearly specified here, technically you cannot find a link with the executive director. Everything that is being assigned from these roles has to do with the Board and the secretary to the Board. So where do you now bring in the executive director? I think this is something where we need clarity otherwise we are creating -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, that is why right from the beginning we had proposed that the executive director be the secretary to the Board. If that is being rejected then we have to agree that we are going to have a corporation secretary who is answerable to the Board with these roles. We need clarity on this matter.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. First of all, I do support the idea that the secretary should report to the executive director for reasons given by my colleagues before. However, the previous speaker has got a point. When you look at the functions being given to the secretary under Clause 19, they are all Board related. There is not a single management function being given by the law. 

Ordinarily, and those who have been company secretaries know it, the office of the company secretary has other management roles, for example, principal legal advisor. They are all given so we need to look closely at Clause 19 and provide for the major management functions by the secretary – (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, hon. Katuntu and I agree with you. However, don’t you think that the provision in (d) of performing any other functions assigned by the Board is enough? This is because it is not possible to enlist all the functions. You know that the structure of secretary differs from institution to institution. Don’t you think it is more flexible and easier that we leave it flexible under (d); allowing the Board to assign any other functions they think are suitable for the secretary in future?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the secretary is working everyday with the executive director so why should it be the Board to assign him work directly while bypassing the executive director? I think there is a problem there.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the point I am trying to make is that we could cure that by looking at 19(2)(d), which states , “… performing any other functions assigned by the Board or executive director.” At the end of the day, there is one supervisor of the authority and that is the executive director. He can assign -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, why don’t you consider saying, “… performing any other functions assigned by the executive director” so that the other three remain with the Board and others remain with the executive director?

MR KATUNTU: I concede.

MR MATIYA KASAIJA: Madam Chairperson, we must be very clear on these two offices. Are we trying to put them on the same level or will one be higher? The executive director is higher than the secretary. Therefore, if that is what we agree, the secretary should take orders from the executive director if we want the institution to move smoothly. However, if both have to seek orders from the Board then I want to tell you that there will be confusion. I beg to submit.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I think we should draw from practical experience and what is going on right now. In the corporate world, we have the executive director, a corporation secretary and the Board. All staff including corporation secretaries are appointed by the Board and that is a fact. The corporation secretary is the one who sits in all the Board meetings, writes all the minutes and submits them to the Board. He or she also advises the Board on legal matters. That is the function of the corporation secretary or the company secretary.

However, the executive director carries a much bigger weight. He carries the management load. He is the one responsible for implementation of the policy. He is the one who must understand the policies of the Board, implement them and reports back. Therefore, this corporation secretary can also be delegated operational work by the executive director. By virtue of being corporation secretary and in most cases they are lawyers, he also has a team of lawyers that help him to do a lot of legal work within the company. 

Therefore, he is not just dealing with writing minutes and reporting back. He has other administrative work related to legal matters in as far as the company is concerned. That is what I know happens practically. 

However, if there are other methods of running companies, I do not know but the little that I know practically and from my experience is that, that is how - You know I have been Chairperson of Uganda Development Bank. In fact, it was the husband of the Minister of Finance who was the corporation secretary of the bank. He was a very powerful man but he had specific work to do. However over and above that, we had the managing director.

Therefore, as far as I am concerned, there is no conflict at all. The roles are very clearly defined and I am wondering why people are saying the same person can do the work. You cannot expect the managing director, who is already a director and custodian of the management and operational work, to also sit on the Board and instead of reporting on Board and policy matters, he is also writing minutes. It does not make sense. 

I think we need to be very clear on this matter, Madam Chairperson and I beg that the matter be put to rest. We have the managing director and the secretary to the Board with well-defined roles. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we need to agree on the language. Let us have proposals.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the reporting mechanism of any institution is normally guided by the roles and functions of the different positions. The Clerk to Parliament reports to you as a Speaker because the function of a Speaker is to oversee the entire institution. Therefore, there is something lacking in Clause 19 and I propose that for us to connect the secretary with the executive, we can propose another function of say, being a ‘principal legal adviser to the authority’. That puts the secretary under the executive director. That is my proposal.  

Madam Chairperson, if we leave it the way it is, we are talking about the minutes of the Board. There is nothing to do with the authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why don’t we stand over it and we have a formulation? Who has a formulation?

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for shedding light on this and I would like to agree with hon. Bahati that we should have (d), which says that the secretary shall be principal legal adviser.

Consequently under (d), which now becomes (e), we could put, “Performing any other functions assigned by the Board and the executive director.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Remove ‘the Board’ and it should be ‘by the executive director’.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, this is the secretary to the Board who is appointed by the Board. Therefore, the Board will give him duties directly but he will also get duties from the executive director. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I want to give is that, a few minutes ago, we passed that the Board will have committees and the committees will be undertaking functions on behalf of the Board. That is why I want to agree with hon. Kamateeka that “In performing of the duties defined by the Board under the executive director.” 

Supposing in the board meeting, the Board decides that the Secretary to the Board is wanted to carry out an investigation in a particular area, and that is the Board directive. The moment you leave it to the executive director, he will say that “Among my functions, I have only to do this and that”. Therefore, to avoid any problems, we should include both the Board and the executive director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, are you saying that the Board can say that UEB handle this work, then the secretary should handle this work and we both work? Is that what you are suggesting? I think it is chaotic.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think we need to learn from the previous lessons. When you look at Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the position of the Lord Mayor, and the Executive Director, you realise that there were some confusion and it has continued to exist. That is why you see that KCCA is not stable.

Madam Chair, I am of the view that to avoid all these kinds of confusion, we can have the executive director have equal qualifications with the secretary. Then we would have the executive director also performing the functions of the secretary. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Really, honourable member, you want to make life hard for this executive director! 

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Chairperson, I propose to avoid conflict of roles, we delete “(d)” because the executive director is the accounting officer for the organisation. He even accounts for the Board. Any instructions should come through the Board to the executive director. Then to the corporation secretary, who is the Secretary to the Board, who takes instructions from the executive director. The executive director then reports to the Board. If that is done, then we only need to delete “(d)” and leave the rest. 

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Chair. If we took another look at 18 and 19, my understanding is 18 is about the executive director like a manager - then he is looking at things like the policy passed by the Board, the fund, the staff, and how to organise them. It is generally looking at the complete management. That is if you look at clause 18 up to sub-clause (3).

When you come to 19, in my view without any assumption is about organising meetings; this is the business of the day. You talk and I am going to record whatever you are saying. I will then keep the record. This becomes very clear from 19 (2) (a), (b) to (c). If we leave the status-quo as that without first taking a second glance at 19 (d), then we will be left with only one option, this gentleman, called the Secretary to the Board is answerable to the Board. His roles are very clearly spelt out. When we include (d) any other function-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before you go far, is this secretary the Secretary to the Board or secretary to the authority? 

MR ANYWARACH: He is Secretary to the Board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, what about the -

MR ANYWARACH: That is what the title says; 19 says: “Secretary to the Board.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, he is only for the Board, and has nothing to do with the authority?

MR ANYWARACH: As he is now Secretary to the Board, let us look at what is a Board. By definition, of this law, the Board also on its membership includes the executive director.

My understanding is when this Secretary to the Board is reporting to the Board, even the executive director is seated there and is listening. He is reporting on matters of records, meetings, and minutes. They are (a), (b), (c), and (d). 

If you are assigning any other duty to the Secretary to the Board, then even the executive director is present.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want to know from the minister whether your intention was to create a Secretary only for the Board, who has nothing to do with the authority. Is he there for meetings only?  

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. From the previous discussions, the spirit in which the Secretary to the Board is created is to support the executive director. If the spirit was to have a Secretary to the Board, then we would also have the Secretary to the Board lined up in 9 (b) When we were considering the members of the Board, the secretary is not mentioned, but the executive director is mentioned. That means that this secretary is meant to give supportive role to the executive director in line with the Board duties. 

That is why when these board duties have been clearly outlined in 19, they go ahead and say that the functions of this secretary will be answerable to the executive director. This actually means that this person is not supposed to go beyond the executive director’s jurisdiction. He is only a technical person who is assisting the executive director for the functioning of the technical roles, and in line with the Board duties.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, when there are no meetings, what does this person do? Do you employ somebody to sit four times in a year? I want to understand the rationale here.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. In Clause 19 (2) (a), (b), and (c), they spell out the traditional roles of a secretary in respect of the board. These are functions that are usually performed by secretary to the support services he renders to the board.

(g) Recognises that he is also a manager and that is why we agreed with the amendment that in performing his duties, he shall also be assigned duties by the Board and executive director. That assignment assumes the manager’s responsibility to be assigned by that person. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to propose that we stand over this matter, and we understand what it is that we are appointing. Is it someone for the minutes or a secretary to the authority?

MR BABA: Madam Chair, you asked what other role this secretary will be performing. Of course he will be taking the minutes, keeping the records of board meetings and so forth. There will also be other administrative pieces of work within the board, assigned by the executive director, which the secretary will be performing outside the meetings of the Board.

This is common in many of the authorities that have been established. The secretary will be assigned other administrative jobs. I, therefore, agree with those who propose that this secretary should be answerable to the executive director. I think that will solve the problem.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, what the minister is talking about is in item (3), it says: “In the performance of his or her functions, the secretary is answerable to the executive director.” What are we looking for? For all this management work and the legal matters among others, whether male or female, will report to the executive director; I have already explained this.
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know what their appointment is going to say; this person might say that he/she is secretary to the board that his/her work is to the Board, and nobody else. When there are no meetings, he/she will go and have a holiday.

Honourable members, I would like to propose that we stand over this particular issue. We then have the minister and chairperson formulate what they really intended to say. Let us have a formulation. 

MR AYENA: Madam Chairperson, I think this House is blessed with people who have practical experience; this kind of dichotomy or the function of the board, of the secretary vis-à-vis the board and management. The biggest problem is that when we leave it like this, the function of the secretary is hanging and we do not know whether it is listed under staff of the authority or part of the management. 

I therefore propose as a cure, we should say: “There should be a secretary to the board, who shall be a member of staff, and shall be appointed by the board”. By that, you will have made the secretary part of the staff and therefore part of management.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I do not know why we have taken so long on this matter. In this House, we have people who have been board secretaries before. We have members who have been executive directors before. I possibly would like us – even when you bring it back to Parliament, the Parliamentary Commission, how do we operate? I think that there was a mistake made by the person who printed or proposed that the secretary will be reporting to the Board. In most cases, the executive director is also secretary to the board, or a member of the top management is appointed to assist the executive director in taking minutes.

We would not be wasting time here. I read from here that one of the officers in the management, who will be appointed to help the executive director and will be reporting through the executive director, then to the board, and then move on just as hon. Baba had proposed here. It was just a mistake here. We have a vast experience in this House.

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, for me the question I would like to be asked or to have answered, is why we are establishing the board. This is a creation by an Act, it is a legal creation and, therefore, if we are doing this, we needed to define its functions. If we leave it like this, the function of this person would be only to support the Board. There will therefore be no duty that this person will be doing for the entire year.

Therefore, if we are to stand over this issue, I propose that the ministers think seriously about two issues:  If we are to maintain this, there should be other functions that are defined by the statute, and should be included here. The other alternative could be that the office is not necessary as these duties could as well be assigned to any other staff - to provide the secretarial services to the Board.

This confusion we are having is the fear of the potential conflict that could arise by establishing equally powerful centres. I therefore think, the way it stands now, we would have no problem if there was a clear chain of command and authority, for these duties.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to respect the brain that drafted this Bill. I think this Bill it is very clear. We are trying to create competence, not chaos. This document is very clear, in 18 (c), the creation and control of the staff of the authority, the executive director. Then number 19 (3), in performance of these functions, the secretary is answerable to the executive director. I would like to agree that in keeping with 19(c), we could change the board to authority. I have no problem with that, if it can create more competence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is why I would like to give more time to the minister – there are so many amendments in (a), I do not know where we are -

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is not the first time we are creating an institution of this nature. This country has many statutory institutions. They all have boards, managing directors or executive secretaries, which is more or less the same thing. They all have secretaries.

For many of them, the duties of the chief executive are clearly defined, and what I would call the orthodox function of, whether you call him a board secretary or the authority secretary, they are all defined. We are not re-inventing them, honourable colleague.

First, what is missing is that there is no linkage as it is now to –(Interruption) 

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I wish to inform hon. Katuntu holding the floor, and all the other members of the House that this part (c) of the Bill, which is talking about staff of the authority, the first staff who is mentioned here, is the executive director.

The second staff who is being talked about is the secretary to the authority, but it was misspelt - Secretary to the Board. In (3) on clause 20 which says: “Other officers and staff of the authority”, if you get it in that context then we shall know that the corporation secretary is appointed to work for the executive director, who works for the authority and all of them work for the Board in the performance of their functions. I thank you.

THE CHIARPERSON: What is your formulation? You know we are just debating.

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I think we now have to go to the needs of the authority. I propose that we provide two other functions to the Board Secretary. One, shall be the principal legal officer to the Board and the other shall be principal legal officer to the authority. Then (d), which could be (e) performing any other function assigned by the executive director. Those two would link the office of the secretary to the management. Thereafter, there will not be any confusion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I wanted to know if these proposals are coming under one or at the end. Are they what you opened with or what you closed with? Don’t you think they should come under two? Then the present two becomes three?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, since the board is high and the functions are higher, they should come first, then the management functions should follow.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 19 –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I have liked what hon. Katirima has brought. He says the executive director is a staff of the authority. In 20, they say: “Other officers and staff of the authority”. Will it do harm, if we said: “Secretary to the authority?”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, for me that would solve everything.

MR ODOI: Madam Chairperson, you do note that the Bill does not provide for the qualification of the secretary. Therefore, I would like to propose an insertion in clause (4) to read as follows: “The secretary to the authority shall possess the relevant professional qualifications”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we have found the solution. I put the question that Clause 19 be amended as proposed

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 21, the committee proposes that 21(2) should be redrafted as follows: “All fees charged for services rendered under this Act by the authority and civil fines and penalty expressed in monetary terms recovered by the authority under this Act, shall be credited or be due and payable to the Consolidated Fund, except that the Minister responsible for Finance may from time to time authorize the authority in writing to retain a percentage of the money recovered by the authority upon the authority submitting it’s detailed work plan and procurement plan to the Minister responsible for Finance, in order to enable the authority meet its expenditure.”

We also insert sub clause (3), “The total sum so authorized under subsection (2), shall not in any financial year exceed that appropriated by the Parliament for the authority for that year and shall be offset against the amount for appropriation.”

Justification: This is to allow the authority to retain certain sums of money to enable it meet its administrative expenses.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to seek some clarification from the chairperson of the committee. Recently, we passed the Public Finance Act. We agreed that all money should go to the Consolidated Fund.  Remember we had an issue with the Road Fund; some of us had wanted that the money go direct to the Road Fund. However since we had already passed the new Public Finance Act we could not do that. Therefore, your amendment contradicts the law Parliament has passed; all the money should go to the Consolidated Fund.

DR BITEKEYERZO: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem. In most cases, I have become suspicious of anybody who wants to formulate or form an authority. Why do I say this? As we talk, Mulago Hospital’s Cancer Institute wants to become independent and make money, retain money and get money. I would like to read this sentence - and you know the minds of the people who formulated this Bill: “All fees charged for services rendered under this article by the authority and civil fines and the penalties expressed in monetary terms and recovered by the authority under this Act shall be retained by the authority”. 

This means, when the law was being drafted, they were trying to make sure that they convince Parliament to allow them to keep the money and make money, eat money and put on weight. Surely, if Parliament is going to appropriate money to this authority, then why should they establish this money now? I would like the money to go to the Consolidated Fund. I thank you.
 
MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, I think on that suggestion, this House should not spend a lot of time because we took a decision when we were debating the Public Finance Bill. We said all money should go to Consolidated Fund. Therefore, we cannot spend time on it again. We propose that the chair of the committee rethinks and withdraws quickly so that we save time for the debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: should we delete clause (2) and withdraw the amendment?
 
MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, the amendment which the chair of the committee had proposed was correct at the beginning. However, towards the end, it was distorted. If you can re-read it, we can locate where it should stop. We would like to hear from you again. The original now is very wrong; we would like to make any amendment that all the fees go to the Consolidated Fund.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, “All fees charged from services rendered under this Act by the authority and civil fines and penalties expressed in monetary terms recovered by the authority under this Act, shall be credited or be due and payable to the Consolidated Fund and be appropriated by Parliament”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 - 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, if you look through 21(1), the first part says that all the money shall be appropriated by Parliament, which is okay. The second part is about donations. Now the third one says, “The funds of the Authority shall consist of…” - meaning the money which they are supposed to maintain shall consist the following: Revenue earned from activities of the Authority under this Act. The revenue is got, charges have to be levied and the moment you leave (c) as it is, (d) and (e), they will use this to retain the money.

The best way to deal with this is to further amend (2) to say, “All fees charged, grants, gifts, donations, civil fines and penalties and any other sources of funds collected shall be paid directly to the Consolidated Fund and appropriated by Parliament for their function”. With this they will have no leeway and say we allowed them to do so. 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chair, I want to agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. When we say, “The funds of the Authority shall consist of- (a) money appropriated by Parliament…”, that is okay. However, when we go into issues of all these other revenues, which do not go to the Consolidated Fund, you leave it hanging. These people can be tempted to use grants, gifts and donations at source. It even goes ahead to say, “…other sources made with the approval of the Minister…” It goes on to mention revenues earned from the activities of the Authority.

Madam Chair, this should only end with money appropriated by Parliament. The rest should be as it is constitutionally provided under Article 153 of the Constitution, that all monies collected go to the Consolidated Fund. That is why embassies and high commissions do not spend money earned from visas. They remit that money to the Consolidated Fund as per Article 153 of the Constitution. 

Article 154 of the Constitution spells out how you withdraw money from the Consolidated Fund and Article 156 spells out how the Appropriation Bill is dealt with, anchored in the Finance Act that we passed. Let us rephrase this and strictly deal with money approved by Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Amongi, are you proposing that we delete (b), (c), (d) and (e)?

MS AMONGI: Yes, and then we amend it to say that all those sources of funds are remitted to the Consolidated Fund. After the funds are approved by Parliament, they can then use these funds. There is a procedure for emergency funds under supplementary expenditure.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chair, that is the fundamental principle for which we have been having issues with this Bill. The certificate of financial implications was given on condition that this Authority depends on non-tax revenue to meet its expenditure, and they need Shs 190 billion annually. The Ministry of Finance, in the addendum, only committed Shs 29 billion. They state that in the medium-term, they do not have resources. That has been our bone of contention.

In light of the information now availed to this committee by the Minister of Internal Affairs, I would like clarification on how he intends to finance this entity.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like to respond to my colleague’s suggestion that an Authority should have enough money to cover all its activities. We know that this country has other areas of priority like hospitals and schools and they do not receive 100 per cent of what is needed. What applies to other authorities applies to this one as well. The money collected should go to the Consolidated Fund as non-tax revenue and then Parliament appropriates it.

I support the idea that the money that comes to the Authority as grants, gifts, fees and any other be treated as non-tax revenue and remitted to the Consolidated Fund to be appropriated by Parliament.

MR BABA: Madam Chair, furthermore, yesterday in the evening the chairperson of the Budget Committee, hon. Amos Lugoloobi, explained two issues: One, there will be provision in the budget for the new Authority if this Bill is passed.

Two, the Minister of Finance clarified in a subsequent certificate that all revenue earned by this new Authority will be remitted to the Consolidated Fund. It was explained here. I do not know why hon. Muwanga is raising this matter again when it was sorted out yesterday.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have any objection to the proposals by the Chair?

MR BABA: I have no objection at all, with the authority of my senior minister. We have no problem.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KATUNTU: Chair, we need to know what we are voting on - the specific amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The one which the Chair brought?

MR KATUNTU: But the Chair’s was on the retention of non-tax revenue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, she has abandoned them; everything has gone to the Consolidated Fund.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chair, can we then delete (b), (c), (d) and (e) so that the Chair’s proposal is anchored well. If you leave 21 (1) (b), (c), (d) and (e), wouldn’t it contradict?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Clause 21 (2) answers that.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chair, we should separate sources of funds for the Authority and management and administration of these funds. These are sources of funds for the Authority. This Authority will get money from appropriation by Parliament. The Authority will also get money from grants and fees, but the administration and management of these fees shall be at the Consolidated Fund. It is a given that when money is already in the Consolidated Fund, it is appropriated through Parliament. 

Hon. Amongi, you should not fear, this is a source; it is not management of funds. We have always done it in so many authorities.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if we stick to one, the others will have to fall out.

MS AMONGI: Madam Chair, 21 (1) (b) to (e) was drafted because of the original intention that you get that source and spend it –(Interjection)- You can argue later. Now, when you collect all these funds from all these sources and remit to the Consolidated Fund, it might not necessarily mean that the same money will come back to the Authority.

My clarification, therefore, would be: if you are saying that the funds of the Authority will consist of this and yet we are still saying, they will go to the Consolidated Fund, what then is the purpose of saying that this is the source of its funding? I will take information from hon. Nandala-Mafabi.
 
MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I would like to thank hon. Amongi for giving way. We want to cure something. The moment you say “funds”, that means they are yours. Hon. David Bahati, I would like you to listen. If you are going to raise money which should go to the Consolidated Fund, then it is not your money; your money is the one that is appropriated for you here in Parliament.

That is why to cure all this, first of all, the sources of the Authority will be the money appropriated by Parliament. The remaining funds, if you want to talk about them, should be put under sub clause (2) and we say that all fees, grants, gifts, donations, civil fines, penalties or any other resources they get during the performance when collected will be put in the Consolidated Fund.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, there is only one lacuna that we must solve; we cannot create an Authority and then tie all its hands. Now, the Authority is young and it might need grants to help it enhance its activities. Grants cannot go to the Consolidated Fund. When you get a grant, it is like help that comes so that you can enhance your services.

Madam Chair, can we differentiate between revenue received from fees and then money appropriated for spending by this Authority, money that includes appropriation and grants? When the Authority is able to charge fees –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chair. The honourable member on the Floor, hon. Kasule, happens to be the chairperson of the finance committee. You can even see the spirit in which the drafting was done here – “grants, gifts or donations from Government”. That is what they are saying. 

Now, in this spirit, as chairperson of the finance committee, how would Government give a grant and gift to itself? That is why we are saying that these other paragraphs, (b), (c), (d) and (e), remain redundant for as long as the proposal moved by hon. Amongi is adopted by this House. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House that the Authority, which is an organ of Government, will receive a grant from Government as a donation?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing Government decides to give a gift of a building to the Authority, how will you stop it?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, I think what we are trying to do is to go to the orthodox - Government operates through appropriation of funds. To imagine that we are going to legislate here that the Government of the Republic of Uganda will be giving out money as gifts to other government institutions and yet in the budget, we never provide for gifts, I think will be very irregular. There should be no circumstances, whatsoever, where Government of Uganda will be giving a gift to a government institution. That cannot happen. 

Therefore, to go back to the point, we are all agreeing that the money goes to the Consolidated Fund. Thereafter, money appropriated by Parliament for that purpose should constitute the fund of the Authority and we proceed.

MR MUSASIZI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have listened a lot to this debate and I am in agreement with the proposal that all revenue sources collected by the Authority must go to the Consolidated Fund. However, like hon. Bahati submitted, if you are talking about funds of the Authority, the different sources of funds must be separated and must be clearly identified and brought out in the drafting. I, therefore, would like to say that I do not agree with the idea of lumping all the revenues collected into one paragraph.

Two, for clarity purposes, we need to separate grants, gifts, donations, fees and other revenues from what sub clause (2) is trying to bring out. Therefore, Madam Chair, I would like to propose that we retain (b) and (c) as they are and we also take the idea of hon. Nandala-Mafabi as it is. I propose.

GEN. ARONDA: Madam Chair, we have looked at the formulation. I think the principle should be maintained; institutions of Government which generate NTR should submit it to the Consolidated Fund and then subsequently, appropriation is done by Parliament. 

Hon. Kasule also has a point; when that institution gets to that point when things get tight, then it will come back to Cabinet or Parliament and subsequent decisions will be taken. Let us move that the NTR goes to the Consolidated Fund and then appropriation will be by Parliament and then we move on.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, do you agree that we have to delete (b), (c) and (d)? What do we do with them?

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Clause 21, as amended, is about the funds of the Authority, and that is basically sub clause (1)(a). I propose that we introduce a new clause so that (b), (c), (d) and (e) are different clauses but also guide that the money should go to the Consolidated Fund. Otherwise, if we leave it under “funds of the Authority”, it will - This is a proposed consequential amendment.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think it is important that we understand the purpose of this clause. The purpose of this clause is to show where the Authority will get funds from. It is important that in the law, we provide those areas where the Authority will get funds from.

We have gone ahead in sub clause (2) to restrict that when you get these funds from these sources, do not spend at source but take it to the Consolidated Fund. I do not know how much we can explain to hon. Betty Amongi to separate the two. 

Madam Chairperson, in all authorities that we have created in this House, we have shown the sources of funds. It is very important that if this Authority is going to charge fees, it is within the law that they are allowed to charge fees.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, supposing we change the marginal note to say, “Funding of the Authority”, would that help?

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, my problem is not failure to understand the sources of funds; I am very clear that the source of funding is money appropriated from Parliament. It is like appropriating for a High Commission based in Britain; it is appropriation by Parliament but those people still collect non-tax revenue. They will collect money from visas and remit it to the Consolidated Fund. 

Madam Chairperson, first, the Minister has conceded and I think that is important. Secondly, the chairperson’s amendment is trying to cure most of the issues. While you are saying sources of funds can be grants, gifts, revenue earned from activities of the Authority, you put it under sub clause (2) that fees charged, revenue and all funds received by the Authority are sent to the Consolidated Fund.

I have no problem with that provision where the chairperson is articulating that grants, revenue, fees or fines that have been sourced or got by the Authority are remitted to the Consolidated Fund. Those are still funds that the Authority has perhaps sourced, but the principle is that they are remitted to the Consolidated Fund. The argument about sources of the funds, if we leave it as funds of the Authority, would mean they can still spend those funds from source and that is my problem. It will contradict the Act that we have just passed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I want to hear something on the marginal note.

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Instead of saying, “Funds of the Authority”, which we should reserve for sub clause (1) (a), we can also say, “Funds by the Authority”; those are the other sources.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. We need to understand each other here. The certificate of financial implications was showing the source for the funds of the Authority. When you say that we take all these funds to the Consolidated Fund, it means when the Authority makes its budget, it must show the source of money. If they are expecting any donations as budget support, irrespective of receiving it from any other source, it must form part of their budget as budget support from any other source. 

This means that the amendment as proposed by the chairperson - Hon. Bahati, you do not need to worry about what had been proposed by hon. Katuntu. Under any circumstances, when money goes to the Consolidated Fund, even if you are going to receive a donation, if it is budget support, then it must show that this is budget support. So, it must be captured under the budget. What we shall not appropriate is the project support, which is outside the budget. 

We are all saying the same thing but at the end of it all, once money is collected, if they want their money to be earmarked for them, then they will have authority from the Secretary to the Treasury to change the money as appropriation in aid for purposes of meeting their objectives. I see no contradiction. We are all saying the same thing, only that we may be appreciating it at a faster rate.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with hon. Bahati and to some extent with hon. Paul Mwiru. The wording here could be having a problem but the principle is clear. Basic legislative drafting principles, even for a small community based organisation, indicate the sources of funding. To get to know basic drafting, whether it is for an association in Bukholi South or West Budama South, you have to indicate where you expect to get the funds, not necessarily that you will be getting from them.

For anybody to suggest, like hon. Paul Mwiru said, that you have it in the budget - You cannot be talking about donations in the budget unless you have received them. Donations are things you anticipate. In the sources of funding here, which we call funds of the Authority, you cannot necessarily envisage how much you are going to get from donations but if you know the clear sources of donations, you can indicate them. I agree with you on that –(Interruption) 

MR RUHUNDA: Hon. Oboth and I are good friends. Madam Chairperson, as hon. Oboth has rightly observed, I have always looked at it from the angle of perception and the mind-set that we create when we are making these laws. For the long term, if we want to liberate this country from donors and begging, then we have within our laws to desist from inclusion of these issues of donations and gifts. It makes our purpose look terrible and awful. 

I want to give hon. Oboth this information. It is high time we liberate ourselves and concentrate on what is within our capacity.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I thought I was going to get a -(Laughter)- but that is from my friend and I will take it. 

Madam Chairperson, I am glad you are a very senior lawyer. In legislation, you legislate with the mind open and not according to the circumstances. Are we going to legislate because we now know we have oil so we close out other possible sources? Of course, the answer is no. If we can be open enough, we would even be broad enough to accommodate the wording here. 

I believe that the minister would have no problem if some wordings could be changed. As I speak, hon. Fox Odoi wants to propose and I will let him propose since he is my uncle, so that we can move forward and we harmonise this position. I think, Members, there is consensus. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let hon. Odoi-Oywelowo propose.

MR ODOI: For the record, I cannot propose to a man. Let me start with the headnote. We could amend the headnote to read as follows, “Funds and sources of revenue of the Authority”. If you read the whole clause, it has two components: funds voted by Parliament for the proper functioning of the Authority and non-tax revenue, which should be collected by the Authority and remitted to the Consolidated Fund. So, if we introduce only the phrase “earned sources of revenue of the Authority”, I think it would take care of that.

That said, it would be fatal if we deleted (b), (c), (d) and (e). The cardinal principle in our Constitution is that you cannot tax a person without the authority of Parliament. So if we do not give authority to this Authority to raise funds, fees, which is in itself a tax, to raise any other revenue that is indicated here, we shall have tied their hands. They need this enabling law to raise non-tax revenue for our Consolidated Fund. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister have an objection to the change of the marginal note there?

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, it would then be prudent, if that is the case, that the amendment of the chairperson states that all non-tax revenue be remitted. This is because the specification that is in her amendment does not include (e), for example, which says that, “any other funds received by…” 

It is only referring to fees charged, services rendered, civil fines and penalties and yet when you look at (b), it deals with grants, gifts and donations or other sources made with the approval of the minister and the minister responsible for finance. Paragraph (c) refers to revenue and activities of the Authority; (d) refers to fees charged, civil fines and penalties; and (e) refers to any other funds. 

Therefore, it would be proper to say that all non-tax revenue raised by the Authority shall be remitted to the Consolidate Fund. If the sources of funds of the Authority are stipulated, then all those NTRs would then be remitted to the Consolidated Fund. It would be an amendment so that instead of enumerating under sub clause (2), the chairperson’s amendment can only say, “All non-tax revenue raised by the Authority shall be remitted to the Consolidated Fund.” 

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So are fees interchangeable with non-tax revenue?

MS NAMUGWANYA: The fees collected are part of the NTR for the Authority.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be further amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Alaso, is that what you wanted? Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21, as amended, do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23 

MR ANYWARACH: Clause 23 says, “The Board shall open and maintain such bank accounts…” Oh, Madam Chair, I thought we were on clause 24. My point is on 24. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since you have agreed that all the money collected shall be remitted to the Consolidated Fund, whenever they are opening an account they should have the authority of the Accountant-General. So, under sub clause (1) after the word “Authority”, it should read, “with the authority of the Accountant-General.” 

The justification is that all government accounts that collect government revenue are opened with the authority of the Accountant-General.

MRS BBUMBA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. My concern is on clause 23 (3) which requires an Executive Director to ensure that no money is withdrawn or paid out of the Authority’s bank account without the authority of the board. Ordinarily, under prudent financial management, such organisations would have financial regulations that govern such operations. This is already referred to under clause 22, which was already passed. 

Madam Chairperson, if the withdrawal of money from the bank account on a routine basis is going to be subjected to board approval, then I think that it is going to be very cumbersome. Under normal financial regulations, there would be approvals of the budget and if you are implementing the budget and you already have the overall approval, I do not see why you would be required, for every cheque issued, to go back to the board for approval.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to delete clause 23 (3)?

MRS BBUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I feel like deleting clause 23 but the formulation would emphasise what is stated in clause 22, which would require the Executive Director to strictly adhere to prudent financial management.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have further amendments on clause 23. Hon. Syda Bbumba has a point because the moment you approve the budget, you are given the authority to spend. By the way, there is clause 8 that I may ask members to recommit because it says, “The Minister may give directions in writing to the Authority with respect to the policy to be observed and implemented by the Authority, and the Authority shall comply with those directions.” 

This is a dangerous one; supposing he directs that they observe a policy that will have huge financial implications to the organisation and the board says that you must comply, if you do not, you will have a problem. It could even be going outside a budget activity. In fact, the minister, according to clause 8, is bigger than the Authority. We made a big mistake in passing clause 8. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we need to address the point raised by hon. Bbumba. If the board’s resolution is required for every withdrawal, how will they run? When does the board sit?

MR BAHATI: I am moved by hon. Syda Bbumba’s argument that we delete clause 23 (3). This is because it will be extremely difficult because the board meets about four times a year. You are not going to continue calling a board to approve imprest of Shs 1 million, money for buying a cartridge of Shs 200,000; you cannot really do that. It will be too much. 

Since there are also rules and regulations governing the financial management of this Authority, then clause 23 (3) can be deleted. I beg to move.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, the proposal by hon. Syda Bbumba does not necessarily require us to delete clause 23 (3). What it requires us to do is to insert the words, “sound financial principles”. Therefore, I propose that it should read, “The Executive Director shall ensure that no money is withdrawn from or paid out of any of the Authority’s bank accounts in line or having due regard to sound financial principles.” 

MR BAHATI: I would like to really advise; we have now recruited an Executive Director with proper qualifications and with experience and all that. They know these things by the time we recruit them. So to maintain it in the law I think would be just unnecessarily widening the scope of this Act.

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the deletion of 23 (3). However, when I look at 23 (2), it says, “The Executive Director shall ensure that all money received by or on behalf of the Authority is banked as soon as practicable after being received.” This is a day-to-day operation of the Authority and normally, this responsibility is vested in the cashier. I have a feeling -(Interjections)- Yes, the accounting officer is in charge of the overall financial management of the Authority, but the day-to-day operations are done by other officers. (Interjections)  I am on the Floor; you will have your chance to submit. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not see why we should put this in the law because this shall be clearly spelt out in the financial regulations and in the manuals. We do not need to have this here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But how does the Executive Director carry out his supervisory role in that area? 

MR MUSASIZI: Madam Chairperson, the manuals that shall be put in place shall clearly specify the roles and different functions of officers in this institution. Therefore, the Executive Director, in playing his supervisory role, is supposed to check on the performance of these officers vis-à-vis the clearly laid down procedures.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you suggesting that we delete (2) and (3) and retain only (1) as amended?

MR MUSASIZI: That is my proposal, Madam Chairperson.

MR YAGUMA: I agree that we delete clause (3) but to keep the board in the know, it should be the responsibility of the Executive Director to present a financial report to the board when they are meeting so that they are informed. Otherwise, the Executive Director may decide to do anything with the money and the board will claim ignorance.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Chairperson, I refer to hon. Musasizi’s concern about deleting 23 (2), that it is too much for the Executive Director to be involved in the day-to-day running of the Authority. In clause 18 (1), we said that the Executive Director is responsible for the day-to-day operations and administration of the Authority. So, there is no way you can separate him from the day-to-day running of the Authority. 

Also, we have already passed it and we cannot run away from it. This is a core responsibility of ensuring that the funds are appropriately and effectively used. I think 23 (2) should still stand for emphasis of the security and key operations of the Authority. Thank you.

MS SANTA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I support the proposal by hon. Henry Musasizi because when you look at clause 18 (b), the functions of the Executive Director include the proper management of the funds and property of the Authority. This is well catered for in 18 (b). Even when you look at clause 22, it still mentions the same. So, I see no reason why we should again come down here at 23 (3) and talk about daily business of ensuring that money is withdrawn and paid out with the consent of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What are you saying?

MS SANTA: I suggest that 23 (3) be deleted.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, clause 23 has a heading: “Power to open and operate bank accounts.” Bank accounts in essence must be opened and operated, and in operation there are only two things involved, either you are depositing or withdrawing. 

I would like to enter into the mind of the framers of this very clause 23. What they are trying to say here is that there will be a bank account opened for the Authority and, therefore, they are spelling out who will be responsible. In matters of depositing, there will be depositing of money on that account. We are giving powers because that account must be run, and then there must be withdrawing.

We are now moving to the next step and saying ok, under clause 23 (1) this account is opened and under clause 23 (2), if money is being deposited, who is going to be responsible? It will be the Executive Director. Are we attaching his act of depositing to another condition? -

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we are going into unnecessary details. I do not know whether you can just open an account, put money there and admire it.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, the Member holding the Floor is confusing two things

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, in conclusion, what I am trying to bring out is that we cannot purport to delete the duty of the Executive Director in depositing the money on the account and his duty to withdraw -(Interruption)

MR SSEBUNYA: May I give you information, please. The contention and why hon. Syda Bbumba suggested that we delete (3) was that the board is a policy organ. The operationalization of accounts is such a small thing for the board to sit every day to allow Shs 100 to be removed. We have all agreed on that one. 

In sub clause (2), somebody is saying the Executive Director should ensure that money is received and banked. That is also operational and it comes in the manual. Somebody also pointed out somewhere that the Authority should keep sound financial principles; that is enough. Let us leave the details in the regulations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, why don’t we go by hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s amendment and delete sub-clauses (2) and (3) so that we just improve on (1)? 

MR KATOTO: Madam Chair, the Executive Director is too big to do the daily banking and the like; so we should save him from that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 be amended, first, by deleting sub clauses (2) and (3).

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 (1) be amended as proposed by hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” and passed clauses 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.45
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we have done a bit of work again. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 19 February 2015 at 2.00 pm.) 
