

Thursday, 14 February 2019

Parliament met at 3.15 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting to pay tribute to the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Kikunhi Bamwoze, Bishop Emeritus of the Church of Uganda and in particular, the first Bishop of Busoga Diocese. In so doing, I would like to make a few observations about the man who will shortly be brought into this House.

Bishop Bamwoze was of modest size and height but a giant in all respects - intellect, personal relations with his flock and people, capacity to work and outlook to life. He was very highly educated and ahead of his times. Whereas many of the clergy in the Church of Uganda were of humble education, as far back as 1971 the Late Bishop Bamwoze had gone through the gates of Makerere University. As you recall, in the 1970s, only about 100 students would be admitted to Makerere University. Therefore, he was one of the chosen few to acquire that high education. 

He was grounded in theology and philosophy and had a great command of the English language, which he spoke with great eloquence, humour and wit. He was a foresighted man of God and as a church leader, he fought very hard to fight poverty, disease and ignorance through a multisectoral socioeconomic programme established way back in 1979. It is this approach which the World Bank and development partners have lately adopted as a blueprint for socioeconomic development in developing countries.

He was a transformative and visionary leader. He pioneered the rural leadership centre commonly known as Busoga Institute of Rural Development at Naminage in Kamuli. At this centre, he sought to groom citizens as change agents who would, after acquiring knowledge and skills, spearhead transformation of their societies. The centre offered courses in project planning and management, monitoring and evaluation, as well as resource mobilization. 

He mobilized massively from friends and organizations to renovate and establish many schools in the Busoga region. Together with the elders, he also established Busoga University.

Under his family livelihood education projects, he established many health centres in the Busoga region and beyond. Indeed, at one stage, on the shores of Lake Kyoga, children were dying massively of measles and he intervened; he sent in doctors and the children were subsequently immunized. Because of that, the citizens named a new school after him, the Bishop Bamwoze Secondary School, in Kagumba.

He was from Busoga and an Anglican, but he believed in working with people of all races, creed, faith and gender for peace, harmony and development. Together with our late Bishop Willigers of Jinja Catholic Diocese, he spearheaded the translation of the New Testament and the Bible into the Lusoga Language.

He also did massive work on issues of water. Even today, the Busoga Trust is operating in many parts of Uganda including in Luweero. Many people are in pain because of the memories and his loss, but we know that he was a good teacher, counsellor, mentor, parent, shepherd who always guided his flock. We wish him peaceful rest.

Honourable members, today there are two unusual things that will happen. First, in accordance with his wishes, there will be no laying of wreaths on his casket. Secondly, on this occasion, His Excellency the President has chosen to come and pay tribute in this House. That is why later today, I will be proceeding under Article 101 to permit the President to come and speak to this House during this special sitting. Thank you very much.
 
(Entrance of the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Kikunhi Bamwoze, Bishop Emeritus)

National Anthem

East African Anthem

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today is free sitting, so you can seat anywhere in the House. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE RIGHT REVEREND CYPRIAN KIKUNHI BAMWOZE, BISHOP EMERITUS OF THE CHURCH OF UGANDA, BUSOGA DIOCESE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before I invite the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to read the motion, we have a tribute message from the Secretary General of the National Resistance Movement (NRM). I will just read one paragraph: “His track record of human development was unrivalled at his time. The Busoga wide development model of multisectoral development was the envy of many religious agencies. His leadership brought water, health and education to many of the remotest rural communities in Busoga.”

I also have a message from the Government Chief Whip. I will just read a small paragraph: “Right Reverend Bamwoze has left the Anglican Church, the people of Busoga and all Ugandans at large with lots of memories of the good deeds many people witnessed. I have contributed Shs 500,000.” The Secretary General will contribute Shs 3,000,000. I do not have it yet but she wrote it here.

3.27
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Right Reverend Cyprian Bamwoze. I am moving this motion under rule 55 of our Rules of Procedure. 

“WHEREAS Parliament of Uganda received the sad news of the death of Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze, former Bishop of Busoga Diocese, which occurred on 11 February 2019 at the age of 86 years;

AWARE that the Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze was consecrated on 6 August 1972 and was the first Bishop of Busoga Anglican Diocese and served as such for 27 years;

RECOGNISING that during his service as Bishop of Busoga Diocese – 

(a) 	he was the Chairperson of the Board of Governors of Busoga College Mwiri, whose resolution bore the establishment of Busoga University, which is seated on l00 acres of land in Iganga offered by the diocese.

(b) 	he further spearheaded the renovation of many schools in Busoga and led to the establishment of many others - I will give some examples, although, Madam Speaker, you had extensively talked about this contribution made by Bishop Bamwoze. Some of the schools that were established included Bukooli College, Kisiki College, Nkutu Memorial, Bunya Secondary School, Bugobi Secondary School, Bubinga Secondary School and Nakabugu Girls Secondary School.

(c) 	the diocese set up the Family Life Education Programme (FLEP) which offers various services, among which is treatment for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and reproductive health services;

(d) 	he was instrumental in the formation of Busoga Trust, a Non-Governmental Organisation whose objective is to improve water and sanitation in rural communities;

(e)	 he facilitated the translation of the Bible into Lusoga and by 1998 the first Lusoga version of the New Testament had already been printed;

(f) 	he established the Busoga Institute of Rural Development, a rural leadership training centre, which aims at equipping the trainees with basic knowledge and skills in project planning and management, resource mobilisation, project assessment, and fighting poverty, ignorance and disease;

(g) 	he also facilitated the Multi-Sectoral Rural Development Programme, which promotes the socioeconomic development of both the church employees and the laity. The programme activities include immunisation against common killer diseases, family planning, protection of spring wells, drilling boreholes, and teaching people about community development, basic hygiene, nutrition and agriculture;

FURTHER RECOGNISING that Rt Rev. Bamwoze was one of the architects of Jinja, Iganga and Kamuli (JIK), a body that brought together Members of Parliament and Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) constituency chairpersons to plan for Busoga's development;

APPRECIATING that the Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze dedicated all his life to the transformation of rural communities especially in Busoga region through ensuring the provision of better education and better health;

FURTHER APPRECIATING THAT Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze was a compassionate person who mentored many across the globe and served our country with memorable and commendable effort, as is evidenced by his performance, commitment and unwavering faith that touched countless hearts throughout his life;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

1. 	That Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service rendered and tireless contribution made by the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze to the people of Uganda.
2. 	That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze.
3. 	That Parliament prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant the Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze eternal rest.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by all sides of the House. What is your justification? 

DR RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is the justification for the resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt Rev. Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze. 

The country woke up on Monday, 11 February 2019 to the sad news of the passing of Bishop Emeritus Cyprian Bamwoze. He is a man who has left a remarkable legacy among the people of Busoga and Uganda at large during his 27 years as a bishop and leader at many levels in Busoga and in the country.

Bishop Bamwoze was born on 15 May 1934 to Birusaani Munhanhanfu and Ms Budestiana Mukoda who were then living in Naminage, Kitayunjwa Subcounty, Kamuli District. He started school at Naminage in 1944 and joined Kamuli Junior School in 1952. He then joined Busoga College Mwiri from 1955 to 1957. In 1960, he joined Bishop Tucker Theological College at Mukono before pursuing further studies in theology in London from 1962 to 1963 where he was ordained as a priest. 

Madam Speaker, the late Bishop loved education with a passion. He was involved in the establishment of several secondary schools, as we have already said. Some of the examples again are: St James Secondary School, Pilkington College Muguluka, St Andrew's Naminage, Lubani Secondary School and many others. Relatedly, in 1985 he founded an organisation under Busoga Diocese. This organisation oversees over 40 clinics across Busoga that champion mother and child health programmes.

The other side of late Bishop Bamwoze was that he was a tough talking man, who at all times encouraged his people to work hard for prosperity. It is because of these contributions to the country that His Excellency the President directed that this faithful servant of God be accorded a befitting send-off. 

Madam Speaker, the cause of his death is leukaemia, which the late had been battling with for the last six months at Uganda Cancer Institute in Kampala. We extend our deep condolences and sympathies to the family, Church of Uganda, relatives, friends and the country at large. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.38
THE DEPUTY CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Tonny Muhindo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I rise to second the motion to pay tribute to the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze, Bishop Emeritus of the Church of Uganda, Busoga Diocese. 

I would like to thank the Government for giving this august House a chance to pay tribute to not only a father in Christ but also an agent for change and development. The country has lost a resourceful and irreplaceable person. Allow me to convey my sincere condolences to the family, the Christian fraternity and Busoga region as a whole. The late will be missed for his commitment and dedication to serve both within and outside the church.

The Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze was a faithful servant who left a legacy, having served for 27 years as Bishop of Busoga Diocese. He had the people at heart and worked tirelessly to build them both spiritually and materially. If this country is to move forward, we need the likes of Bamwoze whom the people can emulate. 

The Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze promoted the social and economic welfare of believers. He set up the Family Life Education Programme, the Multisectoral Rural Development Programme and the Busoga Institute of Rural Development, all aiming at promoting the social wellbeing of the people of Busoga. It is our prayer that Government takes up and supports these programmes for sustainability. 

He was an agriculturalist who excelled in fish farming. He knew that agriculture is the backbone of the economy and he invested in it. It is very painful that the Government continues to invest only 3.6 per cent of the budget to the agriculture sector, which is far below the Maputo Declaration of 10 per cent budget allocation.

He worked hard to improve church founded primary and secondary schools, tertiary institutions and other types of educational institutions and also establish new ones. He donated church land for construction of Busoga University. Currently, the university is facing challenges like the expiration of the provisional licence and it is bound to face closure. In honour of Bishop Bamwoze, can the Government give a hand to this university instead of just closing it? 

In addition, the issue of poor performance in primary and secondary schools in Busoga region is a yet another challenge, which we implore Government to address in order to ensure that the education standards in Busoga are revived. What happened to the powerful schools that existed in the great Busoga like the great Busoga College Mwiri and other powerful schools that used to produce powerful men and women like our current Prime Minister? 

As we send off Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze, we urge the Government to support and award people who have contributed to the growth and development of our country. They are our true heroes. Filling the gap left behind by Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze is practically impossible. His servant leadership and selflessness will dearly be missed. 

Once again, on behalf of the Opposition, I would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family. We pray that God Almighty comforts you during this trying moment. May his soul rest in eternal peace. For God and my country.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Francis Zaake is here and will speak on behalf of the Independents. Honourable members, the Bishop’s family is here, seating at the technical bench. We welcome them. Of course, you are aware that his wife passed away.

3.44
MR FRANCIS ZAAKE (Independent, Mityana Municipality, Mityana): Madam Speaker, before us lies a man of great honour, who diligently served this country through enriching citizens with the word of God. 

Many speakers and writers have recognised the works of the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze. However, what I have found common and captivating about him is the fact that he has been a supporter of development. It has also come to my notice that the late Bishop Bamwoze, while presiding over Busoga Diocese, encouraged activities that would transform the people of Busoga economically, socially and politically. This implies that he meant well for Ugandans. 

Losing such a good son of Uganda, especially at this time when we need people of his kind to tell those with whom he shared a generation to give power to the youngsters, is indeed a big loss. His resignation as the Bishop of Busoga Diocese, where he was also the pioneer bishop, demonstrates to all and sundry that even initiators of great projects can hand over power and that the handover of power is an act of civility, and that “pakalast leadership” is just a hoax.

It is my prayer that those who wish to die in power emulate him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, join me in welcoming, the following guests who are in the gallery:

1. 	Hon. Aggrey Awori, former MP and presidential candidate;
2. 	Hon. Asuman Kiyingi, former MP;
3. 	Hon. Agnes Nabirye, former MP;
4. 	Hon. Capt. Gad Gasatura, former MP;
5. 	Hon. Emily Otekat, former MP;
6. 	Hon. Kubeketerya, former MP;
7. 	Mr Bageya Waiswa, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Works and Transport;
8. 	Mrs Elizabeth Gabona, Deputy Chairperson, Education Service Commission;
9. 	Dr Peter Emodek, Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) Specialist;
10. 	Owekitibwa James Mukembo, youth minister in the Busoga Kingdom;
11. 	Owekitibwa John Naku also from Busoga Kingdom; and several other guests in the gallery. (Applause)

Honourable members, now that the movers have spoken, the rest will speak for three minutes each.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, the Lord has yet again chosen to take away what the Lord gave. It is only that this time the Lord has taken an illustrious personage and an extremely intelligent person, Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze. 

Bishop Bamwoze loved, tutored and embraced humanity. He embraced Catholics, Protestants, Muslims and Orthodox alike. Bamwoze was a bishop like no other. Long after he retired as Bishop of Busoga Diocese, he remained the icon and cornerstone for pastoral work in Busoga. Bishop Bamwoze was a pastor of development and that is why the Prime Minster, the mover of the motion, talked about the many schools that the Bishop championed. He also championed the establishment of a university, health centres and farms.

Bishop Bamwoze was a man of extreme and unique intelligence and he applied it to the benefit of the underprivileged. He lived and fought for equality of man. The Bishop always talked about his humble beginning in life and often used it as an example of how a focused young person can excel. He was an example of somebody who struggled from nothing and got to the top.

Although Bishop Bamwoze was born and he lived in Naminage, he subsequently bought land and transferred much of his work to Nakakabala, which is in my constituency. We – the constituents – benefitted a lot from associating with him. He set up a fish farm, for example, but unlike people who set up fish farms to breed fish to sell, his emphasis was a fish farm to breed fingerlings to ensure that he could supply and teach our people how to farm fish. (Applause) 

I thank you for sharing that enthusiasm with me because Bishop Bamwoze touched our lives. He even touched your life, Madam Speaker. He was a family friend. I will also say this because I am your MP and I know. He was a very close and personal friend to Mzee Kadaga and also to Mrs Eve Kadaga, the mother of a daughter called Rebecca Kadaga. He was a friend to the family.

Madam Speaker, I pray that the Lord who lent him to us and caused him to be of value to us gives him eternal peace and may the family be condoled. Thank you.

3.53
THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Ms Esther Mbayo): Madam Speaker, allow me to join my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the fallen son of Busoga and Uganda at large. He was the first Bishop of Busoga Diocese, after Busoga was accorded diocesan status.

A lot has been said about the late Bamwoze - mentor, father, uncle and everything. As some writers have put it, his candle has burnt out. Many people, particularly in Busoga, believe that the candle of his legacy will burn forever. His achievements are in black and white.

Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze was not only an accomplished spiritual head in Busoga but also a family man and development oriented individual who loved education, health, agriculture, water and environment, among others. He was a true representation of society. As a man, he dared to go where others would not. 

Bishop Bamwoze, as he was fondly called in Busoga region, balanced between culture and religion; for example, he was the clan leader of my own clan, the Abaise Kitandwe - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to suspend the House because the President is coming. I will call you back after he has gone. Let us suspend the House for 10 minutes. 

(The House was suspended at 3.56 p.m.)

(On resumption at 4.15 p.m., the Speaker presiding­­_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House resumes. As I indicated, I had to suspend the proceedings to allow His Excellency, the President to come into the Chamber and pay tribute. I now invite the President to address the House.

4.15
THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA (Gen. Yoweri Museveni): Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Deputy Speaker, Rt hon. Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Deputy Prime Ministers, Rt hon. Leader of Leader of the Opposition, Members Of Parliament, I consulted with the Speaker and mentioned to her that since I may not have time to go to Kamuli for the burial of the, Late Bishop Bamwoze, I thought I should spare some time to share what I know about him.  You know old men are becoming scarce these days and when I see all these young people without enough information, I feel sorry for them. Therefore, whenever I get an opportunity, I want to give them some information. (Applause)

I have known this man who has just passed on for 57 years; before many of you were born. I met him in 1962 at the Christian Youth Conference at Nabugabo Youth Camp. We used to have Christian youth camps where older people would come and help us with the scriptures but also talk about life. I was a mulokole - (Laughter) – and a very active member of the Scripture Union. The Scripture Union was very good because it would help young people to learn the Bible piecemeal. We had a small booklet called “Daily Bread” and it would give you a portion of the Bible and its interpretation to read every day. We were doing this every day and it would help us to read the Bible. It helped me a lot and that is why I am not easy to confuse because I was immunised from all angles.

Rt Rev. Bamwoze was one of the organisers. I was trying to talk with the children to know what he was doing at that time because I did not know what he was doing then. The children have just told me that he was the Secretary for Youth Affairs in the diocese at the time. The children were trying to confuse me that he was already a priest. However, I told them that he was not yet a priest because I knew those who were priests. Later on, they checked and found that he was ordained later in 1963 as a deacon. This was the Christmas of 1962.

There were other people there like a white teacher, Rev Shergold Smith from Busoga College, Mwiri. There was Dr Roy Billington who was a medical doctor; Bamwoze’s children have told me that he was coming from Mengo. I thought that he came from Mulago; I did not get some of the facts very clearly. We also had our Secretary of the Scripture Union for the whole country, Mr Albert Taylor. 

The movement of Scripture Union was really good in terms of making young people learn the Bible more and also sensitise them about life in general. Of course, there was some – That is why I eventually left and stopped being active. We had that youth camp of Nabugabo in 1962 and then, another one in Budo in 1963. The last one I attended was at Busoga College, Mwiri in 1965 when I was in Senior five. That is where I made a tactical withdrawal and God assigned me to do other things. 

However, I came to bear testimony. You can see how long this man has been serving; from the time he was dealing with the youth up to when he was ordained and then, went through those turbulent times. I do not think he ran away. He stayed here most of the time. When we came in 1979, 17 years later, he was already a Bishop and playing another role. When he retired from being a bishop, he went into fish farming.

Therefore, I thought I should come and pay tribute to him. I am not adding much but there is that angle, which some of you may not know, his work among the youth. I do not know what is happening in the Church now, what they are doing with the youth because when the Church connects with the youth, they cannot go wrong. What I learnt as a youth, through religious instruction, has helped me very much. Even when we were fighting, we were fighting in a Christian way. (Laughter) That is why you can see that Uganda today does not have a refugee problem.

In 1986, half a million Ugandans were refugees in Congo and South Sudan. Uganda was number four in the whole world in the export of refugees, competing with Afghanistan, Sudan and another country at that time. We do not have those refugees anymore. (Interjections) Why? Do some research and find out why.

The mentality I picked from religious instruction helped me greatly to navigate through all those issues. You may remember when Saul was looking for David to kill him. David came and got Saul, cut a piece of his cloth and went away without killing him. He stood across from him and shouted, “I cut a piece of your cloth but I did not kill you.” Would you call that a belief or tactic? We would do very well to learn more from the Bible.

I just came to salute Rt Rev. Bamwoze and mention that angle, which many of the people do not know. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you very much. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Your Excellency. I will request the Rt hon. Deputy Speaker to accompany you whenever you are ready. However, you can listen to the debate.


GEN. MUSEVENI: I am going now. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mbayo, you were concluding. I think you had one minute left.

MS MBAYO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before His Excellency jetted in, I was asserting that Bishop Bamwoze, as he was fondly called in Busoga region, balanced culture and religion. He was, for example, the clan leader of my clan, the Batandwe. As an uncle, he would sit us down, counsel and mentor us as a family in his soft but stern voice on the values of society and he would emphasise honesty, hard work, kindness and humility. He always told the truth.

Madam Speaker, Bishop Bamwoze would guide society on the values of culture and emphasise that culture and religion were complementary and not in conflict. He was one of the regents of the Obwa Kyabazinga Bwa Busoga and had strong support for the Busoga Kingdom and its activities; a perfect fusion of culture and religion.

Bishop Bamwoze was a man of his mind and definitely, translated his word into action. It was because of his honesty and frankness that many described him as an arrogant man. He would speak out his mind without mincing any words. This is what sometimes pitted him on a collusion path with his colleagues. 

He started leading the infant Busoga Diocese at a turbulent time but he steered the church well. Busoga Diocese made tremendous progress just like some other speakers have alluded.  As part of his pastoral duties, he baptised multitudes and confirmed many, including myself. He would take us through the tests individually and whoever would fail the confirmatory test, he would not confirm. He officiated at marriages that are, up to now, standing firm on the ground of religion – (Member timed out.)

4.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (KARAMOJA AFFAIRS) (Mr Moses Kizige): I thank you, Madam Speaker. Exactly 42 years this week, the House of Bishops was surrounded at Namirembe during its sitting. The Archbishop and three other bishops were accused of fighting Government, bringing in firearms and training rebels. The Archbishop was brutally murdered and that is why on Saturday, 16 February 2019, the Church of Uganda will be going to Mucwini to remember and celebrate the life of Martyr Janani Luwum, the martyr of the 20th Century. 

That is not news but what is significant today is that of the four bishops; the Archbishop and the three other bishops accused, Bishop and later on Archbishop Rt Rev. Yona Okoth who was the Bishop of Bukedi Diocese immediately left the country. Equally, Bishop Festo Kivengere, the Bishop of Kigezi Diocese, also left the country. However, the man lying before us here, Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze, stayed behind for two reasons. First of all, he believed in his innocence but most importantly, he believed that if he continued praying, he would stay in the country, serve his people and save many lives.

Madam Speaker, for many years in the 1980s and 1990s, Bishop Bamwoze deputised Bishop Desmond Tutu as President of All Africa Council of Churches. In that process, Bishop Bamwoze made many trips to South Africa and openly campaigned against apartheid, which was not expected at that time. However, he had the courage to do exactly that; he was a man of God and a man of courage. This, we shall always remember him for.

Many people have spoken about the multi-sectoral rural development programme. I had the privilege to be the head of finance and administration, at some stage, of the multi-sectoral development programme. For those who are not familiar with it, it attracted funding from many organisations. The German Government Agency was the biggest funder, which at some stage, was providing the equivalent of $2.8 billion annually to Busoga Diocese.

It was multi-sectoral because it had the youth and women sectors, agriculture, animal industry, afforestation, water and sanitation, which was mainly - (Member timed out.)

4.36
MR JAMES AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion by the Rt hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to a gallant son of Uganda.

Earlier today, I listened to many who described his spiritual life and his utmost commitment to the work of the Lord. In this House, I cannot really add anything in that area.

However, I would like to slightly correct something which was included in the Prime Minister’s motion where he described the late Bishop Bamwoze as somebody who was involved in the fight against poverty, ignorance and disease.

I think it is better we call spade a spade and not an implement, which can move soil. Those core beliefs are the beliefs of the Uganda People’s Congress. As such, we are honoured to have a member in the late Bishop Bamwoze. This is pronounced more so in that all the tributes that are being raised about what he did in Busoga Diocese are a true testament in that fight. 

The multi-sectoral development programme really touched the lives of the people. Whether it was fish fishing, it was how to empower the people. When you come to the question of education, there are a number of schools and institutions where the bishop was actively involved. When it comes to health services, there are over 62 clinics or institutions, which were established - (Member timed out.)

4.38
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality, allow me to convey our condolences to the family, the clan, the entire Busoga region and Uganda. This is a big loss.

Madam Speaker, I usually do not read about people who are less important in society. I read about those who have contributed a lot to society. I have taken the trouble to read about the late and he has contributed a lot to Uganda.

Madam Speaker, to that extent, I am able to tell you the village from which he came, through reading, because he is a man who carried sense in him. The late came from Nakakabala in Buzaya, Kamuli District. I know that because I read about him as he was a very important person.

One very important thing that I noted about him is that he refused to be treated in private health facilities. Today, we are talking about a facility in Lubowa on Entebbe Road, which is going to cost us around $379 million and it is going to be a Government facility. 

However, many people have not referred to him. He is one of the people who refused to be treated in private health facilities for the reason that those in important offices will always opt for private health facilities and ignore investing in public health facilities. Therefore, I attribute this development to people like him.

Madam Speaker, his death has come at a time when churches have problems with succession. Everywhere across the country, people do not want to leave power, even in church. Now for us the politicians, where do we copy from?

He was not of such a character. He believed in speaking the truth and being straightforward. Some probably hated him because of that. When you speak the truth, people say you are arrogant, yet you are shaping society. That is why most of the youth are going astray because people do not tell them the truth.

When we have defilement cases, they are concealed - (Member timed out.)

4.41
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues and the entire country in paying tribute to the late Bishop Bamwoze.

There is one aspect that is not coming out from all the discussions; the late Bamwoze played a key role in setting up the Lusoga Dictionary. Unfortunately, the lady who was compiling the dictionary, Nabirye Kivejinja, went to Makerere and Makerere declined to award her a doctorate. She went to Belgium and was awarded a doctorate.

One of the disappointments that I know is that at the time of his death, that dictionary has not been in circulation. Therefore, besides the fact that he was well versed in many issues, he knew Lusoga. If you wanted any explanation of a statement, a word or proverb in Lusoga, you had to go to Bishop Bamwoze.

I was part of the project of compiling the Lusoga Dictionary and I remember visiting him with Ms Nabirye Kivejinja and he played a very key role. Unfortunately, that did not come to pass.

The late Bishop was a revolutionary religious leader. He looked at religion and the State as complementary issues. Whenever matters of the State emerged, he was not shy to rise up to the occasion. Very significantly, he accepted to be chairperson of the task force of hon. Aggrey Awori when he was contesting for the presidency.

I remember working very closely with the late Bishop Bamwoze. I used to drive him to Makerere Guesthouse where he was residing. Therefore, he was never a believer in the notion that the Church and the State are different things. For him, when matters of the State emerged, he would rise to the occasion. When matters of religion emerged, he would rise to the occasion. That is a direct contradiction with what happens these days where people are told not venture into politics because they are on the pulpit. That was not Bishop Bamwoze.

Finally, he was very honest. When he came to a function - I remember seeing him in my early years in Mwiri. He would come to a function and when he is given a Bible to quote a verse, if it was old or dusty, he would throw it back to you. That was him. He was very particular on details, very smart in both body and mind, very honest and transparent. He never tolerated mediocrity and that is why he has died a very principled man who weathered all challenges while his face remained in the same position. (Member timed out.)

4.44
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I bring the condolences of the people of Kampala Central upon the demise of a very great man in society.

We have a scarcity of the elderly. Indeed, this is true by demography everywhere in the world. However, the country has a scarcity of people that are preaching unity versus disunity, tolerance versus intolerance, with the use of might against reasoning and without referring to consultations and peaceful resolutions during conflicts. I think our country is doomed. However, let this be a lesson - the passing on of Bishop Bamwoze - to all of us that are living that death has been prescribed onto us and every soul that lives shall taste it. However, what trail do you leave behind as you pass on? 

We would like to thank Bishop Bamwoze - all the words that have been spoken about him have been comforting, not only to his family but even to the young generation that is to come. Let us always fight to leave a legacy and walk with our heads high for we should always remember that there are those that are going to inherit or go through our footsteps.

Respect for human rights, freedom of expression, freedom of speech and the right to life are some of the things he always talked about on the pulpit. 

Having donated land through the church for Busoga University is another achievement that he will be remembered for. Having participated in the inter-religious council and dialogue in order to create harmony between different persons in Uganda practising different religions was another issue that he did extremely well. We will hold our flag high and our motto, “For God and my country.” May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.42
MR PETER MUGEMA (NRM, Iganga Municipality, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also convey my dearest condolences to the whole nation of Uganda, particularly Basoga, for the demise of our dad, the Rt Rev. Bamwoze. He assisted many of us. He was a true Ugandan and a typical Musoga, who could solve anyone’s problem at any time of his choice. 

I remember, before I came to be what I am, I went to him for financial assistance and he told me to first get his blessings. He was a very principled man to the extent that he meant whatever he said. 

He was a true Ugandan and Basoga will remain committed to his beliefs and norms. I remember he was principled and there is a story that goes around - and which is believed to be true - that sometime, the President went to assist him in his fish pond related issues. The President had promised him Shs 600 million. Incidentally, I think while the President sent Shs 600 million, those who are normally close to the President gave him Shs 400 million. He refused it and asked them to take it back. He told them that it had not been his request but a suggestion from His Excellency. He went on to tell them when the President got the other Shs 200 million, he would take it.  In two days, those slippery fellows had to top it up to make Shs 600 million. (Laughter) That is the man we are sending off today. May his soul Rest in eternal peace.

4.49
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can also testify that Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze was a no nonsense Bishop. He combined both his religious and leadership qualities. Here, I speak as an Old Boy of Busoga College, Mwiri where he was Chairman Board of Governors at the time I was there.

Whenever he was called to Mwiri, everybody had to be smart. We used to wear white shirts and white shorts but we had to be smart because if Bishop Bamwoze found us dirty, that would be the end of us in Busoga College Mwiri. 

Bishop Bamwoze was blessed at the time because he was the Bishop for the whole of Busoga, unlike this time when Busoga has more than one Bishop. That created unity in Busoga in as far as the Anglican Church is concerned. It also helped to teach and make many people reverends for that part of Uganda.

I remember, before he retired, he recruited many retired engineers and professors, to become reverends and I thought it was strange. Why would a professor be turned into a reverend? I think he wanted to make his statement that one can be very educated but also “a fisher of men.” 

Therefore, we credit him for his the unity of the people of Busoga. He taught them to keep time. He was a farmer, a leader and some of us who went to Busoga College Mwiri - the Prime Minister can testify - are all leaders following the footsteps of the late Bishop Bamwoze and also the late Dr Milton Obote. Thank you. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.52
MR JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also take this opportunity to convey my condolences to the family of the late Bishop Bamwoze. I met Bishop Bamwoze way back when I was in secondary at Berkley High School, Iganga. I specifically appreciate his role in education. He played a very big role in attainment of Sustainable Development Goal no. 4, and Article 30 of our Constitution because he advocated for inclusive and equitable education, more especially in Busoga Sub Region. 

Therefore, as far as education is concerned, we applaud him. He had special attention for girl child education. I do not know whether it has changed but Berkley High School was a single sex school then and he loved us a lot; we applaud him for that.

As a board member at the Bible Society of Uganda, we appreciate his role in translation; we do translation. The Prime Minister talked about his role in translating of the New Testament. As we speak today, we have a full Bible, both the New and Old Testament in Lusoga. Hence, we are grateful to our elders who have helped us attain that. 

Madam Speaker, we were told that the Bishop succumbed to Leukaemia. We know that Cancer is a dangerous disease. The World Health Organisation asserts that between 30 to 50 per cent of these cancers can be preventable, if people mind their lifestyles. Of course, it is unfortunate that 70 per cent of these occur in the middle and low income countries. 

However, as a nation, we need to put more effort in the health sector, especially the Uganda Cancer Institute but also in the palliative care given to those that are very sick because of HIV or Cancer like Bishop Bamwoze. We need to scale up palliative care for people who die because of too much pain. 

The responsible ministry needs to put in effort to see that they die decently. We had a policy about palliative care. I do not know how far it has gone. Anyhow, we need to scale up efforts and put more finances into the Uganda Cancer Institute because there are many who are there and do not have the resources. However, as a nation, we need to look into that, especially during this budgeting process. 

With that, I thank God for the life of our Bishop; a life well-lived and I pray that his soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you.

4.55
MR RICHARD OTIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Part of my secondary education was spent at Kiira College Butiki in Busoga. It is from there that I got to know and felt Bishop Bamwoze from a very close range. My school had a green and at that time, Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) Government did not want to see anything green; they were very allergic to green.
 
Some UPC functionaries under National Union of Students of Uganda (NUSU) went and reported that my school then was sympathetic to the Democratic Party (DP). The then minister in charge of education wanted to close the school and this was a very big challenge. At that time, the Third Deputy Prime Minister was one of the cult figures but he was not available to save the school.

Madam Speaker, it was Bishop Bamwoze who saved our school from being closed. It was him who confronted the then minister in charge of education and challenged him. He said, “Why do you want to close the school? This is just a mere colour and UPC found that school there and the green colour was already in the badge.”

The late was a very fierce critic of any form of injustice in society. It was at that point that he was able to know that there was some bit of injustice that the then UPC Government was trying to inflict on us, innocent students. He freely spoke his mind and said whatever he wanted to say, whether it pleased the Government or not. That was his life. 

I am not surprised that even yesterday I read a story in the newspapers that quoted him as saying that those who expected merrymaking at his funeral should think otherwise. I am very sorry but that was the late. He was a free man and he lived for this country. 

I, therefore, condole with the family and people of Busoga. I know the people of Busoga have lost a great icon. The late was a freedom fighter. He was one of the greatest freedom fighters. At that time in Busoga, we knew that there were only two freedom fighters, the late Bamwoze and my senior, Kirunda Kivejinja, the Second Deputy Prime Minister. Those are the only freedom fighters we knew in Busoga. Although we still have Kirunda Kivejinja, it is a very big loss to us as Ugandans and greatly to the people of Busoga. May the Lord rest his soul in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the late did not like you, he had a way of saying it. He would say, “To love you, I am commanded by God but I do not like you.” (Laughter)

4.58
THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Ms Monica Ntege): Madam Speaker, I join others in paying tribute to the great son of Busoga and Uganda, the late Bishop Bamwoze. 

The late was an accomplished gentleman. He was very development minded, thoughtful, and he never uttered anything without giving a thought to it in his impeccable English. He was always delivering his messages very simply, but he was stubborn. 

I had the honour to have grown up in the same family with him, having lived in Bugembe and we were relatives through marriage. He loved his family, including the extended family and the in-laws. One would never tell the difference between his biological children and those that were not biological. He was very equitable and a mentor to very many people. 

He loved God. He was a great preacher who always quoted the Bible and many people would enjoy his sermons. No wonder, he named all his children after the 12 Apostles. 

However, out of the attributes that are being talked about, there is something that has not been mentioned. When he became a bishop, the Bugembe Cathedral Church had been abandoned. It was at a skeleton of timber for more than five to seven years. As soon as he became a bishop, he spearheaded the accomplishment of that cathedral and within three years, that beautiful structure came up. He did a great favour for Busoga.

On a personal note, he loved children irrespective of their sex. As a member of the family, having been born the only boy after six girls, he encouraged our parents to educate all the girls as if they were boys without taking sides. That showed that he loved everybody to be treated equally.

Busoga and Uganda in general have lost a very resourceful person. However, we thank God for the great contribution he has left and for how he touched not only the church but Busoga and Uganda at large. 

My condolences to the family seated there. I pray that God rests his soul in eternal peace. 

5.02
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY AFFAIRS (Mr Kirunda Kivejinja): Madam Speaker, I stand to support the motion. Today, whenever we bury somebody old, we are burying a dictionary or encyclopaedia of society. As the few of us go, it means that the reference books have been closed. 

I have known Bamwoze longer than any other person living because I knew him for 65 years. We met in Busoga College Mwiri in 1954 when he joined junior one and I joined senior one; he was just a year behind me. He was one year older than me. He was born in May 1934 while I was born in June 1935. 

A lot of aspects have been told about Bamwoze. It is not things to laugh about but somebody should pick one aspect as his or her guide. In that way, we shall have benefited from the long life of people who stay around.

The most important thing I know is that we do not hide our origin - our mothers, names, religions and convictions. These are personal to the bearer. My friend here who was talking about UPC does not know that by 1964, I had been expelled from UPC and the history, which was as a result of that, is what we have all witnessed. Fortunately, I have been around to put things correct and we are here for that. I think it has been 38 years from when we started to create an army to be able to bring peace so that the younger generation can enjoy a better life. (Member timed out)

5.06
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am very delighted to be allowed to say a few things about our beloved Bishop Emeritus Bamwoze. 

I would like to raise three things in memory of our great spiritual father. First, I agree with the mover of the motion that indeed he has left a remarkable legacy for the Church of Uganda and Uganda generally. I would like to remind the people like the Rt Hon. Kivejinja here that he does not have to harass me because my husband studied in Mwiri. (Laughter) The Mwiri people are outstanding because of their smartness. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the late Bishop did everything he could to improve the welfare of the people of Busoga. In memory of this great man, let us do everything we can, particularly you, Madam Speaker, as the daughter of Busoga, to deal with the poverty in Busoga. Busoga should be raised to its former glory. That is my appeal on behalf of this great man.

Secondly, Bamwoze was open about his principles and what he believed in. He fought with all of us to ensure that there is genuine democracy in this country. At a time when the voice of Mrs Ogwal was synonymous with that of Lucifer, he was able to listen to some of us. Bishop Bamwoze, Mrs Babunoba, Melchizedek Otim and Bishop Baker Ochola did a lot to ensure we achieve peaceful resolution to the northern Uganda conflict. We, therefore, need to thank him for the role he played to ensure that this conflict would come to an end.

Finally, I would like to say that at the burial of the late Patrick Mwondha, Bishop Bamwoze left a message to all of us and I thank God that hon. Jimmy Akena was there physically. He told him that if we could not reconcile, we involve him. If anyone did not involve Bishop Bamwoze in resolving any conflict in the political equation in Busoga, this Bishop would not rest in peace. I pray to God that the people of Busoga and Jimmy Akena as a person closely associated with UPC - I am not anymore – ensure – (Member timed out)

5.10
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of West Moyo County and on my own behalf, I wish to send sincere condolences to the bereaved family members, relatives, friends, in-laws, Busoga, the Government of the Republic of Uganda, Members of Parliament and everyone who has come to pay tribute to our great Bishop. We have lost a great man, role model, mentor, an educationist, farmer, God lover, peace lover and so forth.

Madam Speaker, from 1985 to 1986, I was in Busoga College Mwiri for my senior five and six. I used to sleep in Wako House and I was the entertainment prefect. Whenever we would go for seminars at Wanyange Girls’ School, we would be very smart in our white clothes to impress everybody there. (Laughter)

Whenever Bishop Bamwoze would visit our school, he would emphasize four important issues. He would say that if we were to succeed in life, we had to follow those four issues. The first aspect was God, for spirituality and discipline. The second was love for academics. The third was love for work and the fourth one was physical activities – athletics, football. That is why at my age of 57, I can still play football and run; it is because of Bishop Bamwoze. 

To the family members, please remain united, take heart, love each other, have respect, reconcile, forgive and stay in harmony. When there is any contentious issue in the family, dialogue is the way to go. May the soul of our dear Bishop rest in peace.

5.12
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze. On behalf of the people of Kagoma County and on my own behalf, I send sincere condolences to the family, Busoga Diocese, Busoga sub-region and the entire country upon this loss.

Bishop Bamwoze was a man full of ideas, trust, faith and confidence. The four words – ideas, trust, faith and confidence – can be remembered when the late Bamwoze was admitted at Kamuli District Hospital on 2 July 2012 and diagnosed with acute malaria and anaemia. The family and friends thought of requesting for a referral to Mulago Hospital for better services but the late Bishop, being confident, full of trust and good ideas, refused the request. He said that by requesting for a referral, he would be showing a sign of no confidence in the institution where he was the board chairperson.

Madam Speaker, we know very well that in this country, we have people who do not trust their institutions. We have headmasters, in-charges and even Members of Parliament who do not trust their institutions. Today, we have a –(Member timed out.)

5.15
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I share with Ugandans this moment when we are sending off this gallant son of Uganda. 

I got to know the Bishop in 1995 when he came to the island. That was the time when Busoga Diocese was faced with serious challenges. He was a resilient man and I saw his resilience in the islands when many charismatic churches came to hear about his preaching. He united us with the other religious leaders.

Madam Speaker, I also knew him as an eloquent man. With his family who are here - I know you are devastated but I can just console you to always read 1 Thessalonians 4:13 and Revelation 14:13.

Madam Speaker, having such a person is not simple. What we should do as Parliament is to make sure Ugandans emulate him and not only say good things about him but also follow what he told Ugandans. I recall when he came to the islands, Bishop Bamwoze said, “Some people want to hold positions to cheat the public. You people who are here, whatever positions you serve in, never cheat the public.” I learnt from that statement and said this is a real son of God. I am seeing one member who might have been my old boy but I will consult with him; may God keep you and make you a good Ugandan as your father was.

5.18	
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze, on behalf of the people of Jinja Municipality West and the people who went to Hannington House in Busoga College Mwiri, which we call the “Bishop’s House”. I was lucky to stay there for some good time. We covey our special condolences to the family. 

When I look at the family, I think some of us belong to that family. We stand here today to pay tribute to a father of many generations. Spiritually, biologically and as a mentor, he guided us. Some of us are who we are today because of Bishop Bamwoze.

In Hannington House at Mwiri College, it was mandatory that we had to spend half of our holidays with him for the time we were there. He would pick us at 5.00 a.m. from his house to go and work in the farm. We would not have breakfast until the work was done. This transformed us. We became very hardworking people because of the Bishop. He taught us one thing, which seemed a braggart statement but it is reality; to Bishop, poverty was a luxury. What he meant by that was that if one was hardworking, they would never live in poverty. He kept repeating that to him, poverty was a luxury. We all became hardworking and knew that we had to work in order to survive. Hard work was his basic teaching to all of us.

He was one of the bishops I knew who would not confirm anyone if they had not gone through Bible study. He would ask you questions in the church and would not be embarrassed to deny you to be confirmed as a member of the church because you had to go through the system to become a true Christian.

Much as we are disheartened by his departure, we celebrate his life. Busoga will never have another icon like Bishop Bamwoze. He was a man who knew that we needed basics in life and those were the things he cherished most - people having medicines, water and shelter. (Member timed out)

5.21
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Gomba West County, I would like to say that the retired Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze was Busoga’s icon and a legend of all time. He believed in the total development of the human being - spiritual and physical.

His pastoral work involved fighting immorality, calling upon people to accept the message of the Gospel and initiating development projects. He started schools, spearheaded building of churches and drilling boreholes to ensure access to water in hard-to-reach areas. 

He was a brave man who spoke his mind boldly and proclaimed his convictions loudly and clearly. An orator par excellence, he spoke English very well. He loved Shakespeare. He was a philosopher and quoted many philosophers in his discourses. He did the first translation of the Bible into Lusoga, which helped in the development of the Lusoga language.

Since he died of cancer, I would like to say that in Uganda, sensitisation about cancer should be taken seriously. Every Ugandan man of 40 years and above normally has an enlarged prostrate that may either be cancerous or not. I would like to also say that the women are advised to do pap smears and mammograms, especially if they are from a cancer prone family. However, people are not sensitised.
	
During the Parliament Week, Kabale University had a stall. They were showing how they cure cervical cancer and I was very impressed. I said instead of showing us people exposing their bodies, why can’t they give them a platform? All in all, we need sensitisation. Much as we have Uganda Cancer Institute, some people do not even know that it exists. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.23
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To the family, the people of Koboko County convey their sincere condolences upon the death of your father and remarkable bishop. What you need to know is that Bishop Bamwoze is a brand name in this country and globally. When you mention Bishop Bamwoze, the name rebounds all over the world because of the work he has done.

Secondly, the late Bishop was a very principled man. He shook the foundation of the church to its core because of what he believed in and what he needed to be done right. He did not suffer fools gladly. This was the man we knew in this country.

Madam Speaker, the Bishop carried the Bible on one hand and a fishing rod on the other hand; the Bible to teach his flock about salvation and living uprightly, and the fishing rod symbolized transformation and development. He did this until his death. This is the legacy this great man has left. 

In making this contribution, I wish to implore all religious leaders to follow the example of this man; carry the Bible and the fishing rod. Joseph was a carpenter while Peter and John were fishermen. The current church leaders are just moving with the Bible without fishing rods; how are you going to transform society? How can you lead an impoverished society while you watch? Therefore, the biggest legacy the old man has left us with is of teaching and transformation, for which we give him this great honour today. Thank you. 

5.25
MS PAMELA KAMUGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Budaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze. On my behalf and on behalf of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) and the people of Budaka, I convey my condolences to the family, the people of Busoga and all Ugandans. 

How I wish I had the powers, I would have appealed to God to reverse his decision and not take this great man. Since I do not have the power, I accept defeat. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

5.26
MR FRANCIS GONAHASA (FDC, Kabweri County, Kibuku): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the family of the late Bishop Gonahasa and the people of Kabweri Constituency, I would like to pass my condolences to the family of the late Bishop Emeritus Cyprian Bamwoze. I first met him 47 years ago in Busoga College Mwiri. He came in as a teacher and soon after that, he was made a bishop and I grew up under his mentorship. 

When he was the Chairman, Board of Governors of Busoga College Mwiri, I had the opportunity to work with him as the head prefect of Busoga College Mwiri. So, I really knew how hardworking and strong he was on development issues.

Also, on behalf of the Anglican fellowship of Parliament, I convey a message of condolences. I do not have time to read it but I will pass it on to the family. I just would like to say God gave Bishop Bamwoze to Busoga and he has taken him away. May His name be praised. 

When I was talking to the family, I told one of his sons who was in school with me to be strong because I lost both my parents just like him. Even though they lost their parents, God is faithful and He will take them through. Like one of our colleagues said, be united. Together, you will support and carry on the legacy of the late Bishop Bamwoze. May his soul rest in peace.

5.28
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to the Rt Rev. Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze by celebrating his life like there is no other life. To the family, the Anglican community and the people of Busoga, thank you for sharing him with the rest of the country. Your struggles were his struggles and your dignity and hope found expression in his life. Your democracy is his cherished legacy. He gave a potent voice to the claims of the oppressed and the moral necessity of racial justice.

You will all agree with me that his commitment to democracy and the rule of law is not only ratified by his ascending to the rank of bishop but also his acceptance to hand over office at a time when there was an impasse in Busoga. The Bishop believed in socioeconomic transformation. Given his accomplishment in life, one would even be tempted to declare him an icon of development in Busoga. 

When the President was making his speech, he alluded to the fact that old men are getting scarce in the country. He fell short of saying “credible and honest old men” are getting scarce in the country. As the previous speakers alluded to, Bishop Bamwoze was an honest person. He treated all of us as his children, irrespective of political affiliation. Even when he did not agree with you, he would entertain you and tell you his opinion. So, it was up to you to either go with what he had told you or do not heed his advice and then when you meet him, you would not say he did not offer advice.

May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.
	
5.31
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to extend my condolences to the family of the late Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze and to the nation, particularly the people of Busoga. 

For someone to translate the Bible, it means that person has read the Bible from Genesis 1:1 to Revelation 22:21 several times. It is not easy and not many of the clergymen can do that. I would like to appreciate him for that contribution. It is only the power of the Holy Spirit that can make someone be able to translate that book into another language. 

Every minister of Christ must teach the people to work. Paul himself said, “I, myself, have worked with my hands.” He was not begging in church. Paul, who wrote the largest number of books in the Bible, was not begging his flock for money. He was actually working.

I have found something fascinating about the number 27. The late Bishop Bamwoze was a fulltime minister for 27 years according to the motion, which is the same number of years Mandela served in prison. It is also the number of soldiers who started the National Resistance Army (NRA) war. I also started running for elective position when I was 27 years old. Therefore, something is very fascinating about this number. It seems great men are always associated with that number.

Finally, I would like to talk about salvation. The President told us that he was a mulokole at that time. I would like to invite him and every person here and whoever is listening to come back to serve Christ; He is the way, the truth and the life. What a blessing it is to die in the Lord. Actually, the Bible tells us that heaven rejoices when a saint dies. This is a departure well celebrated. (Member timed out)

5.33
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to second the motion by the Prime Minister. I also pay my own tribute and on behalf of the people of Makindye West to the bishop who is lying in front of us today for all the contributions he made to this country.

Everyone who has spoken here has been a witness to the contributions of the Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze. One of the key things that I picked from what has been said is the promotion of girl-child education. What a blessed man who promotes girl-child education and when he is going to the Lord, the one in the Chair of Parliament, from Kamuli District where he hails from, is a product of girl-child education.

That means that something should be done. Through your Chair, Madam Speaker, I propose a Bishop Bamwoze University in your area of Kamuli, where he hails from. This would be in recognition of his contribution to the political and social wellbeing of Busoga sub-region and the country at large.

The transformation of the people of Busoga and his willing retirement after 27 years of service at the age of 66 is an example to the current head of state of Uganda and other leaders that no one on earth can achieve everything in his life. There must be continuity in the service of our country.

Madam Speaker, the Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze in 1999, when the President visited him at Nakakabala village in Kamuli at his retirement farm, told the President that “I am fetching Shs 128 million per year after my retirement from fish farming. You can also do the same in future when you willingly retire from politics and go back to your farm in Gomba and fetch more money than what you are getting from politics.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have a message from the Parliamentary Anglican Chaplaincy. I will just read one paragraph: “His achievements are numerous and unrivalled in Busoga. These have impacted greatly on the country in the sectors of tourism, economic empowerment, maternal and reproductive health, agriculture. Bishop Bamwoze as a leader, went a long way in improving the social and economic status of the community where he served.” This is from hon. Gonahasa, Chairperson of the Anglican Chaplaincy. 

We also have a message from the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) signed by hon. Jimmy Akena. I will read one paragraph: “There is no better way we can pay tribute to our fallen comrade other than emulating his impressive legacy. On behalf of UPC members, I share our grief and the loss of Rt Rev. (Rtd) Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze.” Thank you.

5.38
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gulu Municipality, I convey our deep condolences to the family of the late Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze. 

I first met Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze when I was a young student of Uganda Martyrs in Rubaga when we used to have dinner with Archbishop Yona Okoth. That is when we prayed over dinner and I understood that this was a real man of God. From the experiences he told us about from 1972 to date, he is one of those whose legacies among spiritual leaders in this country stands among the tallest in terms of preaching and evangelising the word of God.

Bishop Bamwoze should be taken as a model of nonviolent resistance in this country where we had a lot of challenges in the democratisation process. He was a true champion in the church on the issues of state relations. You have heard a lot about how the church and the state have been. If you look at the struggle Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze had, we should recognise him as one of those who championed, through the church, the democratisation process in this country.

Lastly, he loved true participation of the church in social transformation. I believe in any way, whether we name roads, institutions and our children after him, this was a true son of God that He gave us and we should never forget him. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

5.40
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion. The people of Kasilo County join the family, the people of Busoga and the country at large in mourning, and we send our condolences.

Madam Speaker, listening to all of you who have contributed, I realise now that I do not regret having supported hon. Aggrey Awori when the late was the chairperson of the taskforce. I was part of that team. I do not regret because we were led by the person that we are eulogising today. What bothers me, however, about the person we are applauding today is: why didn’t people see this when we were in that team? That is what is disturbing me now. Why didn’t we see this? It is just a few of us who saw that this man was a great visionary. I wish we had supported him at that time fully; possibly, it would be a different country today. 

I am reminded of the life in the animal kingdom. When animals see a giraffe running, they do not ask the giraffe why it is running but they just follow it, including squirrels and rats. The late Bamwoze lying here was a giraffe that the small animals did not follow at that time. It is a lesson to us that when we see such people, we should emulate and follow them when they are alive. Thank you, Madam Speaker. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Prime Minister, the issue of the incomplete dictionary is bothering me. I do not know whether you will think about it. Maybe you should think about it.

5.42
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Ngora County, I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family, the people of Busoga and Ugandans in general for the great loss of a nation builder.

Madam Speaker, I would like to first thank God who decided in His own wisdom, energy and ability to create the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze. He made him in His image and nurtured him all this time. That is why I thank God for his greatness. 

Secondly, the late was a nation builder; he built schools, churches, hospitals, human capital and fought against disease, among others. As we speak now, we have over 500 students coming from Teso to study in the schools that were constructed and built by the late Bishop. That is why on behalf of the people of Teso, I thank the late for the great job that he did in developing and building Uganda as a country.

Thirdly, he was a man of God. He spoke the word of God with all the momentum and ability that the people should get to know and believe in God who created them in His own image.

Madam Speaker, allow me read some verse since we are talking about the Bishop. Romans 8:35-39 says, “Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall trouble or hardship or persecution or famine or nakedness or danger or sword? As it is written: ‘For your sake we face death all day long; we are considered as sheep to be slaughtered.’ No, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us. For I am convinced that neither death nor life, neither angels nor demons, neither the present nor the future, nor any powers, neither height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 

I would like to request the family to remain united. Focus your attention on God and God will bless you and help you every day. May God bless this Parliament and family in Christ’s name. Amen.

5.46
MR MICHEAL MAWANDA (Independent, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion presented by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 

A lot has been said about the late Bishop Bamwoze, who is before us here. We shall all die and this is the way we shall go. What is very important is what people will talk about us after we have died. Many things have been said, which I do not want to repeat. It has actually reminded me of what happened to me in April last year.

I lost one of my workers at the farm on a Saturday. After milking the cows at 10 o’clock, he set them free and then he walked to the nearby trading centre at around 11 o’clock. He joined his friends in a drinking competition. They said, “Whoever takes a five-litre jerrycan of waragi at a go will take Shs 10,000.” My worker was the first person to take the jerrycan. He did it very well and finished it in the shortest possible time. Immediately after, he died. 

They informed me and I organised the burial the next day. I called the church and they came. When they came at around 11.00 a.m. – in my life, I had never seen a burial that takes 25 minutes. When we started the function, the reverend stood and said, “Honourable, we are sorry, we are not going to be part of this function or service because although it is true it is God who gives and takes, this man has not been called by God but has been taken by waragi.” They packed their bags and went. I felt very small. What speech could we give about the man who was before us? We could not say he was a good man; how can he be good when he was taken by waragi.

I am saying this because after death, what will people talk about us? Very good things have been talked about the late Bamwoze. I actually knew the late Bamwoze through hon. Isaac Musumba. He was a very straightforward person, very intelligent and he wished well for his people. I call upon Members that we emulate what –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Jinja District, I join my colleagues in paying tribute to the fallen gallant son of Busoga and Uganda at large.

Bishop Bamwoze believed that Christianity was not about spiritual welfare but social and economic welfare hence the output that we have seen of education, health, sanitation, Busoga University and many others. I request the Prime Minister that Government fully takes over Busoga University so that the Bishop can rest in peace. I would also like to request the Prime Minister that Government constructs a technical institute in his memory – maybe an agriculture-based institute since he was an agriculturist.

He was a mentor, a teacher, a father and an advisor. He has mentored many, touched many lives – including yours, Madam Speaker. The Deputy Speaker gave testimony in church this morning, the Kyabazinga of Busoga and some of us.

The late Bishop confirmed me; he put his hands on me to pray for me and told me to be truthful and always stand high despite the opposition. I got some of those traits from him. He was a great leader who did not tell people what to do but showed them what to do. He was always misunderstood because he stood for the truth. He hated corruption with a passion and he stood for the underprivileged.

To my sister Keziah and your siblings, God is in control. Papa has fought a good fight. He has finished his race. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I pray that God comforts you during this difficult time. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.51
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkiizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me a chance to condole with the rest for the demise of a friend and a great leader in this country.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of Kinkiizi West Constituency in Kanungu and on my own behalf, I would like to convey condolences to the family and the entire nation and to you, Madam Speaker. I also thank Government for giving the late Bishop Bamwoze a decent send-off.

The humility and respect for humanity the late Bamwoze had and the patience he exhibited while fighting for freedom of the rest of Ugandans cannot go unmentioned. It is true that he did not go away and I want to thank those people who stood firmly to fight for the freedom of Ugandans, including my senior, the Prime Minister. It is important that we learn from the past mistakes and we prevent other occurrences that can also cause anguish to other Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, it is also important, from what has been said, that we learn from the acts of this great man where he superintended over education and health. It is clear now that most of the schools that are performing better are those on a religious-based foundation. It is clear that some of the recently constructed schools are collapsing because they do not have a strong religious foundation.

When talking about taking up schools, we should emulate Busoga College Mwiri – which had clean leadership - because they had a vision for the powerless. However, most of the schools now do not recognise the girl-child and the poor so that they can also benefit from the inclusive development.

It is important that the Government takes over the suggestions that have been made in this Parliament as per prayer No.1 of the motion; that the Leader of Government Business takes cognisant of these suggestions by this House. I think Uganda would benefit from such acts of great men who have exhibited great work for this country. 

I pray that God calls his soul- (Member timed out.)   

5.54
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to condole with the family and the people of Busoga. On behalf of Mother’s Union, Bunyole Archdeaconry and Bukedi, I would like to add my voice to the voices of the Members to celebrate the life of Bishop Bamwoze. 

I started hearing of Bishop Bamwoze from my late grandfather and he used to speak about him as a man who was very proud – of himself, his work and family – because he was very principled. This is a lesson to all of us that when you start something with your own hands and you love what you do, you should always be proud of what you have done. 

Secondly, I remember hearing of a bad wave that was in Busoga Archdeaconry, which brought a lot of conflicts but the Bishop stood firm. He said that he would speak according to God’s message. He indeed stood as a man, spoke what was on his mind and that wave came to pass. 

I have learnt a lot from the messages that the Members have given; that there is no simple job in this world. Even these clergy go through a lot of challenges. They also have conflicts with the same people that they lead in churches; so there is no way we can say that we should always be in agreement with everybody. You cannot please all human beings. That is impossible. Even God disagreed with the devil and that is why he had to throw the serpent to the earth. Therefore, I would like to call upon you, Members, to learn to be tolerant with each other because at all times, we should always know that we cannot agree on all things at the same time. 

I thank my Government, especially His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni for recognising the good work that Bishop Bamwoze has done and according him a decent send-off. To the family, I like Psalm 23 which says, “The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.” When you read that Psalm, the Lord shall comfort you. May the soul of the late Bishop rest in peace and may the Lord comfort all of us.  Thank you.

5.57
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Manjiya County in Bududa, let me join the Prime Minister and my colleagues to express my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Busoga and the entire Uganda on the demise of the gallant son of Uganda.

I came to know about the late Bishop Bamwoze when I saw his name in the print media way back; at the time, his name was shrouded in controversy. We were expectantly looking upon him to become the first among equals in the House of Bishops and he won my admiration because of his boldness and straight talk. Incidentally, during that time, I was living in Bugembe in the neighbourhood of Bugembe Cathedral; so I got interested in him. Nevertheless, I have been equally captivated by the immaculate record of his service in the great commission. 

Madam Speaker, we have heard that he established schools, hospitals or health centres and boreholes in those hard-to-reach areas in Busoga. Mine is to comfort the family; Psalm 116:15 unequivocally says, “Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of His saints.” Sainthood is by works and from all these captivating testimonies, this should comfort you. 

We have to comfort the family by saying that here, we have merely come to eulogise and bury the labourer but not his labour and because his labour is great, his legacy will linger. I will make a clear call to the family to emulate your late father and keep his legacy towering high. 

I would like to conclude by referring you back to the words –(Member timed out.) 

6.00 
MR GODFREY KIWANDA (NRM, Mityana County North, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Mityana North, I would like to convey our sincere condolences to the family and the people of Uganda for having lost a great son.

Years back, we came to Kamuli when you had lost Mr Kadaga. One of the gentlemen that spoke was Mr Kazungu, who is one of the elders in Busoga. He made a statement about education, especially in Busoga sub region. At the burial, he referred to Mr Kadaga’s daughter called Rebecca Kadaga. He said that if Mr Kadaga had not taken his daughter to school, we would not have had all these dignitaries there that day – of course he said it in Lusoga. 

As Members of Parliament in that association, we came back and reflected on his message. Members said that the only other person in that region that can say such educative words was Bishop Bamwoze. Therefore, when we lose such great people in the region, we lose the icons of a country.

Madam Speaker, when I listened to what the Members of Parliament have mentioned here, I realised one thing, that the best way to do a great job is to love what you do. Indeed, Bishop Bamwoze loved what he did; he was a bishop and a farmer. 

When I was here in the Seventh Parliament, all those controversies that were in the diocese came up but Bishop Bamwoze stood firm. Great people are always misquoted, Madam Speaker. It is evident that whatever we do, at times we do it, not with any ill motive but because you go out to work, you are misquoted and I know he has suffered the same as a leader. 

Everyone has said that he “talked tough” and of course by doing that, he must have stepped on some people’s toes. However, I know that it was not his intention. It is only because he had a passion for the country, Busoga and education - and because of that, at times, we make mistakes.

To you, the family, you are challenged. Of course, it is a big challenge to be fathered by such a person because you always wonder what you can do to measure up to the standard of Bishop Bamwoze. As a country and your brothers, we promise to be together and always strive. The bazukulu - I know the grandchildren are coming and are already there and I know –(Member timed out.)

6.04
MR PETER LOKERIS (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker and comrades in the House, I wish to bring sincere condolences of the people of Karamoja and the Atekere group to the family of the late Bishop Bamwoze. I say so because the people of Busoga in general have done a great service to the people of Karamoja.

Secondly, I knew Bishop Bamwoze when I was transferred to work in Jinja in 1992 as a special district administrator. When I arrived there, I found some challenges and they said I should see the bishop. I went and met a welcoming bishop, very steadfast in his thinking and he spoke as a person of God.
 
He told me his views and he convinced me. He was very articulate when speaking English. There are people who speak English “using” other languages but the late bishop was speaking English. He told me a lot of things. He said, “You see, administrator, if we take this path, then we are not following God’s commandments.” He would quote verses and I admired the late bishop in the way he told me things. 

From that time, we established friendship. Imagine a bishop with his humility decides to come from his house in Bugembe, up to my office in Jinja town just to have a discussion concerning many issues. That is when I discovered that he was very developmental and he had built schools. 

I could go everywhere and there would be something to show the mark and footprint of the bishop. Due to that, I totally liked him. One day, I asked him, “I see people from Karamoja here and the children are scavenging all the time.” He said, “They must go to school.” I said, “Where shall we put them?” He said, “We have a school there called Masese and there are no children.” I went to the town council and they agreed; we opened the Masese School for the people of Karamoja. The children have studied, and they have even graduated. What a great contribution he has done. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

6.07
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, Persons with Disabilities): Thank you, Madam Speaker for giving me, the opportunity. I join my colleagues to extend my condolences to the family of late Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze, the people of Busoga, the Christian laity, the Church of Uganda and the entire nation.

After the demise of Bishop Bamwoze, I read an article by his peer, Dr Frank Nabwiso. He explained everything from their tender age to the present time. When I read it, I was so moved by the contribution made by Bishop Bamwoze to this nation. That is why I would like to thank the Government for allowing Parliament to pay tribute and applaud the work of Bishop Bamwoze.

What has been said about the personality, character and integrity of this bishop does not need any irrigation. He has done extremely good work for this nation. However, I am grateful to him for two things:

1. 	As a representative of people with disabilities, we are aware of the contribution Bishop Bamwoze has been engaged in to support projects and programmes for people with disability in Busoga sub region, which is part of my voting area. We wish to thank him for that contribution and we are aware that the gap he has left may not be easy to fill but we pray that God rests him in eternal peace.

2. 	To thank the Rt Rev. Bishop Bamwoze for carrying on the work that was done and initiated by missionaries –(Member timed out.)      

6.10
MR OTTO EDWARD (Independent, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me take this opportunity to convey our deepest condolence to the people of Busoga and Uganda at this time. On behalf of the people of Agago County and on behalf of the Acholi sub region that faced insurgency and war for a very long period at the time when the late bishop was the presiding bishop.

Pastor Rick Warren, in his book, “The Purpose Driven Life” said that time is the most precious gift and everyone has got only a set. I believe when he was writing this book, he had Bishop Bamwoze in mind. I look at my time, 1991 to 1998 in St Henry’s College, Kitovu and St Mary’s College Kisubi; that time I was living in Jinja when there was war in northern Uganda. This is the time when Bishop Bamwoze had not retired and he was preaching. He inspired and gave us hope at the time when there was a lot of stereotype for a young man growing up at the time; he was inspirational.

Had we reached the level of technology where we could clone people, this is one of the Ugandans who we would want to clone so that he does not die because he was of a rare quality. He is a patron and legend and Uganda has really lost a great man; the vacuum that he has left cannot easily be filled.

A lot has been said about Bishop Bamwoze and I would not like to go into details because many things are being repeated. However, the Bible in John 12:24 says, “Very truly I tell you, unless a kernel of wheat falls to the ground and dies, it remains only a single seed. But if it dies, it produces many seeds.” In the death of the Bishop, what is it? I believe that this is when the growth will begin than at his time.

I appeal to the Government that the issues of building a vocational school at this time when we are debating whether to build a specialised hospital and we are looking at money among other things. If we have not got a name, I believe we should consider his name to inspire people. I will end here in the interest of time, may –(Member timed out.)

6.14
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues to send my sympathy to the family of Bishop Bamwoze, the people of Busoga, the Anglican Church and the Republic of Uganda. On behalf of the people of Busia, especially the Basoga Nseete staying in Busia, we send our condolences to the bereaved family. 

Madam Speaker, I stand here to mourn a great man of God and a freedom fighter who fought for Bugembe Cathedral and Busoga University. I am dressed like this today not because I am celebrating Valentine’s Day but because I am representing my father’s party, of which the late bishop was a pillar. (Applause)

I knew the late bishop through my late father, Mr Kwoba. The late bishop was the only person who would enter the intensive care unit in Mulago to pray for my father and he would find me attending to my father because my mother had already passed on. The bishop prayed and blessed me and he said, “My daughter, you will be a leader” and in deed I am. He even said, “You will get married to a pastor” and I am a pastor’s wife. Bishop, when you meet my father, who was your great friend, tell him that Jane is now a leader –(Member timed out.)

6.16
MS VERONICA KADOGO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to the late Bishop Bamwoze. On behalf of the people of Buyende and Busoga at large, I convey my condolences to the family of the late Bishop Bamwoze for the loss of a loved one. 

For the time I have known the late Bishop Bamwoze, I have known him as a straightforward person and as a person who walked his talk and preached economic and social transformation. I have known the late Bishop Bamwoze a man of his word to the extent that he even had to make a will which said that he does not need wreaths on his casket. It means that he meant what he preached. He even said that such wasteful resources should go to the projects, which he had started.

My prayer is that the Government takes up the projects, which the late had started. I also pray that the family should continue with the work, which the late had started. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: A total of 42 Members have contributed. Hon. Prime Minister, there are three issues that have come up. The first one is the resolution of the issue of Busoga University, which he very passionately wanted and I wish it could be resolved sooner than later. The second one is the issue of the dictionary, which he wanted the people to get. Can we find a way of getting it out? 

The third issue is the Busoga Rural Development Centre at Naminage, which he had started but was disrupted in the church and he did not complete it. It would be very good for the Government to complete those projects, in his honour, so that he can rest in peace.

I do not have much to say. As a region, we are in mourning and in Kamuli we are in mourning. There is very little we can say other than “thank you” to him. Therefore, honourable members, I put the question that this House do adopt the motion as moved by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today the body is going to Nakakabala to stay overnight. Tomorrow, the district council of Kamuli will assemble at Nakakabala to have a special sitting in his honour. On Saturday, he will be taken to Busoga Lukiiko for another tribute by Obwa Kyabazinga Bwa Busoga. On Sunday, prayers will be at Bugembe Stadium but the burial will then be at the cathedral. Members who are interested should let us know so that we can arrange for their transport.

MS MUGENI: Madam Speaker, there are some Members who had brought wreaths for laying but you guided that we cannot lay them here. With your guidance, what should we do because some Members may not be able to attend the burial?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members; he declined. He said, “Do not put any wreath on my casket.” That is why we did not do it today. Sorry, but we will put them somewhere else. He did not want them. 

The East African Community Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late Rt Rev. Cyprian Kikunhi Bamwoze, Bishop Emeritus)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we want to thank you very much for giving your time to bid farewell to a distinguished Ugandan. We would like to thank Government for recognising his contribution. I am sure that the Church of Uganda, the people of Uganda and his family are comforted.

The House was adjourned to next week and this was a special sitting. Therefore, we remain adjourned to Tuesday. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 6.25 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 February at 2.00 p.m.)
