Thursday, 28 February, 2013

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will amend the Order Paper slightly to permit the presentation of three petitions; one from hon. Ssewungu; and another from Commissioner Jalia Bintu; then there will be two matters raised by hon. Anywar and hon. Eriaku.

PRESENTATION OF PETITIONS

3.00
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a petition on Table under Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

This is a humble petition of pupils, parents and the school management committee of Nakasero Primary School, being presented by me, Member of Parliament, Kalungu West. 


The subject matter of this petition is: “The current situation of land grabbing at Nakasero Primary School by Prestigious Apartment Limited in collusion with Uganda Land Commission.” This is as a result of a lease granted by Uganda Land Commission.”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, do not go to the body; state the source and the prayers.

MR SSEWUNGU: The source is Nakasero Primary School; they are the petitioners and I am representing them on a matter of land, which is a school playground that was leased out. 

I will lay the land title of Prestigious Apartments Limited, which is not a well-known company, here.

As I read the petition, we shall get the facts about the Prestigious Apartments company. Let me go to the prayers.

    1. “Government, through the Uganda Land Commission, should rescind or decline to renew the lease as the rightful owners were not consulted. 

When this land was being given to these people, there was no consultation carried out with the school management committee though there are letters I am going to lay on Table from the Ministry of Education giving a letter of no objection to give out this playground, where children go for sports.

    2. An investigation should be conducted in the role played by the Ministry of Education in the disposal of the school land. 

    3. We urge the Inspectorate of Government to produce a report on the transaction as it had commenced investigations.

    4. A thorough investigation be conducted into the role played by Prestigious Apartments Limited and its directors.

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the petition. 

I want to attach the signatures of the petitioners. First, is the list of teachers from Nakasero Primary School. I beg to lay.

Then also, school children of Nakasero Primary School, right from primary one to primary seven. I beg to lay

I also want to lay some letters. This is the land title, which was leased out. It was given by Uganda Land Commission to Prestigious Apartments Limited, where the latter has so far divided this land into three blocks of land. The facts we are getting are that they have also mortgaged this piece of land to Crane Bank and we are told that they bought this land at approximately Shs 3 billion.  I also beg to lay the title.

We had to take time to find out who Prestigious Apartments Limited was. This is a company, which was incorporated on 5 August 2010, and has two directors; Mr Ephraim Ntaganda of Kampala and Mr Bob Kanabi.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu you are now going into the merits of the petition.

MR SSEWUNGU: This company, which is taking this piece of land had shares - according to the Registrar of Companies - amounting to Shs 20 million, but we are yet to find out. I also beg to lay.

I want to lay on Table a letter which was written by the Commissioner of Secondary Education, that is Mr Agaba - a former brother - giving a letter of no objection to lease out this land, yet the school was not consulted. This letter was written on August 19, 2010 and it came from the Ministry of Education to the Uganda Land Commission. I beg to lay.

Then on 31st May also, the Permanent Secretary had a letter which we got, but h he says this was a fake letter; it was forged. However, it was also giving a go-ahead for the land of the school to be taken. I also beg to lay.

A company known as collateral legal mortgage has already mortgaged the land and together with Prestigious Apartments Limited plus Crane Bank limited who have the land title of this school. I beg to lay.

This is the certificate of that company known as Prestigious Apartments Limited. I do not know where these apartments are found in Uganda.

I also beg to lay the expression of interest by this company to take up this land. This is what they wrote and we want to know whether it was the right procedure.

As I conclude, let me also lay on Table two documents. A letter that was written by Uganda Land Commission to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, and it was signed by a gentleman known as KSB Mubala, Secretary, Uganda Land Commission. 

The letter states that the land belongs to Uganda Land Commission and had been reserved for use by the school. That one, I beg to lay.

As I conclude, let me also lay on Table, a letter from Nakasero Primary School and it talks about a land lease to the private developers. It was signed by Paul Idule, Secretary, Uganda Land Commission.

All these letters will help us know who is exactly stealing this land.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, the issue of taking school land, mainly playgrounds, is increasing. For example, Ntaganda is the same person who was involved in taking the Kitante Secondary School land. He was involved in Buganda Road Primary School; and in taking land, which was a health centre at Nasser Road.

He has currently taken this land now and we are told he is somebody from Rwanda. We want to prove whether he is a Ugandan, and why he is transacting in taking school land and other places. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

3.09
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, woman representative Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Interruption) 

MR SSEBAGALA: I rise on a point of procedure. Hon. Ssewungu has just presented a petition and I did not hear you referring it to the relevant committee.

THE SPEAKER: I will do so after she has spoken.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to present a humble petition of Makerere University students.

The petition shows and states that:

“The subject matter of the petition regards the university policy that requires students to pay 60 percent of the tuition by the 6th week of the semester.

It further states that the petitioners have a right to education granted to them by the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which should not be unjustly denied to them by the university.”

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Commissioner, do not go the merits. Go to the prayers.

MS BINTU: “The petitioners, therefore, pray to this Parliament that:

“1.	 It carries out an investigation into the matter; 

2. 	It investigates the students’ population and the use of the university fund.

3. 	Parliament urges Government to halt and review the university policy on the above subject matter.

4. 	Parliament urges Government to expedite the implementation of the students’ loan scheme. 

Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.”

Before you, I would like to lay the petition and the signatures of the petitioners.” I beg to move.


THE SPEAKER: Those are two petitions. The first one is of the land. It will be committed to the Committee of Physical Infrastructure.  The second will be committed to the Committee on Education.

3.12
MR EMMANUEL ERIAKU (NRM, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national interest.

On the 21st of this month, three senior officials from Amuria District Local Government, namely, the Chief Administrative Officer, the Chief Finance Officer and the District Health Officer were arrested and brought to Kampala.

On Friday 22nd, they were produced in the Anti-Corruption Court and charged with corruption-related offences. Consequently, the Ministry of Local Government interdicted the three officials and this leaves Amuria District completely paralysed. There is no activity going on because the three are the key signatories.

Considering where Amuria District is coming from, we see a situation whereby the funds allocated for the recovery programme and other service delivery activities will be coming back to the centre.

I pray that the Ministry of Local Government saves the people of Amuria by urgently assigning an official to act as the CAO for Amuria District Local Government. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: I hope that the senior ministers are taking note of the issues raised by the Members.

3.13
MR YONA MUSINGUZI (NRM, Ntungamo Municipality, Ntungamo District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Today, I want to express my concern to the people of this nation.

I have been moving around Lake Mburo National Park, but as we speak today, if you went to this park, you would think that you have gone to a national park for cows and goats.

There are permanent structures in the park,  and if you move around, you will find zebras and giraffes, grazing with cows and goats and you may wonder which one is a wild animal.
There are people who have fenced off square miles of land in the park. I am made to understand that in the last Parliament, some money was set aside to fence off all the national parks, but for Lake Mburo, this has not been done. People have gone on to encroach on the land.

If you move in Lake Mburo National Park today, you will find Warid, MTN and Airtel masts meaning that there is human settlement in the park because wild animals do not have phones.

We have got to raise our voices and save the situation. Lake Mburo National Park is no longer there.

I do not know who is going to convey my message because I do not see the minister responsible here, but I think, when he comes, you will task him to tell us who legalised the encroachment on Lake Mburo to the extent of having permanent structures in the park, which means there is somebody behind it; and who are these people? Why can’t they fence off the park if the money was provided? (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, hon. Musinguzi, for giving way. The information I would like to give you honourable members is that in the Sixth Parliament, Government undertook to resettle part of the park for returnees after the 1981-1985 war.

If that part was cut off, why again are there settlements within the park? Can Government explain to this country, if indeed, it is giving tacit approval for people to encroach on a national resource?

Maybe, we have to review the circumstances under which part of the park was given out for resettlement. I undertook a study there and I know there was a deliberate resettlement.

There came a point where people around the park could access routes to the water points because that is a water stressed area. Now, from having the access routes during the dry spell - and they were clearly marked for a specific period.

What the honourable member is raising, is that there are now permanent structures, fencing off of square miles of farmlands,
 and in the process, taking over the national park. 

Can Government come and tell us, through you, Madam Speaker, what is happening to the national parks of this country? Queen Elizabeth National Park under this oil exploration is suffering the same. Murchison Falls National Park is suffering the same fate. Why are our national parks increasingly being subjected to harm and to extinction, yet, they are some of the permanent and durable resources that this country can preserve to fetch the much desired foreign exchange? 

Even after the oil has been depleted, what is the policy of Government –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssekikubo, you have smuggled in a contribution. Please wind up. (Laughter)

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, there are banana plantations in Lake Mburo National Park. If it means decongesting the congested districts - in Ntungamo District, we are too decongested. If the minister allowed me today, I would carry my people to the national park and they get land.

THE SPEAKER: You are congested, not decongested. 

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, I beg that the senior ministers who are here should convey this information to the minister responsible or they could be responsible. I think that is why they are here. Otherwise, we who move around this park to go to Ntungamo and Mbarara every other day, and are in the business of tourism, we are worried for this country. 

Thank you. 

3.20
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance. As we are all aware, our neighbours, the Republic of Kenya, will by next week go to the polls. Drawing from the history of the previous elections, the repercussion of our neighbours going to the polls was massive. As we prepare to see our neighbours go through the democratic process of electing their leaders and probably changing or retiring those who have already served, we are worried as Ugandans, of how our economy will be stabilised. 

My concern is that we need assurance and a statement from Government to this House, telling us of the available stock of fuel in this country because the last time we visited the fuel facilities in Jinja, they were under rehabilitation. 

We want to know whether we have stock in those facilities and how long it will take us, and at a stabilised price. What happened in the previous election should not happen again here because it is going to destabilise our economy and all of us are going to fall victim. 

We would like this statement to be brought to the House so that our people, the traders and all Ugandans know because fuel is key. Once there is scarcity of fuel, prices escalate and, therefore, others take advantage. We want to know how prepared Government is in terms of fuel stocks when our neighbours go to the polls. Thank you. 

3.22
MR BARNABAS TINKASIMIIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I rise on a matter of national importance. We have read in the press that Uganda is presenting a candidate to become President of the 69th Session of the UN Assembly, which runs from 2014 to 2015. 

We have persistently seen it in the press. We do not want to continue treating this matter as hearsay, and we have also not confirmed from the Government side whether it is true that as a country, we are vying for this great position. 

Secondly, as a country we are interested in knowing which person we are sending to fill this great position. Of course, you know that literally, this would be the first diplomat. We want to maintain a good reputation for Uganda as the Pearl of Africa, and it depends on the type of person we send to this office. So, we are interested in the government –(Interruption) 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Tinkasiimire, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and before a country presents candidature, the Minister of Foreign Affairs should come to this Floor to tell us which name they are fronting. Secondly, they should also have come to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, but they never came. Last time, I raised issues here. Even with the issue of elections in the neighbourhood, the Minister of Foreign Affairs should have come to brief this Parliament. 

The information I would like to give is that they have never even brought the issue to the Committee on Foreign Affairs. 

Secondly, before you present a candidate, what type of candidate are you presenting? The profile is very important and that can also shame the country. So, this is a very serious matter. 

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. For sure, we do not want to go outside this country, the Pearl of Africa, and we are called names because of a person who is going to represent us in the United Nations Assembly – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the question is, are we presenting a candidate? Can the government inform us whether we are vying for the seat? I think that is where we are.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: And who? The country is interested in knowing the reputation and suitability of this person.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. It is not just speculation in the media. This matter was handled at the East African Community level; hon. Sam Kutesa was nominated by Uganda and East Africa approved him as the candidate to be the President of the United Nations General Assembly in the year 2014/2015. 

So, with the 1998 censure, with the CHOGM scandal, and with the inquiry this Parliament is doing right now under oil, I do not know whether he is the qualified person for that position. That is the information I would like to give you. 

MR TINKASIMIIRE: Madam Speaker, you can see why we need to know whether this country is presenting a candidate. Secondly, the type of person. The information he has given gives us a lot of insight into what type of person is going to represent us. 

You know, in outside countries – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are now debating. I thought you wanted to know from the government what they are doing. 

So, can the senior minister respond to the issues raised? 

3.28
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Kahinda Otafiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to the concerns of the honourable members and I can address some of them now, while for the others, I will pass them to the relevant ministers for responses later on.

Allow me address the question on Lake Mburo. I would like to assure and remind the House that only Parliament has the power to degazette national parks and forest reserves. So, if anybody is found living, encroaching or doing any other thing in the national park or forest reserve without the consent of Parliament, they are breaking the law. (Interjections) Yes, the houses can be demolished; they are not dictums from the Almighty. It is only the law of God that cannot be reversed. But whatever is done by human beings can be reversed by other human beings. So, nobody should be scared about the presence of illegal encroachers. (Interruption)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification in my capacity as the Shadow Minister of Environment. Is the minister just waking up to realise that the mentioned national park is already encroached upon? Is he aware that pursuant to Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution, that resource we are talking about is supposed to be a natural resource for the entire country and held in public trust on behalf of the people of Uganda by the Uganda Government? Now, for him to come here and say, “We know it is a national park, things will be handled…” and yet the place is already encroached upon, is a shame to the Government of Uganda. 

I expected him to be apologetic for what is already a misdeed in law and he is a whole Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. He knows well that the defence I am articulating is stated under Article 237(2)(b) of the Constitution, which he is supposed to defend as Minister in Charge of Constitutional Affairs. What is he talking about? (Laughter)

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I respect the diatribe of hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi, “The Man” as a personal opinion, but I am not the one who invented the words “illegality” and “encroaching”. These are factors of life. If somebody encroaches on the national park, it is the government’s duty to rectify that irregularity. We take responsibility; thank you for bringing it to our attention. And I am speaking as the previous Minister of Tourism. So, I know what I am talking about, hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. (Laughter)

As for Kenya, we wish our neighbours good luck in the exercise of their democratic rights in the elections. And we hope and pray that nothing goes wrong because they have learnt their lessons. However, Government has already taken measures to provide for any occurrences just in case anything goes wrong. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I expect the – 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: As for the candidates, we are not yet aware of anybody being proposed as a candidate. (Interjections) If it was discussed in the East African Legislative Assembly, Cabinet has not yet been briefed. (Interjections) So, let us cross the bridge when we get to it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall expect the sector ministers to fully answer those questions next week. [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Let us look for a candidate.”]  Parliament to look for a candidate? No. Wait for the minister to come and give us a statement, then you can tell him that you want to be a candidate. 

Honourable members that concludes the private Members’ business. Let us move on to the next business on the Order Paper.  (Mr Odonga Otto rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Otto?

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance and indulgence that the next item we are going to discuss - the report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the petition by the National Association of Private Universal Secondary Education Schools on the inadequate facilitation by Government. 
I thought this is a very important and serious matter, that bringing it at a time when we are partially charged for the Marriage and Divorce Bill may not give it the full attention this House ought to give it. 

I am seeking your indulgence so that this important matter could probably be carried forward so that we have a sense of continuity from where we ended at 8.30 p.m. last night. Besides, the minister is not here.  So, we do not want to talk to ourselves. 

I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Is that the feeling of all other Members? [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Yes.”] Anyway, I do not see the minister or the ministers of state –(Laughter)- They are celebrating the results? (Laughter) Okay, the issue is important, but we want the minister to be here. So, let us defer it; we shall find time for it later. It will get priority. 

MR SANJYA TANNA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. We are discussing extremely important issues, but I see the  seat of the Leader of Government Business is empty as well as that of the Chief Whip. So, we are not aware of who is in charge. 

So, is it procedurally right, despite your several reminders about attendance of Parliament and the Cabinet keep ignoring your call? Would it be procedurally right, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if the sector minister was not here, I would be worried. But I can see the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, and the deputy Attorney-General here – 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, as far as the Executive is concerned, there is no vacuum. My senior colleague, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is standing in for the Leader of Government Business. I also have the singular honour and challenge to be acting Chief Whip. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we had partially debated and now, we want to invite hon. Bayiga.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

(Debate continues.)

3.38
DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, senior ministers here took off time to define for us what marriage is all about. One of them called it “a biological contract” and another one called it “a social contract”. I do not know where they get those definitions from. 

I am a Catholic and for us, it is “a covenant” where its dissolution would be with the singular authority of the Pope. Once we are married, it is a very strong bond, and that bond is a covenant. [MRS KIBOIJANA: “Information”] I will take the information later because this is just a preamble –(Interruption)

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am equally a Catholic by faith and I am wondering, because only the other day, all of us know that the Pope resigned. Under the circumstances - (Interruption)

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. This Parliament is not in the Vatican; and it is a dogma of the church, to begin debating about the Pope here. So, are you in order to begin talking about the Pope?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us go to the substance of the Bill, please.

DR BAYIGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg for your protection. I listened very attentively to the debate that ensued yesterday and everybody had their own definitions. I find this Bill very controversial. I understand a lot of research has been done including a lot of input from various sections of this country including from women leaders, feminists and so on; yet we continue to have various areas of contention in this law.

My thrust on this debate will take two folds; one on the customary bit and the other one on the Christian bit. I have tried to read this Bill as it is and I find that the proposals therein seek to remove the responsibility of the family to determine the spouse of their children, and I can see that the State would like to take charge of it by bringing in the sub-county chiefs.

As long as you tell me, in this Bill, that the consent of the family members - the father, mother or a guardian for that matter or a head of the clan - will not have a bearing on the direction taken by their children, you are directly impinging on the right of the family to model the future of their children, and I find that very unacceptable.

There are a number of pretexts that have been given, like trying to equate what we call dowry -(Interruption)- I will take the information cautiously.

MR NYOMBI THEMBO: I just wanted to inform my colleague that I think by the time people choose to marry, they cannot be referred to as children, because I have heard him mentioning children repeatedly. By the time people marry, they cannot be children; and of course, children are defined in the Constitution and other relevant laws. Probably, you may use another construction, but not children. That is the information.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you, but I would like to educate you that before your father, mother or guardian, you are a child. These are the differences of opinion based on the customs where we come from, but I am a child of my father and I continue to be one even at 43 years. I believe you are also still one.

So, as long as this Bill proposes to remove -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: It is three minutes. No, but the standard is three minutes, you know that. 

DR BAYIGGA: Can’t you give me one minute?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute to conclude.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I will jump to the second one. We –(Interruption)- Protect me, Madam Speaker, from the rude interruption. (Interruption)

MS BETTY AMONGI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order under Article 31 on the right of the family. Article 31(3) states that, “Marriage shall be entered into with the free consent of the man and woman intending to marry.” Is it in order for the honourable member to assume that we can amend the Constitution while making this Bill?

THE SPEAKER: What is your problem with the issue of consent?

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, I think I am just being derailed from my speech. Thank you very much, I beg to continue. 

There are very many ways in which people can look at why they should contribute to the future of their children. Look at a scenario where I do not have the right to determine the spouse of my child on the basis of health or character. For instance, drug abuse, night dancers or witchcraft which may be on the other side, and I would not want my child to go into such a family. So, you are telling me that as long as they agree, the right of the parent to determine that is out of context? I do not think this is acceptable.

When it comes to the sub-county chief registering marriages, it presupposes that the sub-county chief will be in attendance of every customary marriage taking place and, therefore - (Member timed out.)

MR MUSINGUZI: Procedure

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

MR MUSINGUZI: Madam Speaker, the point of procedure I am raising is that we are talking about the Marriage and Divorce Bill. When I look around in this House, I see some married men and some divorced men and women. I think it would be procedurally right for those who have an interest in the Bill - those who are married and those who have divorced - to get out and those who are not married or divorced debate the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Musinguzi, I do not know where your anger is coming from. Can I ask your neighbours to comfort you and make you happy? (Laughter)

3.48
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My time is running and I am seeing a lot of disorderliness.

THE SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Atiku is on the Floor.

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I want to thank the committee for this report. Secondly, our motto states “For God and my Country” and every time we legislate here, that motto rings in everybody’s mind. But since yesterday, my phone has been flooded with messages, and my emails with messages from both within Uganda - that is from my constituency - and also from outside Uganda. So, that raises two questions: What is the interest of those who are from outside Uganda? What interest do they have in this Bill? 

What I am going to present here is partly what I gathered from around my constituency. First, I was told to ensure the definition of marriage comes out clearly. As the honourable colleague, Dr Lulume, defined it from the Roman Catholic Church point of view, it is a covenant, and it is a covenant guided by the Canon Law under the matrimonial laws. In this definition of marriage, we should be able to deduce civil marriage, which is recognised here in this country; , be able to deduce religious marriage, which for me, as a Catholic, is guided by the Canon Law; and be able to deduce the customary marriage, which the law requires that it is registered at the sub-county level.

Secondly, my voters said that cohabitation cannot be part of marriage, and we should desist from legalising cohabitation. Today, Uganda is suffering from the scourge of HIV/AIDS as a result of cohabitation. What we know in our society as the process of marriage -(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information -

MR ATIKU: I will take information later because I have only three minutes. What we take as the process of marriage is eloping; that is, running away from your parents’ guidance without informing them with the intention of getting married. And, cohabitation does not suffice, because after you have eloped, your parents are notified of where you are and eventually, the process of marriage is initiated. (Member timed out.)

3.51
MS FLORENCE EKWAU IBI (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the Bill. Most of my arguments are going to be based on clause 14, especially sub-clause (2), which supports the issue of those who demand for the return of the marriage gifts and the dowry that has been paid. Women in cultures where dowry is paid in terms of cows - most especially the rural woman - really suffer in marriages just in the name of dowry, because they cannot return and refund the amounts paid for cows. They stay in the marriage and in most cultures, immediately a woman is married, the brothers wait for the same dowry to marry their wives and the cycle continues. By the time a woman divorces, she is at pain of returning the cows, which could have been used by three or four other people. You suffer in the marriage in the name of returning gifts that were given to your parents. So, on this issue, we urgently ask Members to support the issue of non-refunding of the dowry. This would really be of great service to mostly the rural woman. 

The other issue is that on the contentious issues, we really urge Members to prepare amendments other than throwing out this Bill at the end of the day, after we have belaboured to debate. Let us, as the Ninth Parliament, break the record as the Parliament that has passed the law that has stood the test of time and been on the shelves for over 47 years. I think this would be good. And on this matter, I urge that we prepare, as people’s representatives, to sensitise the communities. 

When it comes to the issue of property, why this Bill has met a lot of resistance upcountry, away from the urban centres, is that it is misconceived that it is the women who want to share the property of the men. Times have changed; the world has changed and –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, honourable comrade, for giving way. The information I would like to give is pertaining to the issue of lack of sufficient information about this Bill in the rural areas. The people of Obongi want us to go and consult them on this Bill, and so the community needs to be consulted. Thank you. 

MS EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Even before we came to this Parliament, there were other Parliaments before us, and if you have not consulted for the last 47 years, honestly, we are deceiving ourselves. So, we urge Members to go out and sensitise the people, especially in the rural communities after we have passed this Bill. Otherwise, we shall move in a merry-go-round and the cycle will continue.

So, Madam Speaker, we have to change this notion of saying that it is the women grabbing property.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I like your proposal that after passing this Bill, we should go out and sensitise the people. (Interjections) That is what she said. I would like to think it would be even more appropriate, instead of waiting and we pass the Bill and then we go out to sensitise, why don’t we do what hon. Fungaroo has said? We first go and consult the people. (Interjections)(Applause)

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much, honourable member. 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order! Honourable members, I think you should take the courage to make decisions. Yes, honourable members. Order please! Honourable members this Bill has been on the Table for 47 years. There must be an end to it. 

MS EKWAU IBI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I urgently call upon Members to look at this Bill as a Bill that will be a solution, other than a Bill that will be a problem. Honestly speaking, if we did not sensitise our communities in the last 47 years, then we are deceiving ourselves.

So, I urge that we pass this Bill. Those with contentious issues prepare amendments and then we move on. 

3.58
MR JOSEPH BBOSA KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, allow me to also extend thanks to the committee for the wonderful work it has done in presenting this report. However, honourable colleagues, I would only request you to lend me your ears for– 

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MR BBOSA KIYINGI: Just the few minutes that I have got to speak on this matter. Since yesterday, I have gained interest in one of the most contentious issues in this report and in the Bill, and that is the matter of cohabitation. 

Believe me, I do not fall short when it comes to cohabitation, and I decided to go an extra mile to look at what exactly this cohabitation stands for. So, in looking at the definition provided in the Bill, I saw that it left a lot to be desired. Cohabitation means a man and woman living together as husband and wife. So, I moved forth to get other definitions. The Oxford Dictionary goes ahead and says cohabiting is defined as living together and having a sexual relationship without being married. 

So, I carried on to look for the origin of this word “cohabitation.” It comes from as far as the 16th Century from Latin meaning “cohabite” which was derived from “co” which is together and “habite” which is dwell.
 
Now, honourable colleagues, I would kindly request you to look at this matter from a much broader perspective. You may be looking at cohabitation from the parent point of view but what about the children. Let me not call them children, but the students in the universities. Are you aware that in one way or another they cohabit? When you look at the rights of the people who are engaged in this act of cohabitation, don’t you think there is a bad precedence we are actually bringing up even among our own children? So, I am trying to bring this point out very clearly, calling upon -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you hon. Kiyingi Bbosa for giving way. From the Advanced Learners’ Dictionary, the deduction from the definition you gave does not necessarily say this cohabitation and having whatever they do is between human beings. It could even be between animals.

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: Thank you, hon. Oboth, for the useful information. So, in this case, honourable colleagues, I would want to take this opportunity -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Allow hon. Kiyingi to speak, please.

MR KIYINGI BBOSA: I would like to take this opportunity to have the last nail in this vice of cohabitation by standing out as a Member of Parliament with your support to uphold the institution of marriage, so that I get married to spread the same message to the people of Uganda as an example; and so that we can strengthen the institution of marriage, to protect even the integrity that we have as parents and people of this country. (Member timed out.)

4.01
MS TOPHACE KAAHWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Hoima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with a good report, and I stand to support the Bill, but I have some observations. I want to begin from where my colleague has ended; the issue of cohabitation. Cohabitation is immoral and we cannot support it or make it legal. Much as we know that many people are involved - many people are victims, but we cannot support it; we should find a way of protecting our people who are affected because when you look at our rural women, they are affected, but we cannot pass it because of that. We shall find a way of handling it, but let us pass this Bill. It is very important; it is strengthens the marriage institution -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Has she finished? Information?

MS KAWOOYA BANGIRANA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. This morning, under our organisation UWOPA, we had a meeting. We had to deliberate on these issues and we agreed that when we come to committee stage, we are going to look at this issue of cohabitation and we find a way so that we are seen to be moving forward. So, we shall come back at committee stage and this is where we are going to have a harmonised position and even an amendment. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that those of us in the ministry or those of us who have brought this Bill, we are not protecting cohabitation for its sake, but we are recognising a reality that has consequences. These consequences are the offspring. We must institutionalise regulations that will make those who are involved in this exercise responsible for their offspring. So, you must recognise the practice in order to create obligations. (Interjections) Yes! What will you do - Honourable members, what will you do to protect the children of those who are born out of cohabitation?

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members. Hon. Tophace Kaahwa.

MS KAAHWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I acknowledge the contentious issues, but we shall agree whether to leave it or remove it. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, proceed, hon. Tophace Kaahwa.

MS KAAHWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I said earlier on, it is immoral. I am not supporting it to be there because we cannot legalise it, but we shall find a way of handling it, to protect the people who are affected.

Secondly, I support this Bill because it is well set. I disagree with people who are coming up with their arguments, by bringing up the issues of one to one and the rest. The Bill provides for different types of marriages. We have the church marriage, customary marriage and civil marriage. You have a choice to make. If you want to go with - why cohabitation, because you have a right to choose? (Member timed out.) (Honourable members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: The rules do not allow you to speak again on the same matter. Those who spoke, please sit down. I know you. Sit down.

4.06
MS THEOPISTA SSENTONGO NABULYA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also take the opportunity to thank the committee for the good work done, but I also stand to support this Bill. However, in my view, I start with the title. The title should change to depict the essence of this Bill, because the Bill means well for the state of our country. So, we better start with the title. The title depicts something negative. Probably, that could be the reason why some people are not accepting this Bill. 

Secondly, when you look at this Bill, generally speaking, the Bill is not bad per se, but there are a few concerns which Members feel should be addressed, and I think this is possible. This is not going to be the first Bill in which we make amendments. We had better come up with positive amendments to retain the Bill so that we can have a proper law that can govern our society with regard to the institution of marriage.

I also think that if this Bill is protected and is passed, it is going to protect the society and achieve social justice; protect the human rights of the women especially -(Interjections)- and men at the same time. 

If you look at it and read it properly - I would like to reverse the fear of Members that probably, this Bill is encouraging people to divorce. It is the opposite. It is trying to harmonise marriage. Please, analyse it very well. It is trying to harmonise marriage and also make people enjoy their human rights because all human beings are equal. We all have the same rights. We should not segregate anyone whatsoever. So, cohabitation –(Interjections)- in marriage, I think it is the interpretation of the word. 

Otherwise, I would think that the interpretation is needed. It could maybe be accommodated, but it should not be taken as a marriage. (Interjections) We should instead think of a way of bringing a decent Bill to cover people who are in cohabitation because these are human beings, they are giving birth to children and they have human rights. Parliament has a duty to protect them as well.

4.10
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am also concerned about the title of the Bill. For those of us who subscribe to the Christian faith, the Bible states that, “What God has put together, no man shall put asunder.” (Interjections) So, to talk about divorce is like encouraging it. We should not be making a law that seems to be encouraging divorce. (Applause)

On the issue of gifts or bride price, I do not really support the idea that we should make it optional. These are communities which have been following their cultures and for me, as long as the culture is not negative; I do not have any reason why we should condition them and say that it should be optional. In the community that I come from, bride price is a sign of appreciation. It is a sign of unity between the two families. And then for us, when these cows are given as bride price -

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members. Order! please.

MS NAUWAT: When the cows are given as bride price, it is a way of also pruning the animals in the kraal. So, there is no problem with that. (Interjections)  It is not really unseen harmful practice unlike FGM, Madam Speaker, where I can go and tell my people that it is harmful. For this one, I do not really see how I can even begin telling them that it is bad, because it is something that is out of their own will. And, – (Ms Oleru Huda rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Information from hon. Aleru. Is it information?

MS OLERU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just want to inform the Member who is on the Floor right now that what the Bill is seeking to do is not to ban that precious practice that comes from that region. What we are saying in the Bill, and what I would like the House to support is that we want to protect Members in case the other family requests for a return of the bride price. That is what the Bill is seeking to say. If you ask for it, it is bad. (Interjections)

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Interpreting the law is not very simple for everybody. That is why people break the law and at the end of the day, the law will tell you ignorance of the law is no defence. (Applause) So, Madam Speaker, we need to put it clearly for the people. (Interruption) (Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: Order? What is it? Order? Yes.

MR AWONGO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Mutyabule to stop a Member who is already on the Floor, telling her to stop talking about those things she is saying -(Interjections)- when  she has a right to whatever she has for discussion? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this subject is very exciting, but I want to appeal to you to appreciate that here, we represent the Christians, the pagans, and the Muslims; we represent the whole society. So, allow Members to express their views. 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am suggesting that we pick those elements of the Bill which are positive. The negative ones, for example, like that one of returning the bride price, I would not support it.

4.15
MRS FLAVIA KABAHENDA RWABUHORORO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to –(Interjections)- appreciate that this Bill has evolved for quite a long time.

At one time, this Bill was called Domestic Relations. When we talk about domestic relations, then cohabitation would have a place because it is just a type of relationship. But when we talk about marriage in the Ugandan law, then cohabitation has no place.

Madam Speaker, I want to really appreciate that cohabitation is real and even appreciate that the people who stay in cohabitation have options. They have alternatives, but they have deliberately decided to stay like that and they have reasons, which are sound to them. (Interjections) I want to also recognise that it is a very big number of people who are living like this, but deliberately, and I want to respect them.

There is no way, we are going in this Bill, to talk about the rights of a section of persons whose definition we do not have in our law. I want to pray that we remove the issues of cohabitation wherever they are in this Bill and maybe, some people can prepare a different Bill to first of all, pray that Government respects and recognises cohabitation, and then we can go ahead and proceed to rights; but for now, we cannot talk about the rights of people we do not recognise. 

Two, I want to talk about clause 14(2). I want to support clause 14(2) because the refund of this so-called bride price is a serious matter on the dignity of women and the way they suffer in these homes. It is even very discriminatory. 

In one of the cultures where my sister got married, the man will bring the cows for bride price and on the eve of the wedding, the man’s people will come to this girl’s home and give “emihingiro” but when the man is demanding for his cows, he does not return the “emihingiro.” So, it is a loss on the woman’s side because they give a lot of gifts to this man in form of TVs, fridges and others which are even of more value than the cows he brought -(Interjections)- but he does not refund them. 

In this regard, Madam Speaker, I will not support the idea of refunding bride price. (Member timed out.)

4.18
MR JOHN MULIMBA (NRM, Samia-Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to appreciate the committee for the good work done. But I would like to seek clarification. From Interpretation - “Application: This Act applies, unless otherwise provided, to all persons in Uganda who celebrate civil, Christian, Hindu, Bahai or customary marriages or institute matrimonial proceedings.” 

In two, it states that this Act does not bar parties who profess the Muslim faith from proceeding under it. 

Yesterday, hon. Latif Ssebaggala put up a spirited fight and he was consoled by being told that this law does not apply to people who profess the Muslim faith. 

I wish to seek clarification, Madam Speaker. If the intention of this law is to bring peace or harmony in marriages; take a situation where I am married in the Christian faith and somehow, the marriage gets sour, and I get to realise, and I am served with the intention to file a divorce, I may cross to Islam. That means this law no longer applies to me. So, what happens under such circumstances?

Secondly, do not I entirely support clause 14(a) which states that, “Marriage gifts are not essential requirements”. But I support clause 14(2) which talks about demanding a refund of dowry. In any sensible society, if marriage has gone bad, and these are deemed gifts, then nobody should rise up to demand for the gifts. 

But I think it is not proper to put it down in this law that marriage gifts are not deemed essential. I think this should be left for our cultures to decide that. Just make it optional. If I love my spouse and I want to pay 15 Friesian cows for her, that is my choice. 

The other matter is, I sympathise with Reverends and Fathers and all religious leaders on cohabitation. As put here in the interpretation – although you say it is not a form of marriage recognised in Uganda, but by definition here, it appears to be a form of marriage. Because it staes that, “Any two persons who stay together shall be deemed to be husband and wife.” (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, the chairperson of the committee told us that they are proposing to delete clause 14(1); that is what they told us in their report. 

4.21
MS BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the report and the passing of this Bill. Madam Speaker, it has been a long time since we tried to have this law passed. And we have been consulting again and again; and there is no way we can go out again to make more consultations. I think we have made a number of compromises to ensure that this Bill passes. 

First of all, on the issue of bride price, women have been suffering because of bride price. But also men have been suffering. When the bride price is paid, it is the men who use it and in the end, the women are stressed to pay it back. So, if we say it should not be returned, I think the men are the ones who will enjoy it more than the women. That is why we say that bride price is a gift and it is not returnable. It is for the good of the one who uses it and not for the woman to suffer. For example, at my age, if I decide to divorce my husband, can he collect the nine cows they gave to my father? What about the six children I have given birth to and even my body has depreciated. Who can take me now to be married again? (Laughter) So, those cows will compensate for my depreciation and the children I have produced. 

When it comes to cohabitation, I do not support it. First of all, the report makes it very clear that it is illegal. How can you make an illegal occupant to take an equal share?  Besides, what evidence is there that you have been living with him? When things become sour, how can you now say you share property? Cohabitation is immoral and we have agreed in the caucus of women that we remove it. If it was the one going to stop our Bill, we choose to remove cohabitation. It is now out and nobody should talk about cohabitation. Let us debate the Bill and pass it. (Member timed out.)

4.42
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to refresh the House that this Bill has been evolving and it has been carrying with it several pieces that have been put aside. At one time, we had to remove domestic violence from it. At some other point, we were asked to remove sexual offences from it. 

What we have left in this Bill now is strictly what they call marriage and divorce. Therefore, when we talk about, for instance, cohabitation, cohabitation is not a marriage. If you are doing mathematics and you are looking for intersection circles, then cohabitation is outside that circle. And in a marriage, if we are saying marriage is a contract or a covenant, it comes with obligations, roles and responsibilities. You cannot be outside marriage and want to enjoy things in it without taking on the responsibilities and obligations inside marriage. If you cohabit, you partake of what is in cohabitation because you have made a choice to be there. 

Madam Speaker, in my view, this is like when we made the Political Parties Organisation Act. It is your right to belong to a political party. It is also your right to stay out of a political party. And when you choose to stay out of a political party, you will not be governed by political parties. When you are outside marriage, you will not be governed by the Marriage and Divorce Act. So, like my colleagues have said, we will keep cohabitation outside of this and legislate for it another day. 

Then, I have heard concerns about the title. The intention is also to repeal the Divorce Act. If you look at the Bill, clause 178, it is not that we are re-inventing or providing for divorce. It has always been there and all we are doing is to pick up that Act and repeal it and make it comprehensive. (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I give you half a minute to complete.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, mine is to implore this House so that we move together. Keep the title because we have now narrowed on it as it is, and keep the obligations. If you are in marriage, keep in marriage. If you are cohabiting, we will find a suitable place for you. 

Lastly, on the issue of the fines, if somebody is going to force a widow to be inherited, Shs 48,000 is too little. We must fine that person seriously so that they stop destabilising widows. 

Thank you.

4.28
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. We have consulted with our constituents. I consulted with all my constituents and these are the views that I am going to reflect in this debate. 

On the issue of bride price, I want to thank the committee for deleting clause 14, not to make the provision that they had put that marriage gifts are not essential. In clause 14 (1) my people support bride price, but they do not support the refund of that bride price. I want to support the committee, therefore, when they suggest that we delete clause 14 (1) and we go with clause 14 (2).

On the issue of cohabitation; this is a very complex matter. At least 60 percent of my constituents are cohabiting, but when I asked them if we should recognise cohabitation, they said, “No.” And, therefore, I am opposing bringing cohabitation under this Bill because it has no space. It is talking about marriage and you will notice that I was talking about domestic relations, acts and practices. I, therefore, agree with my constituents that we should not introduce cohabitation here. 

I also want to talk about the title of the Bill. Basing on clause 178, this Act is repealing the Divorce Act and the Marriage Act and, therefore, keeping the title as “Marriage and Divorce” is appropriate here. 

As other Members have said that we have people who are cohabiting - we have people who have cohabited and lost hope and they have moved on and they are now single and living on their own. We need to find a way of safeguarding their interests; the children, who are the outcome of this cohabitation. But you cannot do this under this law. I, therefore, appeal to the Members of Parliament - myself having 60 percent of my constituents cohabiting - they are not recognised, they have no rights and they are not secure. So, really, as a Parliament, we have to find a place somewhere, but not in this law, to see how we are going to help these people.  (Member timed out.)

4.30
MR SANJAY TANNA (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support most parts of this Bill. However, I would like to raise  a few issues. 

The Bill and the amendments by the committee state that should I divorce my wife, then we share our assets. But in the pursuit to fulfil her desires, if I have entered liabilities, why shouldn’t we share the liabilities if any at the time of divorce –(Interjections)- (Laughter) Yes, because the liability which I incurred to fulfil some of her desires – yes, this is very important. So, I will, at the appropriate stage, propose an amendment. 

The second issue is that I would like to disagree with some of my colleagues on the issue of cohabitation.  In the society that we live in, cohabitation is informally recognised as a partnership between two people. The colleagues that are talking about marriage as per the Bible and the Quran – many of these religions came to Uganda after 1900 –(Ms Oleru Huda rose_)

Before I take information - and I would like to take your information, hon. Oleru Huda - I was called by a woman Muslim leader and she said that the Bill we had brought was good and that she had downloaded it from the net. But she said that we were leaving them, the Muslim women, to the same suffering, and that we were not protecting them while we are protecting the others.  (Interruption)

MR SSEBAGGALA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Yesterday, the minister informed us that the Administration of the Muslim Personal Law is in the offing and indeed, we know that the Muslims had their views in as far as the Domestic Relations Bill was concerned, and the government came out to say that they had heard our concerns and that they were making a separate law for the Muslims. 

Is it in order for the honourable member who knows that the Muslims in this country and who follow the Quran were not in agreement with the Domestic Relations Bill, to inform us that a woman Muslim leader has called him to say that they are against this arrangement? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, for the record, I want to inform Members that in the Eighth Parliament, when the Domestic Relations Bill was coming for the second reading, the Muslim women marched here and said that they did not want to be part of that law. They came, and that is how the government – yes, the Muslims marched here, and that is how the government said that we go back and separate. So, really, we cannot have -  

MR TANNA: I thank you for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker, and the information given to us, but I was simply relaying a phone call that came in today.

About sub-clause 14(1) on giving gifts during marriage; during customary marriage, it is normal that we give gifts and we exchange. However, it is culturally embedded that these gifts be received and when divorce or separation occurs, the core gifts must be returned. (Interjections) In Tororo, for example, women have been beaten because of the paying of bride price. 

I have been listening to my honourable colleagues supporting the element of giving bride price for marriage. If at all we support the giving of this bride price – we have an NGO called Mifumi that recovers and protects women who have been beaten by men who claim that they paid for them and they are their property. We have such domestic violence cases on a daily basis in Police. 

I would like to appreciate what hon. Alaso said; that domestic violence was an element that was removed because of those orthodox thinking people, but I would like to still insist that while we are –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I thank you, hon. Tanna, for giving way. We are aware that Europeans do not pay dowry or any bride price, but they fight. Men beat women in Europe. We are also aware that in Asia or India, the women pay dowry for men and the men beat the women. So, please, do not mislead the House that in Tororo, women are beaten because of bride price. (Laughter)

MR FUNGAROO: I thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. The information that I would like to give is that in Obongi, women who are married and have had no bride price paid for them, lose their dignity. They feel that their husbands should pay bride price so that they look and .… live a dignified life. So, bride price payment is also demanded by women. 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MR TANNA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, I would like to support the Bill, except for the element –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Bill. As I said yesterday, I interacted with the women of Oyam, and right from the title, I would like to share with the House their views. Those women –(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: No, she asked for a clarification from the minister. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that I interacted with the women of Oyam, and right from the title, they were saying that if this Bill could be left to be the Marriage Bill, and the divorce part included inside, like that of property rights and inheritance rights. That was their submission, which I find relevant. 

Secondly, I support the committee on the issue of disbanding bride price. This has been a problem for women and not for men, because many times women have been beaten because of bride price. 

I would like to say that bride price has been a pride and source of security to women. But when you say that bride price must be refunded, that is where the problem is. So, I support that bride price must be maintained, but it must not be paid back. 

Secondly, I would like to talk about property and cohabitation. Personally, I do not support cohabitation. When we talk about cohabitation, what comes in here is the separation and sharing of property. When you look at this critically, you find that the rural woman - because this will be handled in court – do rural women have the capacity to pay lawyers who will stand in for them in court? So, the issue of property under cohabitation, I think, can be handled separately, but not under marriage. (Member timed out.)

4.41
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern here is, is it better to be married without love or to cohabit in love and comfort. (Laughter) We have people who are parading rings during the day, but at night they are not even with those partners with whom they have rings but serially cohabiting. So, what is this law trying to cure? That those who are married without love are better off than those who are cohabiting in love and comfort. I need to understand that. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I want to assure this congregation and this House that there is a situation where young people, right from university, are not having decent jobs yet, but they opt to live together and this is actually what is happening to our young people if we really look at the economic situation of our country. They are living in these relationships. For example, the young ladies; you graduate from college at 23 and you look for a job up to 28. The doctor tells you that by 30, you should not be producing anymore because it is biologically risky. As you wait for that almighty ring from the almighty husband, is that a liveable or practical thing in our country. 

So, let us look at it from a practical point of view. You will be waiting for that ring right up to 40. Then you will be having the children thereafter. But here is a situation where these young people are living together – let us leave the risk aspect of it to them, but let us legislate here that in case they have acquired assets and liabilities, there must be a definition of how they will manage it. Otherwise, it is very unrealistic. 

I am speaking as a practicing Catholic. I want us to take faith as one thing and the reality on the ground as another. So, we should not be distracted on matters that are real here because we want our faith and want to please the constituents. 

The other thing that I want to address myself to is the marriage age. I think we should move it to 21 years, because at 18 years somebody is physically grown up, but mentally unprepared and emotionally not ready. From 18 years, we could actually go to 21 years. Look at an 18-year-old who has given birth to triplets or quadruplets. Is this person emotionally mature enough to handle the situation?

Madam Speaker, under clause 144, we are talking about conjugal rights. There is no definition. According to clause 144(a), you are looking at a situation of poor health. What is the definition of poor health, for example? Someone can show me a ring and say, I am married to you, and he will deny me my conjugal rights claiming poor health when this person has serially been cohabiting in another department. 

So, how do I ascertain my conjugal rights? What is the definition of poor health here? (Member timed out.)

4.45
MS AMONGI BETTY (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam District): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will beg you to give me a little bit more time because there are core issues I want to clarify. 

THE SPEAKER: Five minutes. 

MS AMONGI BETTY: Madam Speaker, the first issue I want to address in this Bill is the issue of divorce. Most Members read the Bible and indicated that as Christians or Catholics, marriage is a covenant. 

This Bill protects the right to choice. It is all about choices. You are at liberty to make that choice. I want to refer to the issue of the choice of the form of marriage, which is under clause 12. You can choose a monogamous marriage, which is under sub-clause 12(1)(a) or a potentially polygamous marriage, which is under sub-clause 12(1)(b). 

Therefore, for those Christians who are worried, the Bill protects you. The Bill goes ahead in sections 166, 168, 165 and 175 to protect you in a monogamous marriage. I want to read what sections 166 and 168 state. Section 166 states, “Bigamy - A person who commits bigamy is liable to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points.” Section 168 talks of marriage with a person previously married; the other talks about marrying with a person who is already married. 

So, in this Bill, if someone has married in a monogamous marriage and you go and pretend to be married to that one who is married in a monogamous marriage, you are just masquerading because you are not married. The Bill protects you. So, I want the Christians not to be worried.

Further to that, on the issue of divorce, the Bill is very clear. Under section 147, it only states that divorce can only be granted when marriage has irretrievably broken down. It is not a casual matter where you just walk out and say, I am divorcing. Also, you are not compelled to go to court. It is you to wake up and go to court. Now, if you are a Catholic and you choose to go to Rome, nobody is going to force you to go to court. If you are a Hindu, or a Bahai or you are in a traditional marriage and you choose to go to the Kabaka or to the Japadhola or to the elders, it doesn’t stop you. It is your choice. What are you choosing? Do you want to choose the avenue of reconciliation through church, through traditional institutions or through court? So, you are at liberty. This is about choices. It is your will to choose what you want. 

On the issue of property, when you look at the provision in the law, I have heard many people talk about contract marriages; that this Bill is going to encourage contract marriages. Actually, the Bill protects you because it only designs property to be shared under section 115 –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I think that information is important. You have two minutes. That is UWOPA.

MS AMONGI: So, I want to clearly state that this Bill safeguards you. If you look at section 125, the Bill defines what separate property is. Section 123(2) and (4) clearly define what separate property is. 

Now, I have heard people talk about the ancestral home and customary land. In section 115(d), family land is excluded. It cannot be a subject of sharing as matrimonial property. So, you are covered. On the question of ancestral –(Interjections)- I will get your clarifications. On the question of people who might be worried that your ancestral home or ancestral property can be a subject of division, this Bill clearly protects you under section 127(2). So, Madam Speaker, I want to submit and conclude by stating as follows –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you very much. If you go to page 30 to the section of requirements of a valid customary marriage, section 59(2) on “Consent to marriage”, sub-section (22) states, “The consent of parents, relatives, clan elders and any other persons other than the respective parties to the customary marriage shall not be a requirement for the validity of any customary marriage.” My question here is, customs don’t belong to individuals; they belong to a community. So, if the owner of the customs does not necessarily have to be consulted, whose customs are you using? Are they your customs or the ones of the community? 

THE SPEAKER: But where did that come from? 

MS AMONGI: Thank you for the clarification. I want to state that most of us were not here in 1995 when they were making the Constitution. Article 31 that I read earlier clearly states that consent to marriage is by two people. In your custom, you can find a mechanism of restraining those two consenting people from taking you to court, but constitutionally if you remove this, you are amending the Constitution. I think the Attorney-General can guide us on that. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to hon. Betty Amongi to further buttress her argument is that I think the genesis of this issue of consent to marriage is because there are cultures and practises in our communities that cause people to enter into marriage almost by force. You can have an arranged marriage and we already know in our communities that parents get loans and then they go and tell somebody, “I will give you my daughter in marriage.” 

Two, there are churches in our communities where a pastor claims to know what is good for me, a young girl in the community in the church that, “You must marry that brother; God has spoken.” Those are some of the things we intend to deal with and that is the reason we are insisting on in the Bill; for full and free consent whether for customary marriages, Christian marriages or any other marriage. There must be the consent of the two people involved. That is the idea behind it, Betty.

MS AMONGI: I want to conclude by appealing to Members that we make laws to cure a mischief; and I want you to ask yourself, when we get married, does divorce exist or not; or at the moment is divorce happening or not? 

4.55
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The debate on the Floor of Parliament has been on and lively since last evening, and as we have debated, the only contentious area in the Bill has been cohabitation. The rest of the Bill seems to be generally acceptable. I would like to move a motion that you put the question so that we can go to committee stage so that other contentious clauses can be amended accordingly. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have also been listening since yesterday. There are actually three areas; cohabitation, bride price and property. Those are the key areas. What I am saying is that everybody is fine with the bulk of the Bill, but we can handle the contentious areas at committee stage.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I don’t wish to comment on the motion of my dear sister, but procedurally, this law has been in our books for the last 40 years and above. It is prudent that hon. Beatrice Anywar and others allow each Member to make a contribution so that we have consensus. I beg for your indulgence. Personally, for instance, I have not made a contribution regarding international marriage, because that is where I belong.

MR SSEBAGALA: Further guidance, Madam Speaker. I propose that Members who have issues that have not been touched by other Members – clauses that they feel have not come been touched in the debates of today and yesterday should arise, instead of repeating cohabitation. Only those with new issues should arise.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, that is what I was coming to; that since yesterday, the debate has been revolving around cohabitation, bride price and property. Those are the areas that have been covered since yesterday. I want something new – No, you have already contributed; you contributed yesterday. Honourable members, this is not a joke; if you contributed yesterday, you are not going to speak today, except during the committee stage. Yes, hon. Ekuma, but something different.

4.59
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The main issues in this Bill that have raised eyebrows are those three areas. However, our Constitution recognises that we have four types of marriages in this country, that is: Christian, Islamic, customary and Bahai. Now, the intention of this Bill is to weaken where some of us fall – the customary marriage. If the Bill decides to restrict those who are married customarily, what is its intention? Is it to destroy or strengthen marriages? (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Point of order from hon. Ayena.

MR AYENA-ODONG: Madam Speaker, my sister, hon. Beatrice Anywar, proposed a motion. Is it in order for us to proceed when you have not –(Interjections)- I seconded it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not see the seconders.

MR AYENA-ODONG: We stood up and seconded it.

THE SPEAKER: Did you?

MR AYENA-ODONG: We stood up and seconded it; we are here. Let those who seconded it stand up. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, can I now put the question that the question be put? [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Yes! No!”] Okay, can we vote by show of hands? Those in favour of the motion, raise your hands. Those who want us to conclude the debate so that we can go to committee stage, please raise your hands. What about those who would want to continue?

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, you have directed that we vote by a show of hands; is the honourable member in order to raise both hands while the votes are being counted?

THE SPEAKER: I am told that only one hand was counted. What about abstentions? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, abstentions are three; Nays are 49; and Ayes are 31; let us continue for only 30 minutes. Hon. Ekuma, please continue. Each one will now use only two minutes.

MR EKUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my contribution, I cannot be restricted from talking about dowry because it is what makes the customary marriage valid. Therefore -(Interruption)

MS GRACE NAMARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been very attentive right from when Members began debating yesterday. I heard you clearly ruling that those continuing with the debate should bring up new issues. Dowry has been an old issue since yesterday; is the honourable member in order to continue with the dowry issue?

THE SPEAKER: Those who want to continue talking about cohabitation, bride price and property will do so during the committee stage. I want something that has not already been covered. Let us have hon. Ssinabulya.

5.05
MS SYLVIA SSINABULYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is based on section 123; I know it is on property, but I am going to talk about what has not been mentioned. 

This Bill allows for spouses to acquire separate property. What I want to find out under section 123(2), where the Bill talks about distribution of matrimonial property. It states that, “Property acquired separately shall not be counted as matrimonial property unless there is an agreement to the contrary.” My question is: I know in Christian marriages, when we make vows, we say, “I have given you all my earthly possessions; all that I have, I give to you.” Is that also an agreement under this Bill or the agreement must be written? I think we need clarification on that.

Under the same section, 123(3), the Bill talks about spouses proving that they have made contribution to the acquisition or maintenance of separate property. However, sometimes it may be very difficult for someone to prove that they made a contribution to that property. For example, spouses in rural areas, especially women, the kind of work that they do sometimes is not valued. They look after children, tend their gardens and do all kinds of domestic chores while the men do business. Now, at the end of the day, how can the woman prove that she contributed –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Omwonya, hon. Kwemara and the honourable for Lwengo. Hon. Yaguma, you spoke yesterday. Please, this is not a joke. Sit down; you spoke yesterday. No.

5.08
MR STANLEY OMWONYA (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much very much, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the committee for the report. I will be very brief. I consider this Bill as one for the elite women. Why? It is because I do not think the people in the rural areas appreciate or understand this Bill. It is only the educated who are actually advocating for this Bill. What I know is that the rural women take marriage very seriously and they know that when a village woman falls in love, it is because -(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable colleague from Zombo for giving way. Actually as we debated from yesterday, I raised a similar issue to hon. Kassiano Wadri concerning what the Lugbara culture understands in as far as divorce is concerned. 

This morning, one of my elders called to tell me about the aspect of divorce. He actually belaboured the point that in Lugbara culture, there is no divorce. If a woman and man get a misunderstanding, she is allowed to go and rest and after some time, she comes back, but the Bill is talking about dividing property, which will permanently destroy the sanctity of the family or of marriage.

So, this Bill is actually going to divide marriages and disorganise societal settings. For that matter and for your information, we share the same border with you around Warr and this is the same culture that we share.

So, the information I wanted to give you is that time allowing, Madam Speaker, it would be prudent for each one of us to go back to our constituencies to get more support from our constituents so that this Bill can be given the right judgement. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know whether you are aware that the Divorce Act is already a law in this country since 1922. The Marriage Act is already a law in this country; the Marriage of Bahai Act is law in this country; and the Marriage of Hindu is law in this country; please!

MR OMWONYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I totally agree with my colleague from Ayivu. Actually, in some cultures, divorce is a taboo. It is only the elites who actually want divorce because they normally marry out of convenience.

I am suggesting and proposing that this Bill be stayed. Let us go back home and consult. If this Bill is passed into law, it is going to cause more problems than solving the problems - (Interruption)

5.12
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not want to delve so much into what has been deliberated upon, but allow me to quickly run to one concern in this law. The concerns I have are the contradictions between secularism and religiosity in this law.

When you read through this law, we are actually treading a very thin line. How can we maintain a delicate balance between secularism and religiosity in this law? For example, we are legislating using different religious laws, but are they going to treat both men and women equally? 

Look at the example of the Islamic law, which is not yet here. If you scrutinise it and given what you have told us that when we wanted to legislate in the previous Parliament, the Islamic women came here and said they are not party to that Bill. The issue could have been that possibly they were promoting patriarchy. You know, patriarchy is a system where men oppress, exploit and suppress women and at times, women are party to patriarchy themselves and they support it. (Interruption)

MR MULIMBA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. I want to give this information in respect to the controversies, which surround this Bill.

Madam Speaker, like I submitted yesterday and it was clarified that this law does not apply to Muslims. I want to draw your attention to clause 40 of this Bill, which talks about marriage between persons of the same sex being prohibited. In as much as you are talking about controversies within secularism and religious confines, we also have this controversy here prohibiting same sex marriage without putting sanctions. You only just bring it in like it is in the Constitution and leave it there. Why can’t we propose under this to have it prohibited and punishable by death?

MR KWEMARA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for that information. To continue with the same concerns, look at the definitions of Christian marriage and Hindu or Bahai marriages. (Member timed out.)

5.16
MS GERTRUDE NAKABIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Lwengo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In addition to what has been discussed, I agree with the Bill. However, my only concern is clause 118; forms of agreements. Sub-clause (2) states that an agreement may be oral or written. In my view, this Bill is strong and I think it will be in order if we emphasise that all agreements should be strictly written and we remove that provision for oral agreements.

Under clause 123; separation of property and especially sub-clause (5); the onus of separating the property is on the person who is claiming. I need clarification here. In this case, who is making the claim or presenting the case for separation of property? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.17
MS MARGARET KIBOIJANA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I rise to support the Bill. A marriage of bliss would not necessitate any law. I am a student of sociology and conflict is part and parcel of society. Whether you want it or not, there will always be conflict, and this is why we need a law. 

Many of you will agree with me that many men and women have been killed in the name of marriage. Many men and many women have also been maimed in the name of marriage. We need a law that will take care of these emerging conflicts. This is why I support this Bill. There have been incidences - I represent Ibanda, and I am bogged down by cases where men have maimed mainly women; with both legs chopped off, and both breasts chopped off. And you men who are refusing to support this Bill, some of you have been victims. Your private parts have been chopped off. (Laughter) Why don’t you join us in support of a law that will address those anomalies? 

Having said this, Madam Speaker -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order! Members.

MS KIBOIJANA: I will go to section 128: “Matrimonial property in polygamous marriages.” Section 128(a) states that, “Property acquired by the husband and the first wife shall be owned in common.” I support it wholly. But at an appropriate time, I think we need to move an amendment on 128(b). (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: That is an important one. Half a minute. That is an important point. It is new.

MS KIBOIJANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Where it says that subsequent wives shall take interest only in the husband’s share of the matrimonial property, we need to come up with a percentage and define what remains of the man’s property which the other women will have to share. Otherwise, at an appropriate stage, we shall come up with a percentage to give the first wife, hopefully 60 per cent, and leave 40 per cent. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.20
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I come from a background where I have been dealing with people who have some problems with conjugal rights, and I am looking at clause 114 which says spouses shall have conjugal rights in marriage. It says here, “Notwithstanding subsection (1), a spouse may deny the other spouse the right to sexual intercourse on reasonable grounds which may include – 
(a) 	poor health;
(b)	 surgery that affects the capacity to engage in sexual intercourse; 
(c) 	child birth; or 
(d) 	reasonable fear that engaging in sexual intercourse is likely to cause physical or psychological injury or harm.” 

Madam Speaker, this clause must be properly done, from a medical point of view. When you talk about poor health, there are some things you have left out. We have some spouses who have married, you then abandon your spouse, you go somewhere to cohabit - that word which I do not even want to hear as a married man – and you contract a disease that is transmitted through sex. You then come and you want to infect this woman that has been at home waiting for you and cooking for you. We have some disease conditions that should be put here properly like HIV and Hepatitis B, which are not treatable at all. So, in case you have gone to cohabit and you have developed a disease which is going to kill this woman or this man at home, we put it there so that it becomes a ground to protect people who have been very careful so that marriages remain very perfect. I accept the information.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank hon. Bitekyerezo for giving way. Honourable colleagues, the more I listen to hon. Bitekyerezo and all those who have spoken, the more I get convinced that this Bill contains not just contradictions but very serious contentious issues. We are talking of the issue of conjugal rights. We have talked of the issue of polygamy versus polyandry. There is the issue of registry under civic authority in a customary marriage; the issues of bride price which you have articulated; issues of property ownership; issues of divorce and cohabitation. 

It is my conviction that much as this law has been here for long and there is urgency for it to be disposed of, Article 1(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda clearly states that all authority in this country under the State and all its organs emanates from the people of Uganda - (Applause)- and Article 38 of our Constitution clearly gives the right of every citizen to participate in policy that affects them. Madam Speaker, I therefore beg to move that this Bill be deferred for two months to allow Members of Parliament to consult our constituencies. Madam Speaker, I want to move the motion.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I think that procedurally, I was on the Floor and gave way for information. So let me complete my point.

Before I sit, I want to quote Article 31 of this mighty Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Article 31 talks about rights of a family: “A man and a woman are entitled to marry only if they are each of the age of 18 years and above and are entitled at that age- 
(a) to found a family; and 
(b) to equal rights at and in marriage, during marriage and at its dissolution.” 
This means, if this Constitution provided that if you marry, you can divorce; things can happen. I am of the view that let us sort out this Bill and we pass it but with some amendments, so that we can have people pray to divorce in case things have not worked out. I thank you.

5.25
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to appeal to my colleagues that we need this law. In my own village, I have buried so many women because of a lacuna in the Marriage, Divorce and Property Act of Uganda because of changes in time. 

You may have different opinions regarding the provision of this law but my request to the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice is that you need to come up with what is called, internationally, in the US and in other countries, the prenuptial agreements because there are certain provisions that spouses will choose. If you look at the prenuptial agreements in some countries, they are so detailed. What you have provided for here is so narrow and yet you have given opportunities for people to choose and – (Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I was very reluctant, Madam Speaker, to stand up again on a matter of clarification like this one, but clause 117 is the enabling provision for prenuptial agreements. Now, hon. Ekanya, you do not expect to have detailed agreements on prenuptials in this law. That one will be developed by the relevant parties; otherwise, the enabling provision - maybe you had not seen it - is clause 117.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. This law has become controversial, Deputy Attorney-General, and we need to pass it. If you say a village woman with some other person should draft, you need to have different models and guidelines so that these people can choose. It would help us when we are about to pass this.
 
I know the section regarding regulations will handle that, but can we make it mandatory that the regulations come down here and those guidelines. Let me give you an example. My marriage was consummated abroad but - (Interjections) - Do not ask me. For that matter, we had to choose because even the domicile place of marriage is very important. That is one. 

The second issue is the issue of the banns – (Interjections) Madam Speaker, Members are asking why there is no ring. I have a health issue; I only put on golden rings which cost about US$ 5,000 and as of now, I do not have that resource. That is the truth. The one I had was stolen during the riots and therefore, I am bound to buy another so that I have it. (Laughter) The issue of the banns is also important - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, if you get consent of marriage here in Uganda and then you travel to another country, the provision here says the Notre or the lawyer will inform the parties in case, but that needs to be put in detail.

Finally, the marriage and divorce industry is a very big issue now in the world. Lawyers are making money. You find that some people are failing to divorce because of the cost. We need to make provisions that a poor woman or poor man in the village whose right is being abused and cannot afford the cost of divorce will be protected. I do not see that provision in this law.

5.31
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion. You allowed the House to proceed for the next 30 minutes. Checking from the clock, that time has already elapsed and I would like to move a motion that you put the question so that the House goes to the next stage. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE BILL, 2009

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. We are paid by the Government of Uganda and this Parliament to legislate on behalf of the people who sent us here. We have now reached the real stage of deliberating for our people. I want to know whether it is procedurally right for people to start moving out when, honestly, we are doing a wonderful job and this is the time for us to support our people. I was of the view, if possible, that you call people back. I thank you.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Chairperson, you have clearly indicated, and it is on record, that this Bill is an important one. It has been on for as long as 40 years. We are now moving to a stage where we have to bring in amendments; isn’t it procedurally right for the Sergeant-at-Arms to bring back those who are running away from this debate?

Clause 1

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Before we get to clause 1, the committee is proposing an amendment to the long title.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It comes last.

MR TASHOBYA: Much obliged, Madam.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

THE CHAIRPERSON: We normally do interpretation last.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In clause 3 -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, are there no changes you might make in that section? We normally come to that at the end in case there are changes in interpretation.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I am a Member of the committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and I signed the report, but I stand here on behalf of the Committee on Human Rights to propose an amendment to clause 8, where a fee is prescribed for checking the register. This is 8(3) “The District Marriage and Divorce Register –

MR TASHOBYA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I know she is raising the matter in very good faith but as the Member has pointed out, she is a member of the committee. Also, the committee which she chairs has been in existence for the last six to seven months and they had all the opportunity to interact with the committee. Is it in order, having gone through the general debate, that a member comes and brings up amendments at this stage, Madam Chairperson? 

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chair, I am party to that amendment which is being moved and I am not a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I wanted the Chair to first make a ruling.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. First of all, under our Rules of Procedure, there is no rule which prevents a Member from debating. It has just been a practice of this House that we give opportunity to other colleagues who have not participated in the formulation of the report. At this stage, the committee stage, all of us are entitled to bring in amendments whether we are members of the committee or not. I have several amendments I wish to propose. That is why I did not sign that report. I could have written a minority report but because of the harmony in the committee, I thought I would move my amendments here, at committee level.

THE CHAIRPERSON: State your amendments.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, this is to allow the people access to be able to view the register. I am proposing that we should the fee. This is in subsection (3), which says, “The District Marriage and Divorce Register Book shall be open for inspection by the public during office hours on payment of the prescribed fee.” I am proposing that we just stop at “hours” without putting a prescribed fee, in order to allow access for those people who may want to view the register without hindrance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you sure this does not affect any other law? Doesn’t it affect maybe the Stamps Act or something else? 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I would like to support her argument because the Budget Act is clear that when we bring a Bill on the Floor of the House, it has financial implications and those financial implications are to help a Bill to pass; those agents who are going to implement that Bill will utilise those finances. 

I envisage a situation where a poor person in the village who does not have money is denied access due to this fee. It should be a right for everyone to access. For a district register for public accountability, let any citizen be free to find out what is happening. Even in marriage, by the way, in the Church they say, “So and so is going to marry; is there any problem? Whoever has a problem should come and mention it to the Church.” I do not see why, really, somebody who comes to find out what is happening in the district register should have to first pay money. It is an impediment to the poor. 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I support the deletion but for one reason, that maybe in 10 years’ time, there will be no hard copy registers. They will be on the Internet and people will be able to access the Internet without paying a fee to anybody.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even from your village of Buhehe?

MR WAFULA-OGUUTU: Yes, even from my village because I guess when the FDC Government is in power, we shall have all this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, chair, what do you say about this? Is it okay? Minister, is it okay to delete? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 9

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Chairperson, in clause 9, they are talking about those places where they solemnise their marriages and in (6), they are talking about places where the Registrar keeps the list of licensed places. In fact, they have said that this person is supposed to publish these places in the Gazette or one of the newspapers, once a year. 

My problem is that the people whom we are legislating for, in most cases, do not read newspapers and they even do not access the Gazette. So, I am proposing that we say this person publishes these places at the district level and the sub-county level. I think those places can be accessed by our people whom we are legislating for. I thank you. 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I think the reasoning behind this stipulation of gazetting was consistency. Two, we are actually, for these places, looking not only at people who are going to have their weddings but also the ministers who preside over these weddings. 

Three, unless the Minister is moving an amendment to say that in addition to what we have already provided, we provide those registers down there in form of decentralisation, it will not make sense because we are also legislating for people who do not stay in Uganda who need to access this information at a different level, not necessarily the sub-county. So, unless she is saying this is in addition to what already exists; I also invite her to consider the financial implications on the part of Government. As minister for justice in the next Government, I am concerned that we may be constrained financially when he leaves tomorrow. (Laughter)

MS NAKADAMA: Madam Speaker, I am not saying that we delete the Gazette and the newspaper, but this is in addition them. These days, we have very many churches which are opening up, many worshipping places, and some are even under trees. Somebody is taken under a tree and then in future when there is a problem, this person is told that, “You know, the place where you went was not a gazetted place.” That is why I want this to be brought to that level of a sub-county or district where our people can access it. I am not saying that we delete the first ones.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, I do not know. Of course, the Bill came with a certificate of financial implications. I do not know whether this will not create an additional charge on the Consolidated Fund. There are 112 districts, then 1,000 sub-counties. I do not know. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chair, if the minister wants those administrative units to be included, once you talk of a sub-county then you do not even need a district. We will only specifically look at the district because we are taking that as the lowest level. So we do not need to bring in the sub-county. We cannot say “sub-county and district”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, how does the minister get that information that in my gombolola of Mbulamuti there is the licensed place, because the minister is supposed to give notice? 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chair, before we got to that stage, you raised a pertinent legal issue and I thought the mover of the Bill should have replied whether he consents to it or not. It certainly has got financial implications. At this point, any amendment should not cause further charges. The idea itself is noble, but I think the minister should be able to concede to it before we proceed with it. That is the law. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, good enough the mover is from this side; as the Executive, we take the concerns of her proposal and we shall consider it at another later stage. For the time being, let us go within the financial limits for which this Bill comes. In other words, we reject that amendment.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I was thinking about the purpose behind publishing. Most of the people who are going to marry within the rural areas are really rural people; they are not going to read our Gazette and they are not going to buy these newspapers. But if they hear that at one point in time, there will be information on the notice board – that is what I want to introduce, a sub-county notice board. There should be a display of all licensed places once or twice a year on the sub-county notice board. I think that would be practical; it is just a few additional papers. 

The purpose of this is for people not to go to un-gazetted places. Actually, you could dispense with the Gazette if it were possible, but you cannot dispense with giving people information; it undermines the very reason behind trying to display those places. So, if we can support the minister, I think the requirement is modest. Just let the community know. We can retain both and make a provision for display at the sub-county.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I want to allude to the Budget Act. When the Minister of Finance is giving a certificate for any Bill, it gives an allowance to Parliament. So, as long as Parliament in its wisdom decides to amend this clause, then the sector ministry will bring a budget and Parliament will appropriate it. That is why the certificate of financial implication is open. The Minister of Finance indicates that once the Bill passes, then the sector ministry should budget for that money. 

MS KABASHARIRA: Madam Chairperson, I want to support the minister but also take hon. Alaso’s proposal that they do it once a year. I think if we consider the financial implications, it should be just once a year as long as our people will be served. 

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that under (a), the Gazette should be taken up to the sub-county - a copy of every Gazette must be taken to the sub-county. The Gazette is so important; everybody refers to the Gazette, yet I am sure that even some MPs here have never seen a Gazette or read it. How about the people in the villages? We should take the Gazette to the sub-county for easy reference.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, the Gazette should be placed on the notice board at the subcounty? 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, this problem of places that are licensed applies to many different types of situations. Doctors are licensed, business places are licensed, and so on. Now, if you take the situation of places of worship, they change over a period of time. So, even if we put a list at the sub-country once a year, three months afterwards, another place of worship might open up. Another practical way of handling that is to provide a licence to the location; the licence should be placed at that particular location. If I visit a doctor, the licence should be displayed for me to know that this doctor is duly licensed. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the last proposal is okay. If we are to add sub clause (d), we would and say, “...at each sub-county headquarters.” So the minister would produce the Gazette and ensure that it goes to every subcounty. There should be uniform information to the whole country. Is there a problem with that? Okay, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

MR OTADA: Madam Chair, I am relying on your ruling – (Interruption)

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chair, we should be very clear about the way we are working in the committee. My very good friend, hon. Otada, is a member of my committee and so are several others. In the committees, we debate and consider these Bills, call witnesses and finally all of us make an input on the final report that we bring here. Whoever does not agree to what is proposed has an option of writing a minority report as provided in the rules. 

Madam Chair, I would like to be guided whether it is in order for members to go to a committee, debate, be present when we are making recommendations and finally come again with other independent amendments. If so, what is the purpose of committee meetings and reports?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, give your amendment to somebody else who is not a member of the committee; otherwise, you are going to set a bad precedent because you go there, write a report and then come out – Give it to another Member. 

MR OTADA: Madam Chair, I think a precedent has also been set before where at committee stage, we all debate as equals. I think that precedent has also been set before and it is against that background that I was just, in good faith, volunteering an amendment because the precedent is there. But, Madam Chair, we rely on you - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you give it to another Member to speak for you. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, as we go through the general debate, we are also influenced by colleagues. The colleagues bring ideas and we can buy them. We can even depart from the positions that we had in the committee. At this point, if there is no specific rule within our Rules of Procedure to stop me from bringing an amendment, it is fair enough that I bring an amendment. If the Committee of the whole House thinks that it does not make sense, they can reject it. But to gag a member from moving to the Floor with an idea, which can improve a law, because somehow I sat on the committee, is wrong.

The purpose of the general debate is to influence opinion. So I do request, earnestly, that without a rule we are infringing, I do plead to you to allow me bring these amendments for debate because there is no rule under our Rules of Procedure that we are infringing.
 
MS KAWOOYA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. As you have said rightly, we are setting a bad precedent. What we present here are committee reports. The chairperson of a committee presents a committee report signed by members. That report is owned and as chairpersons, you have met us and said that these reports must be owned by the members. Now, even the chairperson in his capacity would have wished to raise his personal views for amendment, but because he is tied up as a chairperson of a committee, he goes with the committee report.

If we start saying that members on the same committee, who have worked together, come up with a report, signed and owned it and it has come on the Floor of this House, now want to change or amend this, what precedent are going to set for other committees or other reports? That means there will be no committee reports. So, we need guidance such that they are either committee reports or they cease to be committee reports.
 
MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I thank you, Rt Hon. Chair. I have two issues to raise. The first one is that the committees of Parliament are constituted for effective discharge of the function of Parliament. The core work of Parliament is done in the committees. If we do anything that undermines the integrity and cohesion of the committees, we shall be killing the process of Parliamentary work. (Applause)

The second one is that the rule of collective responsibility operates against every member of the committee. It is rude and discursive for a member of the committee to stand up and oppose the position of the chairperson. Madam Chair, I beg to submit.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, unless through the Chair, we agree to dance to the tunes of expedience; Rule 123 (4) of our Rules of Procedure says, “The Committee of the Whole House shall consider proposed amendments by the Com­mittee to which the Bill was referred and may consider proposed amendments, on notice, where the amendments were presented but rejected by the relevant Committee or where, for reasonable cause, the amendments were not presented before the relevant Committee.” 

I think what this imputes is discretion on the part of the Speaker; one, on notice and you also look at reasonable cause. Otherwise, we may set a very dangerous precedent if members of the committee are going to come and present amendments which were not presented in the committee. You have the powers, looking at the nature of amendments that the member is bringing. But there is also a possibility, as you suggested earlier, that for consistency, a member may present a proposed amendment to a non member of the committee; otherwise, we are going to lose trust in what we agree on in our committees. (Applause)

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I beg to differ from my colleagues who are submitting against proposals for amendments. I really think that some of the amendments that members move here are meant to improve, and some of them just occur as you are sitting here and you notice it. I guess that is why rule 123 (3) of our Rules of Procedure exists. If you look at 123 (3) (b), it says, “all Members who wish to speak on it have spoken...” It does not exclude the committee members or the minister but it simply says “all” 

Madam Chair, if the amendment is not really very contentious and very far fetched, if it is something that would make the law better, my prayer is that in exercising your discretion as provided in (4), you would hear out the members and then probably make a verdict on it after – (Interjections) - I will take the information.

MS AKELLO: I thank you, hon. Alaso, for giving me way to give you this good information. In the recently concluded debate on the oil and gas Bill, I saw hon. Alaso, who is a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, on several occasions moving amendments on the Floor on that Bill, which of course improved the Bill. I really wanted to give you this information and say that it is very healthy and it even seems that our Rules of Procedure are silent on this.

MS ALASO: I want to thank hon. Franca Akello for that position. I will also sneak the moment to actually congratulate hon. Franca Akello who is reporting to the House after her wedding. I thank you and congratulations.

Madam Chair, you recently sent us for a meeting on oil and gas and we were told of a situation, and let me share this story. After the committees had gone through the oil Bills in Ghana, somebody sneaked the word, “not” into a sentence and then the sentence began to read that, “this and that shall not be subject…” Initially, the committee and the framers had wanted those particular aspects to be subject to taxation, then somebody sneaked the word “not” and up to today, Ghana is struggling with that word “not” which emerged from nowhere. If we have the capacity to keep our eyes open and save the country and improve a Bill and the Chair considers that it will be helpful, then maybe we can do it and I pray so.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Chair, when hon. Otada stood up, you made a ruling and you said that hon. Otada should pass his amendment to a neighbour or to another member to bring it up. I do not know since when we begun to debate your rulings. You have already made this ruling and hon. Otada is in agreement. When we go ahead discussing your ruling – (Interjection) - My point is, when we go ahead discussing your ruling, we are setting a very bad precedent for this House. You have already made a ruling that hon. Otada passes this to a colleague. He sat down and passed it to a colleague and the colleague is here ready for it. Why go ahead to discuss something you have made a ruling on. Madam Chair, I pray that we move as you have already ruled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we should be careful not to destroy the work of committees. (Applause) I think we should support the committees, unless it is something unconstitutional. Honourable Otada, give your amendment to somebody else. You actually signed this report. Give it to another Member. 
 
MR OCHOLA: Madam Chair, the amendment I have is on 12(b) where it says, “polygamous marriages which are customary marriages”.  I am not comfortable with it because to me it portrays that all customary marriages are polygamous. There are many customary marriages which are not polygamous. I am one of those who is married customarily but I have one wife. I propose that we have customary marriages standing on its own and not –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which clause?

MR OCHOLA: Clause 12(b)

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Polygamous marriages which are customary marriages” You do not want that?

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chair, I do not want that. I want customary marriages to stand alone and then polygamous marriages.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want customary marriages alone and polygamous marriages alone.

MR OTADA: Madam Chair, clause 12 provides for types of marriages. I would like to give information to the effect that what clause 12(b) provides for is not sufficient. It provides for polygamous marriages which are customary marriages. I would like to give information that not all customary marriages are polygamous in nature. Therefore, customary marriage should be a standalone, and we can make it 12(c). We could find where to put it.

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. I think if we talk of polygamous marriage, there is no where it is solemnized. What we have is the matrimonial Christian marriage, which is monogamous and the customary marriage, which can be either monogamous or polygamous. We cannot say customary marriage is polygamous. That is wrong. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is there any harm in separating this sentence and providing for polygamous and customary marriage separately. Is there a problem?
 
MR OCHOLA: Madam Chair, I am not very comfortable with this because when we are recognising the marriages in clause 12, when we are supposed to have mentioned customary marriages, the framers decided to say “polygamous marriages which are customary marriages” and there is no where customary marriage is mentioned. I am not comfortable with that. I am suggesting that we have customary marriages stand alone and we delete the polygamous marriages part in (b).

MR AMOS OKOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. I was reading this and I see that both “monogamous” and “polygamous” do not fit. This is because when we are talking of marriage under this Act, it can be either of those. So, we can omit the words “monogamous” and “polygamous” and refer only to Christian marriages, which has its own form; civil marriages, which has its own form; Hindu, Baha’i and customary marriages. Even if customary marriage is polygamous or monogamous, it will be there. I thank you. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you would want to delete the word, “polygamous” and leave out “customary”.

MR AMOS OKOT: And “monogamous” too. 

MR RUHINDI: The proposal is good but in terms of drafting, I wanted to propose that we could say “customary marriages which may be polygamous or monogamous.” (Interjections) For as long as there is where we can make a qualification, I do not have any problem. We can have it as, “(b) customary marriage”, and maybe put a proviso that customary marriages may be polygamous or monogamous; for as long as there is a proviso somewhere. 

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chair, I do not think we should create a law which encourages “either polygamous”. The people I represent are still in customary marriages, a great percentage of them, and that is why I am saying we should have customary marriages standing on its own. If you decide to go for more than one woman, that is up to you. It is just like we have people who are wedded but marry more women. It is up to them to decide on that but we should have customary marriages stand alone.

MRS CECILIA OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think the earlier proposal that “monogamous” and “polygamous” be deleted is the correct way. Christian marriages are regulated by the cannon practices and customary marriages therefore must also be regulated by customary practices. So, you cannot subject it to any other regulation. I believe the best way would be to delete the two words, “monogamous” and “polygamous” because they are strange.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, if you delete the word “monogamous”, I do not know what you will be creating.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. For customary marriage, sections 61 and 64 already state clearly that it shall be conducted according to the customs and rites of that culture. In most of those cultures, they accept either a monogamous customary marriage or a polygamous customary marriage. So, if we just leave it the way hon. Amos Okot proposed, just to recognise customary marriage, then the rest should be regulated under sections 61 and 64. 

Secondly, on all the other forms of marriages, it is clearly defined how they are solemnised and how they are voidable. So, the content of each of the forms of marriage is dealt with in-depth in each of the chapters. So, if we just say, “subject to subsection (2), marriages under this Act are Christian marriages, civil marriages, Hindu marriages, Baha’i marriages or customary marriages”, then that is okay. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable members, the proposal is that we delete the words “polygamous marriages” –

MR RUHINDI: I will take the proposal made by hon. Amongi, but in furtherance of her elucidation in clauses 61 and 64, add on sub clause (4) of clause 12 because it is actually much clearer. It says, “Without prejudice to any procedure prescribed for marriages under this Act, any institutions or practices which traditionally facilitate marriage which are not inconsistent with this Act or any written law shall continue to be recognised.” So, to me, it is okay if we simply highlight the types of marriages. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. You can see I already have a contentious presentation with my very good friend, who is my member. The committee proposes to amend the head note by deleting the words, “marriage allowed”. It would then read, “Widow inheritance prohibited.”
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there any other amendments?

MR TASHOBYA: Madam Chairperson, we also propose to delete sub clause (2) because of the amendment we are proposing in the head note, and therefore have a consequential amendment in sub clause (3). 

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. It has taken time to mobilise male colleagues to support this Bill and as they get on board, I thought we would change the word “widow” by substituting it with “spouse” in order to be consistent, or we insert “widow and widower”. This is because it has caused tension and suspicion from the other side.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: You mean there is widower inheritance? (Laughter)

MR MUWUMA: Yes, Madam Chairperson. I can defend this. There are places we have been to where when a woman has passed on and the family has to sit and get you a woman or wife and they term her as omukuza - somebody to raise the children. So, to balance this off, I think we would say, “widower or widow” so that it does not cause suspicion. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But under what circumstances does a woman inherit a widower?

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chairperson, I want to give an example of what hon. Muwuma said. My uncle’s wife died and the young sister who grew up in that family and was raised by that man took over and she is now the wife and they even have children. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But that is catered for - widow inheritance. 

MR OCHOLA: This is inheriting the man because the man lost the wife who happened to be a sister to this girl. She has now taken over the husband of her late sister. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want to prohibit that. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think we are splitting hairs over nothing because what mischief is there? The mischief is against coercion of a weaker sex, and ordinarily that is a widow. Now, where a man partakes of say a sister-in-law, I am sure that widower will do it with his full consent and equal capacity to negotiate, and that is provided for under clause 13(3). Have you read clause 13 (3), hon. Okupa?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, that may be true as stated by the Attorney-General, but there is one aspect where children below the marriage age are coerced into marrying old people. Those are the ones we want to protect. How do we protect them?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, that is what is provided for. What hon. Muwuma was introducing was widower inheritance – inheriting a man whose wife has died. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I have these scenarios; in Kigezi and Ankole, if a married woman dies, the relatives of a woman may say, “Look here, our daughter has made too much money, we do not want you to marry anybody from outside to take the property that this woman has left behind. To be on the safe side, we want you to be taken over by our sister.” How do you overcome that? The woman has inherited me. I can’t run away. That means the man has been inherited. (Laughter)

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Chair, when we talk about widow inheritance, there is a power relation in favour of the man who is taking over. It is very unlikely for that power relation to exist when we are referring to a widower. What usually happens is that the family of the deceased would like to have continuity, especially for nurturing children. To me, that is a very good thing which the man would appreciate. (Laughter) Just in case a man wishes to take over that person who has been brought into the family for the purpose of continuity and it is okay on the other side, the family would continue and it is a good thing. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the rationale of this provision was to deal with a situation where your husband dies and you are told, “You must marry so and so.” That is what was intended. 

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chair, I want to get to understand this further because my colleague, the honourable Dr Lulume, was saying that if you lose your wife and you are given her sister, he is happy with that. Now, what about in a situation where a woman has lost a husband and the brother comes in? If you are giving an argument of taking over the children, if the brother also says he is taking over because of the children, what shall we do? If the woman also accepts, how do we handle such a situation? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, order, please. Let us hear from hon. Alaso.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I would like to give hon. Ochola information from his constituency, Serere. What happens with the traditions and the customary marriage in Serere, which hon. Ochola represents, is that having been married to this family, and deriving from the gifts, you are treated as property by that clan. Therefore, when their son who married you dies, you should be passed onto another person in the clan. So, that person should continue to own you in that clan and without your consent. It is not required in Teso that the widow should consent. In fact, traditionally, the clan would sit and for you, you are in the house, and then they choose the heir and tell you, “You, Alaso, from today onwards, this is your new husband; proceed”, and that is it. (Laughter) 

Madam Chair, the other information I would like to give to this House in regard to widow inheritance is that the courts of law in Uganda already considered that matter and declared it unconstitutional. What we are trying to do with this provision is to harmonise it with the court ruling. Also, we want to say that this is no longer desirable; you cannot pass on a human being. It undermines the Constitution, Articles 31 and 32 where we are all equal before, during and after. Moreover, since a man is not passed over, so shouldn’t a woman. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about including a widower here? Give us the final position; we want to move on.

MR RUHINDI: My view is that legislating for widower inheritance is legislating absurdity. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 be amended as proposed by the committee chairperson. (Interjection) They amended the head title by deleting two words. (Interjection) Yes, that was the amendment. 
MS NINSIIMA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Sub clause (4) says, “A person who contravenes this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding twenty four currency points...” I propose that we make the fine 250 currency points because 24 are few. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay? Honourable members, I am told that the number of the currency points is tied to the number of years one would serve as a sentence. That is what the clerk is advising me.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chair. I share the same view that 24 currency points are not punitive enough. If we are to go by your guidance, in order to make it punitive enough, it would mean that we would need to be advised on the time the person would serve. 

The problem with widow inheritance is that it undermines the basic human rights of the other person, the widow you are inheriting. Not only that but you are likely to violate the rights of the children in regard to that estate. For somebody to know that all they need to do is to pay Shs 480,000 and yet the value of the estate is worth millions or billions of shillings; Shs 48,000 is little. I want to propose, if hon. Ninsiima will accept another amendment, something like 100 currency points, which is equivalent to Shs 2 million.

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think we should have a realistic view of the people we are putting this law in place for. These are our brothers and sisters in the village. You know that this is mostly practised by people upcountry. For some of them up to this time it was the norm, and I think he best way to get out of this is through education. I think we should harmonise the punishment – (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we are talking about a population which we have just described here as unable to access information upon payment of a fee, first and foremost. Secondly, the people who practice widow inheritance – by the way I have not seen anywhere – are the people deep in the villages, who cannot afford the Shs 2 million we are talking about. If we are going to say Shs 2 million, we are better off providing no alternative of a fine because with that figure, they are just going to end up in prison.

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I wish to provide is that for committing adultery, as it was then, the penalty was Shs 600. I remember we challenged one of the senior lawyers why Shs 600 and she said the process of undergoing a court trial for having committed adultery may be more painful and elaborate than paying the money. So, we should not forget that this person who commits that offence in the village would undergo trial, there would be witnesses, and that in itself would be passing therapy to people in the village that this is a bad thing. 

So the moment we begin from Shs 2 million and yet we are just trying to prohibit an activity, which some people think is okay- Let us just criminalise it, we make the trials fairly easy and the witnesses will be collected from the village. If someone is tried in Busia for widow inheritance, all the other villagers will abandon this act and we shall all achieve. But parting with Shs 2 million is being too ambitious. Who will keep my wife if I am taken to prison for trying to inherit a widow? (Laughter) You will be causing more problems.

MR TASHOBYA: Can I conclude? As I was saying, the best way we shall move this law forward is not through punishments, fines and imprisonment but through civic education. I would like to request my sister that in the spirit of the sentences that are running through the Bill, we should also adopt a sentence of 24 currency units or one year imprisonment as is running throughout the Bill, so that people do not misunderstand the intentions of this law that we are putting in place.

MR WANGOLO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We need to be very careful when we are making this law. Like hon. Muwuma proposed, it is very clear that these things are happening down there and I know that as politicians we shall suffer. 

We are making a law and talking of civic education; who is doing that and who will do it? We are making a law and it will be stored and our people will continue suffering where they cannot pay even Shs 500,000. I propose that we move from 24 currency points to five currency points. That is my proposal, Madam Speaker.

MS NABBANJA: Honourable members, I want to share some experience that will help us move forward. I want you to appreciate that this Parliament made a law on defilement. What is happening down there is bribery because the sentence we put was very high. Policemen are just swindling people’s money left and right. If we put a lot of money or a high penalty on this, we shall give the police more money.

I am giving you a live example and therefore suggesting, from the experience I have, because I have been a local leader for quite some time, that we move the way we have been moving. If the committee has proposed 24, let us move by that. We need to make a law that is realistic and that our people- Remember, you are the one who is going to suffer when they have arrested someone and they want Shs 2 million. They will definitely run to you as a Member of Parliament. If they do not run to you, they will die in jail. If they do not die in jail, the Police is going to carry the day and the judges.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 as amended do stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chairperson, just for clarity, I hope that what we voted on is the amendment by the chairperson and not that one of hon. Alaso.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We voted on the chairman’s amendment. Proceed.

Clause 14
MR TASHOBYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In clause 14, the committee proposes that we delete the words “not essential requirement” appearing in the head note. The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising out of the deletion of clause 14(1). As has been elucidated in the course of the debate, we are proposing to delete sub clause (1) of 14 because it is covered under clause 61 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14(1)-

MR RUHINDI: I agree with the amendment by the chairperson of the committee, but I would like us to be mindful- Maybe when we come to clause 61 we can see what to do. The problem is the compulsion. We are going to delete this but the compulsion remains, meaning haggling and bargaining. If, for instance, under customary marriage parties sit together, they can insist on 100, 50 or 20 cows-

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable minister, why don’t you allow us to deal with clause 14 and then deal with clause 61 later because here they are just deleting-

MR RUHINDI: Agreed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ongom, do you still have a problem? What is the problem with clause 14(2)?

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. In clause 14(2) we are saying, “Where a marriage gift has been given by a party to a marriage under this Act, it is an offence to demand the return of the marriage gift.” Madam Chairperson, I wish to amend the word “gift”. It should not be a gift. We have talked about dowry or bride price somewhere; why don’t we say, “Where dowry has been given, it should not be refunded”? That is my proposal. 

DR OMONA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The help I seek is on 14(2). Clause 61 talks about the preliminaries to a customary marriage. We are talking about customary marriage, which is defined and they have got their own different rites-

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we have not yet got there.

DR OMONA: Madam Speaker, I am just saying that supposing the rights of a particular custom also allow for refund as is stated in clause 61, shall we come back to clause 14(2) again? Suppose it is a custom. I just seek help on this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think I have understood you.
 
MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the honourable colleague from the left hand side has a point. This is because a gift is voluntary but dowry is something different from a gift. So, I would think that we would better put dowry instead of a gift.

MS NAMARA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to inform hon. Kakooza and my colleague here that if you look at the definition of marriage gifts, it caters for the bride price, which is dowry as well. If I can read it verbatim: “Marriage gifts means a gift, by whatever name known, in cash or in kind given by either party to a marriage in respect of that marriage and includes bride price and bride wealth”, which I think caters for dowry.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you not satisfied, hon. Ongom? 

MS JOY ONGOM: I concede.

MR OCHOLA: Madam Chair, I still have a problem with clause 14(2). The problem I have with clause 14(2) is that in the villages, the people we are representing, in case of a situation where this poor man has his four animals and has married a woman, the woman stays with him for two months and she divorces him and they have not even saved, shouldn’t this man collect his animals? - (Interjections) - Madam Chair, I want help from you. This can then easily become a business. A woman can decide to marry this man, he gets the animals and then two, three months down the road, she divorces and moves to another man, the same story happens and she moves to another one. Madam Chair, how are we going to handle that kind of situation?

THE CHAIRPERSON: That is theft and you deal with it under the Penal Code. It is theft. I put the question that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MR OTADA: Madam Chairperson, in good faith, clause 17 says the following: “Prohibited degrees of relationship. A person shall not be a party to a civil marriage where the parties are within the prohibited degrees of relationship, whether natural, legal, or by clan as set out in the Second Schedule of this Act.” 

Madam Chair, the second schedule says something else. The second schedule, which we are relying on, is saying it shall apply whether it occurs naturally or legally or by marriage, not “or by clan”. The second schedule which we are quoting is saying something else and clause 17 is talking about something else. I want us to harmonise and pick the spirit which is in the second schedule, which we are relying on, and put it here. My issue is that we should delete “or by clan” and replace it with “or by marriage”, which is what is described in the second schedule.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I think all our customs, wherever we come from, are founded on a clan system. That is one. Two, we have had a case in this country that has gone up to the Court Of Appeal talking about marriage within one clan. So when you remove the clan issue, you will offend our clan system and you will offend that decision.

When it comes to marriage, if people are related by marriage, I think in this country our customs differ. There are those where a person can marry a cousin in their system. It has happened. In some cultures it does not. I would suggest that we retain “clan” as opposed to “marriage” and then the rest can be handled customarily.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am going to propose amendments to clause 19(1) and (2). Sub clause (1) says, “Where a civil marriage is intended to be contracted, one of the parties to the intended marriage shall sign…” It is really discriminative to say that only one party should sign. I propose that both parties must participate in the signing.

Sub clause (2) says, “Where the party who gives notice is unable to write or understand the English language, it shall be sufficient if he or she places his or her mark on the notice in the presence of a literate person…” Madam Chair, literacy is the ability to write and read but it does not mean that the one who knows how to write and read knows English. I am, therefore, proposing that instead of saying, “in the presence of a literate person”, it should be “a person who understands English.” I propose, Madam Chairperson.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I would like to propose a further modification to make sub clause (2) to read, “Where the party who gives notice is unable to write...” and then we delete, “or to understand the English language.” I do not think it is mandatory. I can write my name and I can sign. My name and my signature are actually not in English.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, how is a civil marriage conducted in vernacular? It is in English. Civil marriage is conducted in English before the registrar.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, I appreciate the education you are giving me. Like you said, it is conducted in English but what you are requiring of this person is to sign, and I am saying the signature is not in English so there is no requirement for me to understand the English language. I think I will just sign because there is already a translator helping me anyway.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing we are divorcing and I say, “Actually, the marriage is void because I did not even understand that thing which I put my hand on.” 

MR KATUNTU: I think we need to go back to the Constitution. The Constitution provides the official language and the official languages are English and Swahili. Swahili is the second official language. So, what we can only provide for is the interpretation such that the illiterate, or those who do not understand English, can know what they are thumb printing or signing. Obviously, we can also provide, maybe under the regulations, for a certificate of translation such that it is a legal requirement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, the first amendment of hon. Mutyabule is that she wants both parties who intend to marry to sign the notice. Is there a problem with that?

MR RUHINDI: Really, first of all, we are looking at the practicability of doing things. This is at the stage of giving notice that such and such party intend to wed; one of the parties can do this. For most of these civil marriages, I have seen some of these parties do not even live here and it is just to expedite the affairs because at this stage, you are only giving notice as you wait for your party who is to come from London, from New York and so forth. That is one.

Two, we already have a law - these practising lawyers know – and we have even had some judicial decisions to the effect that where a person thumbprints, you need a translation; you must read that translation to that person who is thumb printing to indicate that that person understands what he has thumb printed and so forth. There is already an existing legislation to that effect - (Interjection) - Excellent! It is the Illiterates’ Protection Act. It is there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you reject the proposals.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Chairperson, given the explanation of the Attorney-General where one of the parties may not be here and really it happens so much in the civil marriages, why don’t we provide that if both of them are here, they can sign. If both of them are here-(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: You see, we have spent two days blaming men or spouses who do not want to get married. Now, this is someone who voluntarily walks and gives notice to the whole world that they intend to get married. The notice is to make the whole world know and in case anyone wants to raise some objections. Now you are making the process of marriage difficult if you want both parties to go. Nothing may prohibit them, but at least we are saying any of the persons should go and give a notice. So, I think we should not insist. These are some of the easiest ways to make cohabitation even end.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, let me give an example about myself. I was here in Uganda, a process had to take place, my partner was also in another place and we were going to get married in a period of 10 days. If you say both parties - Unless you are now going to put an electronic system of signing, and this might even complicate the process. So, we have to define, - unless we are going to have electronic signatures - will that be in the villages and some places?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, this is just a notice to say we intend to do this. If you do not want it, you do not follow it through. It is just a notice.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, you know there are some of these very malicious guys in the village. He knows that I want - okay I am married to Johnson- to get married to Johnson in a few days to come and then he purports, because he wants to undermine my relationship, and he goes and notifies. So, the whole village now says, “You see, she actually wants to get married to Fox” because I have not signed up. So, I need to be protected and I need to give my consent. Otherwise, people will peddle notices that they want to get married to me and the real guy I want to get married to will flee.

MR TASHOBYA: Well, I think what hon. Alaso is raising will give rise to even criminal sanctions. Really, more fundamentally, as Members have said, we are saying we should look at a process-(Interruption)

MS BAKO: Thank you, Madam Chair, and thank you, honourable, for giving way. The reason we want both parties to sign is this - In case the relationship is going astray after that marriage, one of the parties can decide to tell the other that, “after all, you are the one who went to apply for this”. So, to avoid that kind of scenario, let the two parties endorse their signature to that.

MAJ. GEN (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chairperson, whereas one of the intending parties signs, they will eventually have to make a contractual obligation, which both of them sign, which they cannot run away from. So, this is redundant.

MR SSEGONNA: Madam Chair, let colleagues understand this in its proper context. Already, this notice requirement has been there and the parties are not required to notify the public. It is the registrar or the person intending to celebrate the officer to notify. I, as a person intending to marry somebody, have no duty whatsoever to notify the public. It is this officer of Government in form of the registrar; for Christian marriages, it is the priest who notifies. 

Let us also draw on the analogy of other notices which are issued. An application for letters of administration, for example; here, the applicant does not sign the notice but it is the registrar who signs the notice. Subsequently, the two parties will come together at the time of celebrating or solemnising the marriage. That is the time when they will sign. I am actually expressing a degree of discomfort when we say one of them “shall”. It should actually be “may”, because the person who has the duty to notify the public is the officer of Government.

MS KABASHARIRA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am looking at a scenario where we have our people doing kyeyo outside the country; at times they want to get some certificates to help them to attain citizenship and they always come and organise marriage. Now, if we put a condition that two of them must sign the notice, won’t we deny even some of these people? One person can do it. We can even do without it. These officers can do it for them and it is done because afterwards, they will sign when they come for their real ceremony. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. In clause 20, they are referring to the civil marriages’ notice book. Sub clause (2) says, “The District Registrar shall also cause a copy of the notice to be published by affixing it on a public notice board at his or her office for twenty-one consecutive days after the day on which the notice was entered in the Civil Marriages’ Notice Book.” Sub clause (3) then says, “The Civil Marriages’ Notice Book shall be open for inspection by the public during office hours on payment of the prescribed fee.”

I see a situation where I am deep down in the village, my daughter is in the university and they kind of make an agreement that they want to marry. As a parent I have no knowledge about it but then they just go to the registrar’s office and a notice is made. How will I, as a parent, know or have knowledge of such incidences? So, for matters of consistency, we are saying that let it be down to the sub-counties not just at the district, so that the parents, even the illiterate ones, the rural woman or the rural guardian, will know their daughter is being married off or their son is about to marry somebody. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Honourable member, your consent is not required. If the children want to inform you, they can send you an SMS - (Laughter) - because they are above 18 and they have attained the age of consent. It is a civil marriage. 

MR OKOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. I stand to move an amendment to clause 20(3) so that it conforms to clause 8(3). In clause 8(3), we jointly accepted that the District Marriage and Divorce Register shall be open for inspection by the public during office hours and then we said, full stop. We decided to delete, “on payment of the prescribed fee.” I see that the same thing, if possible, should apply here so that the civic marriage notice book shall be open for inspection by the public during office hours. We should stop there and delete the words, “on payment of the prescribed fee”, to give room to people to access this. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We did that in clause 8. Is it okay if we remove the fee? Okay, honourable members, I put the question that clause 20 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The committee proposes amendment to clause 23 by inserting a new sub clause immediately after sub clause(2) to read as follows. (Interjection) Madam Chair, can you protect me from my member, hon. Ayena?

Sub-clause(3), we propose, should read as follows: “The registrar,  after production to him or her of the certificate or licence,  shall, either directly or through an interpreter, address the parties thus- 
‘Do I understand that you (name) and you (name), come here for the purpose of becoming husband and wife?’ 

If the parties answer in the affirmative, he or she shall proceed thus- 
‘Know you that by the public taking of each other as husband and wife in my presence, and in the presence of the persons now here, and by the subsequent attestation of that taking by signing your names to that effect, you become legally married to each other, although no other rite of a civil or religious nature shall take place, and that this marriage cannot be dissolved during your lifetime, except by a valid judgment of divorce; and if either of you before the death of the other shall contract another marriage while this remains undissolved, you commit the offence of bigamy and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.’” 

The justification is: to enable the registrar explain to the parties the consequences of a civil marriage.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub clause be introduced into clause 23 as proposed by the chair. (Interjection) Let us deal with his. Are you dealing with this one? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Chair, there is a presumption that those who hope to go for civil marriage know why they have opted for that. Now, on my marriage day, to hear such a message – “you commit an offence, on conviction” - for heaven’s sake, that is a little rude. I can say, “Just a minute, I did not know all this”, if ignorance of the law is no defence. I think it is a good suggestion but these things of telling people the offence and how many years you can be in prison on the day they are dressed in their best attire -(Laughter)- is a little harsh. I think it is a little harsh, Mr Chairman, for whatever intentions you have. It is a little harsh to hear such things.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Otto, when people wed in the Church, the Priest says you should be together until you die. It is the same message they are giving them. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Then maybe we stop at the point where they wrote “divorce” so that you say, “Know ye all that public taking of oaths continues to the effect that you become legally married to each other although no other rite of civil marriage or religious nature shall take place and this marriage cannot be dissolved during your lifetime except by valid judgment of divorce and if either of you dies”. We stop at “divorce". Those other ones down there are rude - (Interjections)- We can stop at “death” but this one of, “while this remains undissolved, you commit the offence of bigamy and shall on conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred and twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years...” I think that part-(Interruption)-

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, and thank you, honourable, for giving way. According to the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights, you are supposed to be facilitated to make a decision when you are fully aware so that you have free and full consent as you enter the marriage. Thank you.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, when you are preparing to get married, you are prepared not on the day when you go to swear in. Even in civil marriage, you are prepared before because you will meet the registrar and then they tell you the consequences. Even the issue of health, the degree of relationship will all be discussed and then you will be found to be fit, also on the issue of age and so forth. It is not necessary at this time because they will have verified the degree of relationship, age, health and other issues. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want to stop at the word, “divorce”? We stop at divorce? 

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, I am at pains, knowing the nature of business at hand; it appears we are running without quorum yet we are voting, contrary to rule 23 of our Rules of Procedure. Are we proceeding well without quorum yet we are voting?  (Interjections) Well, the rule does not allow me to move a motion when I ask a procedural question.    

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we had not agreed on where to end; does the chair agree that we stop at the word “divorce” and we do not include imprisonment and death?

MR TASHOBYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I thought hon. Kamateka brought very good information to us. Marriage is a very important institution and it does no harm for people entering that institution to know the consequences of that relationship. I think you should help them instead of obstructing them. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I think it is important that we express the obligation here so that people know the responsibility they are entering into. Even in church, they tell you that you have entered into this marriage and you will stay in it in good health and bad, in poverty and riches; all these things come out clearly. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: They even say that you should not take it lightly. 

MR BAHATI: Yes, so people must get to know the consequences and obligations.

REV JACINTO OGWAL: Madam Chair, I think in religious marriages, all the instructions take place before the day the marriage is blessed. Now, in this case, in the civil marriage, is there any preparation which takes place before these people consent to these marriages? To me, these people are coming to celebrate their marriage but there is no preparation before they confirm their consent. 

In fact, in some churches there is serious preparation before the marriage but in the civil case, that is not taking place. I think the registrar has the obligation to explain all the details of what this marriage entails.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, I think we are missing the point. Whereas there might be no preparation like in the Church, the time of the wedding is not the time they establish the age and other things. Are you going to put age here also? Are you going to say if we establish that you are below age, you will be jailed? Are you going to say that if you deny your partner sexual consent, you are going to suffer five years? Are you going to put all those issues here? Why are you putting in only this aspect and leaving out the other criminal aspects? Let us then put in everything. 

Madam Chair, before the registrar accepts to process the marriage, he will have established the facts and will have taken you through the consequences. 

MR RUHINDI: I stand in support of hon. Ekanya’s submission because we cannot codify everything in a statement of this nature. The decision to get married is a decision between two people and the registrar only needs to make sure that the marriage is conducted in accordance with the law. So, it is not the role of the registrar to begin explaining to the parties what the law pertaining to marriage is all about. The practice in church is just good ethical manners in our churches. Otherwise, you are going to codify everything pertaining in this instrument we are making. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, we stop at the word “divorce”?

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, we are looking at different types of marriages which have different ways of being conducted. If you contract a customary marriage, you are initiated into the marriage in accordance with the customs under which you are contracting it. If you opt to contract a Christian marriage, the Christian minister will take you through the values of a Christian marriage – (Interjections) – Yes, for moral purposes because you have subjected yourself to the values of Christianity or a particular custom. Now, when you opt for a civil marriage, are we saying that the role of the registrar is just to pronounce you man and woman because you have satisfied the paper requirements? 

That is why I concur with hon. Jovah Kamateeka, who represents Mitooma, that because this thing has legal implications, let us explain the legal implications to those people. If your option is not to explain to them on this day, then make provision for prior explanation of those values. Our work is not simply to legislate and trap citizens. That is my information.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Madam Chair, there is a provision for divorce in the Bill, meaning that in this undertaking, when you injure the other party, they will divorce you. So, why do you have to say, you will be imprisoned and all that? We have gone into a social contract, a civil marriage, so you marry somebody else, I divorce you; period. You do not have to explain to me that I will have to jump tall and sit down – (Laughter). Then you will have to add that if you do not produce children, then you divorce; that if you do not function – 

By the way, I want to explain what I said yesterday. I said that this is a biological function. What I did not add is that it is governed by social, spiritual and legal norms. The marriage between cows, if the cows approve of it, is a marriage. This is between homosapiens. (Laughter)  These marriages are governed by biological functions of emotion, support and compatibility in sexual relationships. When one of those fundamental functions is unavailable, the marriage collapses. 

So we are not going to explain everything, that if you are biologically this or that, because this causes annulment of marriage. Why do you want to say, if you marry again, you will suffer this or that? What about when you are impotent? Will you be imprisoned for being impotent? So, Madam Chairperson, I submit that we should stop at “divorce”. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that we delete all the words after “divorce” as proposed by the chairperson. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR YAGUMA: Madam Chairperson, why don’t we substitute these words, “becoming husband and wife” with “marriage” because “becoming husband and wife” has a connotation of cohabitation. “Come here for the purpose of marriage...” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but in the church they say, “Do you take this man to be your lawful husband; do you take this woman to be your lawful wife?” Those are the words they use.

MR YAGUMA: Yes, but cohabitation is when you are living as husband and wife. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 23, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question out and agreed to.)

Clause 23, as amended, agreed to.
 
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.29
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.) 

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_) 

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

7.30 
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered clauses 1 and clauses 4 up to 23 and passed them with amendments. I beg to report that clauses 1 and 2 were stood over -
THE SPEAKER:  No. It was clause 3, minister. The interpretation section is the one we stood over.

MR RUHINDI: Did we pass clause 2?

THE SPEAKER: We passed clause 1 and clause 2 and stood over clause 3, which is interpretation. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, I beg to report that we considered clauses 1 and 2 and 4 up to 23 and passed them with amendments and stood over clause 3. Most obliged, Rt. Hon. Speaker. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE 

7.32
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the work done the whole of this week. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.33 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 5 March 2013 at 2.00 p.m.) 

