Thursday, 27 February 2014

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I wanted to remind the chairperson and the Members of the Committee on Health to expedite consideration of the HIV/AIDS Control and Prevention Bill, 2010.

I do recall that you went on a benchmarking trip to Zimbabwe where they have successfully established a Trust Fund to cater for the cost of treatment for their citizens suffering from HIV/AIDS. If we do establish a Trust Fund as you reported, this will enable us to look after our people rather than succumb to blackmail from the western world who want to force us to become homosexuals.

If we have a Trust Fund, we can raise resources internally so that we are able to fund our own medication. And if we could have that Bill done before the budget such that it is incorporated into the proposals soliciting revenue during the new financial year, it will really help a lot.

Secondly, I would want hon. Anywar to formerly substantiate the allegations she made against hon. Kibuule in relation to the anti-pornography law. On Tuesday, she had undertaken to produce a tape or transcribed text on what he said on Radio Dunamis. Yesterday, I waited but I did not see the text for that transcription. So, hon. Anywar, if you do not have that tape or transcribed text, I want you to formerly withdraw the allegations against hon. Kibuule.

3.04
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was on record and I promised that I would bring a tape where the honourable minister made a comment concerning the Anti-Pornography Bill where he was inciting people and I was directed to bring that tape. By yesterday, in conjunction with hon. Betty Nambooze, we established that the radio station was intimidated. They have written a letter and I am looking for it to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: No, those are new allegations. If you do not have it just withdraw. I cannot prove the intimidation.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will withdraw. I just wanted to also lay on Table the letter for record purposes.

THE SPEAKER: What are you laying on record?

MS ANYWAR: As I was saying, we sent hon. Nambooze to the radio station and she is the area MP and she has written a letter but the radio station management was intimidated and refused to –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, either you have the text or you do not; if you don’t, please withdraw because you are now bringing new allegations which we cannot prove.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With your guidance, I withdraw.

THE SPEAKER: I direct the Clerk to expunge the allegations made on Tuesday against hon. Kibuule by hon. Anywar.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 38/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.06
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): “(i) What is the statistical classroom deficiency in Uganda?
(ii)What measures are in place to address this problem?
(iii)What efforts is Government making to construct staff houses in government aided schools?”

QUESTION 56/1/1/09 TO THE MINISTER OF ENERGY

3.07
MS BETTY ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): “In light of the newspaper article in the Sunday Monitor of 25 November 2012, titled ‘Government in fresh tax disputes with Oil Companies’

(i)	Would the minister explain to the House how and why these fresh tax disputes arose?
(ii)	What specific measures is Government taking to ensure that these disputes don’t lead to further loss to Government in terms of compensation and or arbitrations abroad?”

3.07
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In regard to hon. Anywar’s question, Government through my ministry has entered into different production sharing agreements with international oil companies.
The current active production sharing agreements are those for exploration area I in Packwach Basin; Area II, Buliisa Hoima and Area III, Bugoma Ntoroko, which were signed in 2004, 2001 and 2004 respectively.

These production sharing agreements were developed in conformity with International Oil Industry Practices and Production Sharing Models which contained standard provisions including a provision on dispute resolution.

Madam Speaker, the individual production sharing agreements confer rights and obligations upon the international oil companies over their respective exploration areas. For example, Heritage which had rights to explore for petroleum in Exploration Areas I and III(A) thought that it could invoke the arbitration provisions in the Production Sharing or Explorations Areas I and III(A) when it was not willing to pay the tax arising from the sale of its assets to Tullow Oil. This led to the first arbitration case filed in a London tribunal. 

In a similar way, Tullow before the transfer of its interests to Total and CNOOC was having the exclusive rights to explore for petroleum in Exploration Area II in accordance with the Production Sharing Agreement for that area which was signed in 2001. In October 2012, Tullow had a disagreement to Value Added Tax and it filed an arbitration case against the Republic of Uganda at the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes in Washington DC, United States of America thereby invoking certain provisions in the Production Sharing Agreement for Exploration Area II.

Discussing the details of how and why this fresh dispute arose at this material time would constitute violation of the sub judice rule. This case has no relationship with the case filed by Heritage since they arose from different Production Sharing Agreements.

Madam Speaker, Government, like any other party, has no mechanism of preventing any person or entity from going to a court of competent jurisdiction for litigation. Government can only continue to build institutional capacity and develop strong legal regimes including petroleum and tax legislation, among others, so that the companies are not able to take advantage of any weak legal or institutional framework.

With strong and clear national laws, competent manpower as well as competently negotiated Production Sharing Agreements, Government should be able to continue prevailing in any litigation and arbitration. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary?

3.09
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my honourable colleague the minister for the response. However, you can imagine that this case is still before the courts of law. We actually do not know what could be the outcome and my concern of what could easily become a loss to the Government can be an option. This is why we are advocating that we needed Government to show strong commitment of guarding against these arbitrations and losses so that it is not repetitive.

And two, the minister has indicated here that there is already competent manpower to negotiate the Production Sharing Agreement. Madam Speaker, you are aware that the already negotiated Production Sharing Agreement that was laid in this House had stringent conditions of accessibility to the extent that the hon. Members before you, Madam Speaker, have not been able to internalise the details of those agreements leave alone –

THE SPEAKER: What is the supplementary question arising from her answer?

MS ANYWAR: One is that, I wanted specifically to ask the minister to let this country know what has been put into place apart from saying that “there is a competent team” and yet it has been there and we have been involved in getting losses for our country.

But two, I would also want the government to ensure how the  competently negotiated Production Sharing Agreements can be accessible and owned by the citizens of this country and particularly by this august House. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I see no supplementary there. Let us go to the next question. Where is the Minister for Education? The three questions from three members are for the Minister for Education and there are several ministers in that ministry. Prime Minister, where are your ministers?

3.14
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. Rtd) (Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, definitely I would be telling you lies if I said I knew where these ministers are. (Laughter) Therefore, my honest answer is that I do not know where they are - (Laughter) - and much as I am the deputy in charge, definitely it is not within our roaster for ministers to tell us where they are at one particular time. I am sorry, Madam Speaker, but we shall find out where they are.

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, I appreciate your inability to explain their absence but Thursday is the day when Private Members Business takes priority and this is well known in our Rules of Procedure. How can they disappear when the Private Members Business is a priority? Hon. Ssewungu.

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker First of all, allow me to thank the Minister for Energy. You are responsible and thank you for being around. 

Madam Speaker, this is also a common problem that we have also received in the Committee for Education with the three ministers. This is not the first time. Whenever - and it is one of the ministries getting the biggest share of Uganda’s budget yet it is not performing to the extent that even now, O’ Level performance was the poorest! 

Don’t you think that it will be procedurally okay to ask the Prime Minister to summon these ministers here because we need them as these questions are pertinent and we are going to bring more questions about the same? And once they come here, may you caution them because they have read these questions - and that the Prime Minister is here, they were in Cabinet yesterday and these are the things you handle. We know that they just play around and –

THE SPEAKER: Mr Prime Minister, I will defer these questions to a little later today but they must be answered today. So, please ensure that those four ministers come here. All those four ministers for education should come here, today.

3.16
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. Rtd) (Moses Ali): Most obliged, Madam Speaker. But then I will ask you to allow me to go out and find out where they are. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Very well, Prime Minister. Next item.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Now, hon. Sezi Mbaguta told me that she is a bit unwell and I wanted to move her up; if she could make her statement quickly.

3.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mrs Mbaguta P. Sezi): Madam Speaker, you guided me that we send our statements on the iPads and we did pass it on to the Clerk for passing on to Members.

My ministry was required to make a statement on the non-payment of salaries to staff of Kisoro, Kabale, Tororo, Mbarara and others. 

Madam Speaker, I want to inform the House that we are shifting from an old system of computerisation to a new one. Therefore, January 2014 was the deadline for paying staff through the legacy payroll system which is the old payroll system that was managed at the Uganda Computer Services by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

As a result, all records that were still on the old payroll system totalling 18,000 for traditional staff and for local government, 4,289 in agencies and 364 teachers had to be migrated through the Integrated Personnel and Payroll System commonly known as IPPS. 

The process of migration required extensive data verification of records for officers as per the requirement of the new system and in this respect, it was not possible to complete the migration of this category and above record in time for payment in January, 2014.

Accounting officers were accordingly notified that since the migration was not completed in time, the affected staff were to be paid their January 2014 salaries together with the salary of February 2014. As I speak, that process of payment is on-going today and tomorrow.

The ministry has already made a submission to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – (Interruption)

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, the minister was supposed to have circulated this document but it is neither circulated nor is it on the iPads. We want to be guided.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member says that the document is not on the iPad and it is not in circulation. Can the Clerk check?

MRS SEZI: I do not know where it is but we did send it. I am not familiar with that area of technology, Madam Speaker.

MR BALIDDAWA: Madam Speaker, the hon. Minister should be guided that when you send a copy of this text, it should be in digital form for it to be put on the iPad. If you send hard copies, definitely it will not be there. So I suggest that the ministers be informed to send both the hard copy and the digital copy to make life easier for the ICT department to effect this.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, did you send a digital copy?

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, we sent it to the Clerk to make the submission because that is the procedure. But, Madam Speaker, my statement is also very short.

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister is whispering that the statement is short but our queries might be longer. While she explained the short area of the statement, she talked about shifting of names of people who are already in the system but the major complaint is that most of the people do not access the payroll and some people in Police, Education and Health are getting half pay. So as you look for the shorter statement, consider that. Thank you.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want to further inform the minister that as she tells us she is going to be very brief, I cannot imagine her being brief in her statement when Mbarara University of Science and Technology alone has got 488 workers and I want you to hear the pain I am in with my people. Only 72 workers were paid in January and out of the 72, some had died, some had retired and some had been sacked and I will give you examples.

There is a woman called Beatrice Kimanyenda who has been peeling Matooke in the kitchen of Mbarara University of Science and Technology. She retired but got the January salary. Alex Mugumya and Mufanjara Mustapha are sacked drivers who got some salary. However, the professors and other people who are working in Mbarara University - imagine 415 workers of Mbarara University of Science and Technology have not received salaries for January and February. Now what shortness is she talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, the matter originally started with Kisoro health workers but it seems it is across the board. I want to ask you to bring a comprehensive statement about what is happening in all the sectors because I hear Police got half pay -

MRS SEZI: Madam Speaker, I was going to explain what is happening regarding staff salaries and the issues related to payment. I was just moving systematically to explain it.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I have checked with the Clerk and your Office did not send the document. So let us go to the Ministry of Works. I have asked the minister to bring a comprehensive report about all these sectors. Hon. Members, the Minister of Works is on the Floor.

3.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRANSPORT (Dr Simon Chebrot): Madam Speaker, first of all, I wish to thank you for giving me guidance yesterday on the ministerial statement I was to make on Soroti Flying School. I wish to thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, as you recall in the statement, you did ask me to make statements clearly spelling out the questions, which the Members had made in response. Hon. Elijah Okupa, the MP for Kasilo County informed the House that instructors at Soroti Flying School have gone on strike because they have not been paid salaries for the last three months. 

Madam Speaker, it is not true –(Interjections) –

THE SPEAKER: Order, hon. Members. Let us hear about Soroti Flying School, please.

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I have already sent the copies on the iPads; they are there. I have just checked with hon. Muyingo and the statements are already there. Let him confirm.

THE SPEAKER: Are they there, hon. Members? You have seen it? At least two Members confirmed. Proceed.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you. It is not true that instructors at Soroti Flying School have not been paid their salaries for the last three months. All the salaries of instructors have been paid up to date. What had happened is that, funds to pay the House rents for the newly recruited instructors were processed late and their rents had not been paid for December and January. Because of this, the instructors had protested and refused to give instructions to students until their rent had been paid.

I wish to report that to date, all the rent for instructors has been paid. Soroti Flying School, just like all other government institutions, have budgetary constraints but we are trying our best to provide services within the available resources.

Madam Speaker, it is also not true that the guild president and his team have been meeting me for the last two weeks. In fact, I never met them at all. The students came to Kampala on the morning of Tuesday, 26 February 2014 in the school van given by the acting principal to confirm what the principal had told them that the ministry was making all efforts to meet the needs including increasing the salaries of instructors according to the President’s directive.

The PS showed them the letter from the Rt Hon. First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Public Service, which was written to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to include salary enhancement in the budget for next year. This is salary enhancement not the President’s salary directive and all allowances, which are due to be increased as directed by the President.

Hon. Elijah Okupa informed this House that students are taking longer than two years to complete the basic final training and that two of the six new aircrafts have problems. It is true that some students have taken a longer time in Soroti than required and that the main reason is just budget constraints and due to lack of funds. This is why on the direction of the President, we procured six new aircrafts two years ago and we are now in the process of procuring a new twine engine aircraft. In the meantime, the old twine engine aircraft has also been repaired and right now it is in Nairobi for calibration and is due back in Soroti by next Tuesday. 

Mr Speaker, it is not true that two of the new aircrafts have problems. Only one of them had a propeller tip broken recently. The aircraft which crashed is one of the old aircrafts of 1969 and it has also been fully compensated by Goldstar Insurance Company. They already paid Shs 94 million –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we have received $94 million? 

MR CHEBROT: Shs 94 million. Hon. Mukula told this House that the flying school has lost the certificate of training –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, could you restrain hon. Anywar from calling me internal names?

THE SPEAKER: Please continue with your statement – let him finish the answer. 

MR CHEBROT: The statement made by hon. Mukula is certainly untrue. The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) issues certificates of flying to the school annually and the current certificate is valid up to October, 2014. The honourable member can check –(Interruption) 

MS ANYWAR: I stand on a point of order. The minister told us that he posted his statement on the iPad. Before me is the statement by the Minister of Works and Transport on the status of compensation of the right of way on the Mpigi Kanungu-Sembabule Road. 

The minister is already submitting on Soroti Flying School which is not on the iPad. Is the minister in order to continue while knowing that he did not send the information on the iPad of the Members? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you send both statements to the iPad?

MR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I submitted softcopies of both copies to the Clerk and if they have not arrived on the iPad, maybe they are in cyberspace – (Laughter) 

MR SSALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There has been an outcry that honourable members of Parliament do not know how to use the iPad. But I have realised that MPs are experts in using them. That means that the frontbench and technocrats are the ones who need training urgently. 

THE SPEAKER: Training is available for all the Members including ministers. Please conclude your statement. 

MR CHEBROT: My ministry is doing everything possible to recover and maintain the glory of the East African Civil Aviation Academy or what is referred to as Soroti Flying School by enhancing the salaries and conditions of services for the instructors and staff and therefore attract and retain more and younger instructors. 

My ministry is also revamping the training fleet of aircrafts by procuring another twin engine aircraft. Already, a state of the art simulator has been procured and installed and improvement – (Interruption) -

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, we do not know what the minister is talking about. He is continuing to read when Members are not even paying attention. Is the minister in order to continue reading to himself the document when Members do not have the document and they do not know what he is talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Wamai, did you come with your iPad – let me ask my clerk whether the statement arrived.

Honourable members, the clerk confirms that the statement on Mpigi is on your iPad, but the one of Soroti Flying School is not there. So, please arrange to send it then we can receive your answer. Now go to the next statement on the road. 

MR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I address you in reference to issues which were raised by hon. Mariam Nalubega, Woman MP for Butambala on the road upgrading to tarmac from Mpigi – Kanoni – Maddu – Ssembabule Road. The main issue she raised was about the compensation of the project affected persons on this project, and why the contractor of Energo Construction has started construction work before any compensation was carried out. I would like to apologise to the people of Butambala and the Members of Parliament and I wish to state as follows. 

The affected people who had given leeway to UNRA before payment did it willingly. The reason the contractor commenced work before the compensation was completed is that we were allocated money for road construction and compensation at the same time in July 2013. We made a decision – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you seem to be reading something different from what I have – what you are saying is not in this statement. 

MR CHEBROT: I am just summarising – it is the same. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are actually adding things to this statement; what you are saying is not here. 

MR CHEBROT: Okay, let me stick to the statement. The reason the contractor commenced work before the compensation was completed is that we were allocated money for the road construction and compensation at the same time in July, 2013. We made a decision to proceed with the work at the same time as the compensation for the properties – so that the road works are completed within the contracted three year period. 

Our practice is that when we carry out two activities at the same time, the contract should only carryout work in areas that have been fully compensated. The evaluation report was approved by the Chief Government Valuer and all the affected property owners were assessed and valued for compensations.
 
A consultant firm called Ugaserve was contracted to carry out the compensation and titling for the road reserve. The exercise commenced with a sensitisation programme which ended in January 2014. 

Mobilisation by the compensation consultant has been completed and the compensation programme is set to begin Monday, 10 March 2014. The programme for compensation will be running in the press beginning Monday, 3 March 2014 for a period of one week to give the project affected persons ample time to prepare for a verification programme and compensation. The budget for compensation currently stands at Shs 29.6 billion and the funds planned are already in the budget and ready to be disbursed. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.41
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the minister for attempting to answer a question that I did not ask him – (Laughter) – because the issue we raised on this Floor was not whether you have money for compensation but why the construction of Butambala Road is ongoing without revealing to our affected people the amount they are going to be paid and without paying them yet their buildings are being destroyed. 

For you to tell me that the disclosure of the payment will be done on 3rd March and the payment will start on 10th March is not answering my question because the compensation Act is very clear and so is the contract. Even though you agreed with Ugaserve and Energo to do these two processes at the same time – to compensate and start the work; why did the work start without the compensation starting? It means you want to defraud our people. Now, all the trees are being thrown down and the homes are being destroyed. How are you going to assess whether the payment which is accorded to Mr Matovu, whose house is already demolished, is accurate and worth the damage –(Interruption) 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I would like to inform this House that the stretch of the distance affected from a village called Kikumbo near Kibibi to Kabasanda is a stretch of about five kilometres. Their buildings have been demolished; they are completely down. Those of you who have been to a place called Mirembe – I was there with Simon Mulongo – the whole trading centre is completely demolished without any compensation. 

The minister was trying to tell the House that the people conceded freely; that is an absolute lie. What is taking place is that the people are ignorant of what is being taken care of. Yesterday, I made a statement. The law is very clear; the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, Article 26(2) (a) and (b) are very clear; payment must be prompt and prior. Even where you say it is a common practice, that common practice is an illegality. You have been doing it for some time elsewhere but it will not be done to the people of Butambala; they know a little bit of the law. 

Therefore, I would like to inform this august House that what can only happen is for the project to stop for the meantime so that people are compensated. Those areas that are duly compensated can start – that is the dictate of the law and the Constitution. The hands are tied. 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving us very relevant and good information. Our people welcomed this development programme and they gave the will to use their land on concession that there will be a refund – it is very clear. They have a right to land; they have a right to their buildings, but they consented to have Government pay them so that they can allow the project to go on. So for the minister to say that our people consented so we can work without paying them as hon. Kivumbi stated - we would not want to have this project go to a standstill, but we will go and mobilise our people –(Interruption) 

MR BAKKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member for giving way. Some time back, Government constructed a road between Busunju and Hoima. Part of this road is in my constituency – that is between Busunju and Kikandwa. It is almost 10 years but these people have never been compensated. They are always in my office, I have visited UNRA offices several times but these people have never been compensated. It is a very big problem for you to work on a road without compensating people. So, I want to strengthen the point that you should not go ahead doing this project without compensating people. 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, hon. Member. Honourable minister, we have been dialoguing with UNRA and they assured us that by July last year, they had the money ready for compensation. So, we are wondering; if the money was ready by July, how come today Energo is constructing without paying a single person? Even those who are on a threshold of Shs 200,000 have not been paid and you are busy throwing down their buildings – (Interjections)  

THE SPEAKER: No, this is not a debate. Hon. Minister, you have had this money since July, why haven’t you paid? Can you pay immediately? 

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I want to assure you that the Shs 29.7 billion is available on the budget and we are starting payment from 3rd to 10th of next month. 

THE SPEAKER: No, Minister, you said you were given this money in July 2013. 

DR CHEBROT: Yes, but the procedure is that when you receive the money on the budget, you verify who owns the land that you want to pay. They have to give you the title and then you have to cut the title which belongs to UNRA – that takes a long time to process. By the time the Ministry of Lands gives you the title from the mother title, it takes almost six months. 

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Lands tell us where the title deeds of these areas are? 

DR CHEBROT: All the title deeds of the area where the road is going to pass are currently with UNRA and copies were made to the consultant to verify the owners. Therefore, titling from mother titles for the land to be transferred to UNRA; as of now, we are going to pay all those people who have given us their titles. They are going to be paid before 10th March – I do not see what the problem is; 10th of March is just next month.  

THE SPEAKER: Can the Minister of Lands confirm what you have done about this particular land along this road?

3.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (Ms Aidah Nantaba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I request that you give me 30 minutes to give you a report about this. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us defer this matter until we get the right information about the status of this land holding and why the money has been held since July, 2013. 

3.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we saw a Member of the frontbench in front of me failing to present or answer questions. Today we have also seen a lot of answers which are not satisfying to us. You are postponing what should be done. The ministers have a lot of staff and resources available to them. Their performance shows that there is a dysfunctional Government. You may say yes or no but that is my judgement and it is from this side. We think that this Government is dysfunctional or the ministries are dysfunctional because already we have seen you - (Interruption)

MR ECWERU: Madam Speaker, we agreed here and it is the habit of this Cabinet and practice to always avail this Parliament factual information. What has happened is that my colleagues have decided that they must go and get correct facts so that they do not come and mislead the House. To indicate that that suggests that we are a dysfunctional Government by the Leader of the Opposition, who is just getting used to his new chair - is it in order for the Leader of the Opposition to insinuate that we are not competent?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we need to know the right information. Let us leave that matter until the Minister for Lands returns.

3.52
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I requested for permission to go and find out about the four ministers of education because I was afraid to tell you lies. Now this is the truth: hon. Alupo is in Arusha, hon. Bataringaya is in Mpigi, hon. Bakkabulindi is indisposed - that means that he is sick if that is difficult English. Hon. Muyingo is inaccessible. So, I could not get him on telephone. This is the status quo. I request that you defer this question to the next sitting.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, we must express our displeasure because this is an opportunity for Members to ask questions and we are aware that education is one of those areas which every Member is interested in yet all ministers are away without leave of the Speaker. Please, note that we are not very happy.

MOTION FOR CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON FINANCIAL IMPROPRIETY IN THE OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER

3.54
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, before we broke off for the recess this Parliament enacted legislation on anti-homosexuality. Shortly after enactment of that legislation, we received in our pigeonholes copies of a letter that was written to you by His Excellency the President copied to all of us Members of Parliament. In that letter, this Parliament was accused of passing that law without quorum.

Secondly, in that letter this Parliament was accused of indiscipline and that the Speaker is the one leading that group of undisciplined Members of Parliament. The rest of the content was as scandalous as you read it.

Now that His Excellency has assented to this thing in a public ceremony witnessed by both the local and international media, can the Prime Minister give us a statement, first of all, retracting that very scandalous letter? More so offer an apology to the Speaker and this Parliament which was accused of indiscipline and it was not invited when the Executive chose to share the limelight over a Bill they had said was passed without Quorum? Whoever read that letter was scandalised to the bone. So, can the Prime Minister issue a statement retracting that letter but also apologising to this House and to you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: The question is to you the Government.

3.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Madam Speaker, as my colleagues in the Opposition were quick to point out and praise the President for signing the Bill, I think that matter has been overtaken by events and if we want to delve into history, we can do so but I suggest that we don’t because that is something that is behind us and we should move on.

MR SSEMUJJU: I can understand what the Prime Minister is saying but scandalising this Parliament cannot be a matter of the past. I have seen hon. John Patrick Amama Mbabazi my friend apologising for the wrongs committed. I do not know what would be difficult for him to pronounce himself that the content of those letters - this is the first time that a letter written to the Speaker of Parliament is copied to every Member of Parliament but also with very scandalous content and the Leader of Government Business says that we should forget all about it. When it accused the Speaker of Parliament for breeding indiscipline and it remains on our record, and you think we should forget about that? 

THE SPEAKER: Let us go to the next item. Yes, hon. Alaso?

4.00
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My concern is basically to understand how we have decided to now move forward from the issues that were before the Minister for Public Service and the portion that was before the Minister for Works.

I would not drag the House if I did not feel very passionate about these two issues. Last year, I talked to the Minister for Public Service about how the two doctors in Serere had begun getting half pay in October. 

Madam Speaker, you know how hard it is to get a doctor to those villages in Serere. It took us time to go to medical school to get these doctors when they were still doing internship. We had to get into all sorts of weird negotiations and convince them after Government had failed to get the recruited formally. Now when they accept to go to Serere, all of a sudden, they find themselves on half pay. 

I am expecting an answer from October when the doctors went on half pay and today they are thinking of leaving Serere when mothers are dying every other day. Now I am caught between a rock and a hard place and I do not know what to do because the House, in the interest of adhering to rules, is now saying that bring another statement and the minister is walking scot-free. I have a dilemma back home to handle –

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member, I had directed her and written her a note saying that there are bigger problems than the hospital in Kisoro. I have told her to look at all the sectors and bring a report relating to all this. I wrote to her a note when she was here.

MS ALASO: Yes, Madam Speaker, perhaps what needs to be emphasised which the minister was actually getting over when you are passing by is that she started in January but I want her to go back to the problems of half payment since October last year.

Secondly, even as we let Dr Chebrot get out on the matters of Soroti Flying School, you know that it is becoming ping pong. Hon. Okupa said that it is not true; hon. Mukula said it was not true. Why doesn’t hon. Chebrot come to this House and lay on Table a valid certificate for that school and then we know that it not about hon. Mukula or anybody. The valid certificate is there and the rest of us would shut up on that matter.

Most importantly, he may want to wish away the issue of the instructors on strike but they are on strike effectively. They are not instructing or teaching and so whether he comes here and says, “You know, it is hon. Okupa who came with this or the other.” The truth is that the students are not learning. I want to implore this House one more time for the sake of that flying school to go an extra mile. The depth of problems in that flying school cannot even be sorted by this statement.

Madam Speaker, if you assigned the Committee on Infrastructure just to do an investigation and deliver to this House the problems or report detailing the challenges in that school which fortunately you partly know, it would help the school  to move forward. I would like to beg you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, hon. Members, I did go to the Soroti Flying School and there are a lot of problems. So, the Committee on Physical Infrastructure should take off time before we go into the budget to go to Soroti and meet the students, instructors and give us a report. This should be before we go into the budget. 

I have already written to the Minister for Public Service to tell her what she should come with. Yesterday, we were completing the recommendations. Does the minister want to say something? Hon. Otengo?

4.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR NORTHERN UGANDA (Ms Rebecca Amuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You may recall that yesterday when we left, I had wanted to make some clarification after the presentation of the Prime Minister.

Allow me to begin by thanking my colleagues from the Public Accounts Committee for the work well done; my Committee on Presidential Affairs who have always done the oversight in the docket that I hold and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister for giving the response on behalf of all of us. Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank you for giving us space and time to debate the report. Hon. Members, allow me to thank you.

As the Minister in charge of Northern Uganda, I would like to say that the issue of rehabilitation of Northern Uganda has been made a national issue and this has been because of you. When I brought here the extension of PRDP II, the people supported it not just from Northern Uganda but also from other regions and I am indebted to tell you that we are grateful.

Besides the fraud that took place in our office, I would like to thank all the agencies of Government that helped us to detect it. This goes back to all of us because as Government, we have laws which enable people to look into the cases of corruption among us and we can speak about it.

Yesterday, the Prime Minister gave some details but somehow all the details of what we have done with the money that you gave us as Parliament of Uganda did not all come out and Members were asking a lot of questions. Allow me to say that the areas that we are handling are about three or four; one, we have the details with the documents that I want Members to give – it is down being photocopied. They are ready.

Allow me to begin with the PRDP Grant. The problem is that it may not be in the same order that I am going to read. We have what we called the PRDP Grant that gives money to different districts under the PRDP region. The PRDP region has –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am lucky that I got an ipad and I am using it very well. You have rightly read the next item where we had to conclude the motion of the report of the Public Accounts Committee. Now, I am seeing the minister giving us information which is out of the audit query and yet yesterday, the Prime Minister responded to the report including my minority report which is now the report of the House. Are we procedurally moving well to have this information when actually we have not concluded the report of PAC?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, this is part of the report. Proceed.    

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your guidance. It is very important, hon. Ssewungu, to know how the money that you have given us is used. Therefore, I would like to call upon you to look at the two documents and see how we have been releasing money to Northern Uganda.

Yesterday, we had a lot of debate that the monies were not reaching Northern Uganda but I would like for you to look at the different regions starting from Acholi Region and see the amount of money which has gone there in the four financial years. The document is with you.  

Then, move to Bukedi, Bunyoro, Elgon, Karamoja, Lango, Teso and Acholi. This is the document that we are using now. These are additional and are not on the main budget that is given to the region – the pages are not given but we have these releases, which you have.

Madam Speaker, it is very important for Members to know how the budgets have been used. We have another project called ALREP and KALIP both in Northern Uganda and also in Karamoja. Allow me to give this document because we will have to put it on record –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, please take your seats. We want to hear. Please sit.

MS AMUGE: Madam Speaker, we have a document headed “ALREP”, which is an AU project and the total amount of money is Shs 13 billion. It has been implemented in Northern Uganda and you have the document with you, please. I want us to look at NUSAF. So far the amount of money that has been released to Northern Uganda under NUSAF is Shs 208 billion and the details are in the document written second NUSAF programme, which is with you -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, don’t you want us to know what money has been spent in the country? Please take your seats.

MS AMUGE: I have given you all the releases and you have seen different regions getting PRDP; the 55 districts from Acholi, Lango, West Nile, Teso, Bukedi and Elgon region. Those are the details that I have given you because yesterday, you remember there were some arguments that we are worse off, we want to see where our money has gone and what it has done.

Madam Speaker, these monies are under the decentralised systems of Government. I have also shown you in that document what has gone to the centre like the IGG, the Police, Prisons and the Amnesty Commission and what has gone to the local government. The details are all in this paper.

I would like to say that much as money was stolen, the local governments have been implementing the projects. I agree that we have worked on the hardware but maybe as Members of Parliament, we should think of working on the software. We have built a lot of schools as you can see and we have built health centres but we have not looked into production.

Madam Speaker, I would like to ask the Members of Parliament that while we think the poverty level has grown higher –(Interruption)

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. I wish to first of all salute the minister for the detailed information that she is providing for us. Indeed, I want to associate myself with what she is saying that some good sums of money have been crossing to these regions.

My heart is bleeding and I want to be on record about this. I have been counting the districts here that are benefiting from these numerous programmes. The minister is talking of 56 including municipalities and the like and they are around 64. We have another programme called Luweero-Rwenzori, which covers a sizeable part of this country. As vice chairperson of the Busoga Parliamentary Group, the procedural issue I am raising here is, where is the kaveera or share that we should tell our people about? 

I am moving straight to the Prime Minister regarding this matter. At a certain function, the Prime Minister did assure the people of Busoga that there is a special programme being designed to also provide for them because these are additional resources.

The procedure I am raising is, where is Busoga because I wanted it to be captured here. I would have loved to hear that in addition, we are planning to bring Busoga on board. Is it procedurally right to keep reading and praising these districts that are benefiting when other regions are not being reflected at all? 

MS KABAALE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members. Further still on a point of procedure, it is very good that the minister has quoted the NUSAF money as being Shs 208 billion and she has also stated the districts and municipalities, which have benefitted.

The minister knows that Iganga and Jinja districts have municipalities but she is very clearly saying that she has made very good accountability. If you look at page 3 of that form, you find that there is a special programme of agriculture worth Shs 60 billion and value addition worth Shs 100 billion and agro forestry. We would like to know whether it is procedurally right for certain regions to be addressed with particular programmes when Busoga is not appearing anywhere. We seek your guidance, Madam Speaker.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. According to our Constitution, in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy Number XII (iii) it states that, “The state shall take special measures in favour of the development of the least developed areas.

I am aware that special measures have been given to different areas of this country - the North including the East that border Busoga. Special measures have also been made for other parts of the Rwenzori. Buganda still borders Busoga but Busoga has been left out as an island of neglect on the other side and this side. I want to ask whether it is really proper for the government - hon. Prime Minister, do you think Busoga is highly developed and advanced to deserve no special attention and no special project programme so that we can also benefit from these preferential interventions? Thank you.

MR OKOT OGONG: We are debating a very important motion or report regarding misuse of funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. Madam Speaker, you are aware that the North suffered for 20 years. You are aware that more than 120,000 people died in the North during that war. You are aware that our people were displaced and suffered greatly over 20 years. My point of order is that as people from the North, it is not a gift that we are receiving; it is because our people suffered for 20 years. 

Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Lubogo, hon. Muwuma and others to turn this very important debate into a tribal debate and yet they are aware that the North suffered for 25 years and they are aware that the people of Northern Uganda are not receiving this money as a gift? Is it in order for honourable members of Parliament that we respect to divert the attention of this House to tribal – if you bring yours we shall also support you! (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I think the Members who have contributed are not unaware of what happened. But you must also appreciate that the people who are displaced from the North are in Iganga, Kamuli, Buyende, Kaliro and the entire Busoga. And we have said it several times on the Floor of this House; no provision has been made to take care of those people who have put pressure on our resources. So they are in order. (Applause) Yes, hon. Minister, we want to know why you have left your people in our areas without resources. Tell us. (Laughter)

MS AMUGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I started making my presentation, you may recall that I said that the issue of rehabilitation of Northern Uganda in this Parliament has been supported by all regions and every time we bring the issues of Northern Uganda, it is not only people from Northern Uganda who support us. Therefore, Madam Speaker, it is very important to have facts and figures on paper; to see the monies which have gone to the local governments and see what we need to do with the local government people. At one point you may also need forensic audit in the local governments.

Before I conclude, I also want to lay before this House another programme that is set to go to Northern Uganda; we have the Expanded Restocking Programme and Government has given us Shs 20 billion: Shs 5 billion for Lango; Shs 5 billion for Acholi; Shs 5 billion for Teso; and Shs 5 billion for West Nile and it will start this financial year. What we should do is to make sure that the money we get is prudently used -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is important information; yesterday you accused Government of doing nothing in the North and now she is telling you what has been done. So, listen.

MS AMUGE: Finally, Madam Speaker, at an appropriate time I will provide a detailed report per district to the Members in this House so that you see what has been done and what is left to be done. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Let us now proceed to the recommendations. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Rebecca Otengo for the useful information she has given to us. The Committee on Public Accounts addressed its mind to resources, which were misappropriated in the OPM and this was through an audited report issued to us by the Office of the Auditor-General under Article 163; the rest of the information that the Minister has given us, I would want to believe, is just for information but not an attempt to derail us.

Madam Speaker, NUSAF and PRDP have been implemented at various levels; we are aware of the processes through which money is disbursed to districts under a demand-driven arrangement – where every district makes its budget, submits it to Government and Government remits the money direct to the district coffers. The amount of money that we are involving ourselves in and that we are grappling with in this report are the resources which were misappropriated here in the Post Office Building, where the OPM operated from – not the districts. So I really do not know whether this is an attempt to derail us from our – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Wadri, I want you to be very comfortable; this information does not affect your report. But it is information that is important for us to know.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to be misunderstood but it is a public secret that I am a nationalist and a patriot. From what I did raise on this Floor of Parliament, I expected the Prime Minister to say something to the people of that sub-region as far as these programmes are concerned such that we also sit here aware that there is something that is going to that sub-region. I wish we could get that commitment from the government. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. All of us have been focusing on the report which is before us but I think we also took this opportunity to look at other issues that are important for the development of other areas in the country. And I agree with hon. Muwuma that it is important that we raise this issue.

But before the Prime Minister comes in, I want to say this: Obviously, Northern Uganda was affected for 20 years and all of us sympathise with the situation which you went through. A programme was put in place to assist the people of Northern Uganda over the years. When Luweero was affected, a programme was put in place to assist people there and when the Rwenzori region was affected, another programme was put in place to restore what was lost.

But Madam Speaker, when the invasion of Rwanda in 1994 happened, it caused the destruction of the property of the people of Kabale from Kamwezi up to Rubaya and Butanda. And the people of Kabale have been pleading with Government; why can’t we also be assisted to restore what was destroyed? As the Prime Minister responds to this question – and I know that he knows it better – can you also answer what is going to be put in place to help the affected people of Kabale? 

4.29
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think let me make two points: First, yesterday in my response, I did answer some of the queries that were raised in the debate the day before and one of the questions that was asked was whether the Northern region had lost funding for its planned activities because of the financial impropriety in the OPM. And I remember saying that Government has readjusted its allocations and got funding from alternative sources and I gave figures in broad terms. 
 
I gave the financial year 2009/10 Shs 79.87 billion – something like that. Then I remember I think it was my good friend, hon. Wadri, who raised some doubts. There was an honourable member who said that in fact Northern districts received zero of this. 

I had indicated yesterday – this is a question of fact; we need to establish what actually happened and what the minister has been giving you is actually in response to that. In spite of all these things that happened, indeed the districts received releases and – I do not know if that is what she was showing but I think we do not have to handle this now. Let us take our time and handle it for purposes of information; we will distribute this information to you so that this is known. I thought that is what we agreed yesterday. Point no.2 –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. As I said earlier on, the minister has just given us information but unfortunately the information does not respond to the issues over which I disagreed yesterday. 

I clearly indicated that in the last financial year, in the fourth quarter, across the country there were zero releases other than salaries – not only in Northern Uganda. I went further to say that the zero releases across the country to the districts was as a result of Government having forked out Shs 38 billion to pay back to the donors. 

The information you have given here is lumped; it does not show the releases quarter by quarter. It is your own document; see if it really answers the question about the quarterly releases. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, as we have said, that is information for us. We finished the debate and we shall take the recommendations as they are. 

MR MBABAZI: So, my second point is that the agenda now – the item to show this House is the Public Accounts committee Report arising out of the special audit report by the Auditor General. Therefore, I expect that we will stick to that and finish it. 

The other issues which are being raised are very pertinent for the people concerned. For instance, that the people of Busoga Region, the people of Kigezi Region; the people of – of course, the Kanungu Bridge is not something I want to raise now. 
So, I want to suggest that we find time to discuss this because what we are discussing is a report arising out of misappropriation of money this Parliament appropriated for PRDP. Not for Kigezi, not for these other places. The question whether Kigezi, Busoga and other places is a very important question and we should find time to discuss it and find a solution but let us finish this one and then see when we can handle the other. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, I invite the Clerk to read out the recommendations. Let us start with the minority report. Hon. Members, they are on your iPads. Procedure on what? Hon. Ssewungu, do not over do things. You read your report and we had a debate – the report is a property of the House. We are on the minority report now. 

MR OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewungu never responded as the author of the minority report. I think it is proper for him to be given a chance to report before we proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, for three minutes. 

4.36
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, you have given me three minutes. First of all, I want to respond to the Prime Minister and I want to clarify that I was present when the Prime Minister came to the committee; that is how I reached these conclusions. 

Secondly, when you look at the response of the Prime Minister, he contradicted himself. Let me read verbatim. He said, “I wish to reiterate that the Prime Minister is not in any way involved in the financial management and human resource management of the ministry.”

Now, when it came to buying the vehicle, he was not involved and he said that Kazinda had to prepare and make a report. Now when it comes to Kazinda, he is involved in human resource; when it comes to purchasing the vehicle he says he was not involved; what is the truth in that. 

When you look at my minority report, I raised three issues that he did not answer sufficiently. Let me go to the issue of failure in political supervision as I explained it. All my ministers – hon. Khidu Makubuya, Gilbert Bukenya and others faced problems and were censured as a result of failure – even hon. Kabakumba Masiko who is in front of us here – they were removed due to political irresponsibility. 

Madam Speaker, I want to say that I saw hon. Kintu Musoke whom I succeeded and hon. Nsibambi and hon. Adyebo, how they managed things as prime ministers. They were being escorted by the Police and with no lead cars sometimes. Now we have a Prime Minister who has security, not from the Police, but the Army and yet people get money from the bank in sacks and they take it to the Prime Minister’s office, like Kazinda – where should we place that political responsibility?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, did you raise the issue of what type of guards the Prime Minister has in your report? Did you raise it? Did you complain that he has got the Army and not the police?

MR SSEWUNGU: Yes, Madam Speaker, let me substantiate – 

THE SPEAKER: You cannot be the report now. 

MR SSEWUNGU: It was not there.

THE SPEAKER: Then leave it. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to emphasize this. It is on record that – (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information. This Parliament needs to be informed by someone which criteria we use to determine whether vehicles should be armoured or not. I know the Vice-President is second in the country; the Speaker of Parliament is the third in hierarchy. The Vice President does not have an armoured vehicle; the Speaker of Parliament does not have an armoured vehicle; the Chief Justice does not have an armoured vehicle, the Deputy Speaker does not have an armoured vehicle but we find that the Prime Minister who is probably no.7 in this country has an armoured vehicle at a cost of Shs 800 million. 

We need to be told because the Speaker needs to be safe. We have just passed controversial laws; we have also seen letter bombs. The Prime Minister did not receive any letter bomb. This country should be told which criteria we use to pick Shs 800 million to armour certain vehicles for people who are no.7 in the hierarchy of this country. Someone should tell us this. 

MR MBABAZI: I know, Madam Speaker, that it was hon. Odonga Otto who raised that question. I did not answer it deliberately because knowing his background, the question of my security is very important and therefore I would not disclose that to him. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, this all is confirming what I put in my minority report and it is said here. 

When I gave my second point about Geoffrey Kazinda, Mr Bwogi the Accountant-General was summoned by the Prime Minister through his security guards. From there, he halted the transfer of Kazinda. According to the auditor and the information we got which is tabled here, had Kazinda been transferred, money would not have been lost. That was his influence.

You can even see his own response; he says, “in addition, two suspects have voluntarily paid the money, Shs 2 billion.” Who are these? They are not named but he takes time to name some other people. That means that the Prime Minister knows all these things. I am willing to lend my iPad to the Prime Minister for two days to look at the pictures I took from Karamoja. I am not from Karamoja. 

Shimon Demonstration School where I taught used to have 150 students per stream but a stream could have 30 tribes. I was not merely teaching all those tribes but I was teaching them for the future of this country. When I went to Karamoja, what I saw there and what I looked at and what people told us was showing a lot of unhappiness and suffering. If you look at the whole report, the Prime Minister is featuring everywhere; even the whole debate here was the same. How do we leave – (Interruption)

MR MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, for those who can read, it is a fact that my name and my title do not feature anywhere in the special report of the Auditor-General. They don’t, absolutely not. The only reason I appeared before PAC was because I talked to the Chairman of PAC who is a reasonable person and he told me that the question of the vehicle that had been bought for the Prime Minister had come up and that is why I said, “Okay, I will come and tell you what I know about it.” That is all; there is nothing more in the report even of PAC itself, the majority report.

Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Ssewungu to keep stating that I am everywhere in the report when the report I am talking about does not have my name, my title or any linkage whatsoever? Is he in order?
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I think you should stop trying to beef up your matter; you have made a minority report, Members debated it, let us go to the resolutions. We cannot have a dialogue on this matter. Please sit down. You made your point, your report was read and a debate ensued.

Recommendations of the minority report 

(The recommendations were read out.)

Recommendation 1

That the Prime Minister hon. Amama Mbabazi be held politically responsible for having influenced the PS to use PRDP funds for purchase of vehicle -

(Members voted by a show of hands on the minority report)

MR OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, this matter is quite touchy. The decision we have taken about the vote is about the Prime Minister and it is possible that some people are not free enough to vote the way they want. It would be better for us if we vote on such a matter by secret ballot.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members the results from the first vote 17 for, 51 against, 10 abstentions. That recommendation is lost.

Recommendation 2

That the Prime Minister be held responsible for overstepping his powers by exerting pressure on the Accountant-General, an act that led to the loss of colossal sums of money under the OPM.

THE SPEAKER: Those in favour put up your hands.  Okay, hon. Members, those for are four and those against are 59 and abstentions nil. Motion lost. Read the third one.

Recommendation 3

The Prime Minister further be held responsible for failure to use the information provided by the hon. Member of this House that PRDP funds had been used to procure vehicles instead of using it to help the suffering people of Northern Uganda as planned. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those for are 11 and those against are 60 and nil abstentions. Recommendation lost. 
 
Recommendation 4

That the Rt. Hon. Amama Mbabazi, having failed to play his constitutional role in respect of coordinating and implementing the PRDP intervention, be found unfit to hold the Office of the Prime Minister and His Excellency the President be requested to relieve him of his duties as Prime Minister.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, those for are 13 and those against 64 and abstentions are nil. The fourth recommendation has not been carried and, therefore, the entire recommendations of the minority report have been lost. Let us go to the main report now. 

Recommendations of the main report

Recommendation 21 

(i)	Ms Mariam Kiggundu, Mr David Mugisha and Ms Jennifer Muwuliza be held responsible for initiating fraudulent transfers of funds from the PRDP Holding Accounts to Project Accounts in the OPM.

The committee strongly recommends the trio be prosecuted for their actions.

THE SPEAKER: An amendment from hon. Mulimba.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to move an amendment to include Mr Arthur Mumanyire and also Mr Mubarak. This is arising out of the email reports that I laid on Table the other day during the debates. I want to propose.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I have further amendment. I have got very reliable information that I will lay on Table that out of the 300 suspects submitted to the DPP office after comprehensive investigation by the Police, the Director of Public Prosecution is deliberately sitting on the files and frustrating the Police. There is already a formal complaint from the Uganda Police that their investigations are in vain because the problem now is in the Office of the DPP. 

I do not know how this can be accommodated because we are mentioning only four people and yet I will be willing to lay a list of 300 people that the Police have already submitted to the Director of Public Prosecution and the file has been sitting there for the last seven months.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. I want to thank hon. John Mulimba for the amendment that he is pushing. However, I have the following to say; of the two as it was presented in the email that was laid on Table, the committee only interfaced with Mr Mubarak who is a staff of the Treasury Department.

First, it will be against the rule of natural justice for us at this stage to bring Mr Arthur Mumanyire who never had any interface with the committee. And as for Mr Mubarak, as contained in that email that was laid on Table – the first time this email was sent on which the Mubarak’s acted, bounced and money never hit the account and this is contained in our report and we have evidence to that effect. So, much as his name was mentioned there, at the time when this email successfully caused transfer of funds that went through, Mubarak had no involvement. That is the reason why we could not lump him with the others. 

I would therefore like to convince this House that the name of Mr Mubarak be left out among those that we strongly propose for prosecution. I submit, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What about Mr Mumanyire? He mentioned two names.

MR WADRI: Both of them. I have told you that the committee never interfaced with Arthur Mumanyire. Look here, you need to appreciate what this committee went through. In the same way, we never met Mr Kazinda whom we even attempted to meet and that is the reason why we have also not made any recommendation concerning him. Honestly, we will be wrong and we will be conflicting with the rules of natural justice if we lumped up such a person with others. I beg to convince you, honourable colleagues.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, read the two other bullets quickly then we shall take a vote.

MR MULIMBA: It is for the very reason that the committee did not interface with the said Mubarak and Mumanyire that I am proposing that they be investigated. Also, just to contradict the chairperson, he says that they did not propose for the investigation of Mubarak or Mumanyire simply because they did not interface with them. I find some contradiction there because the committee accepted that they did not interface with Kazinda but they are recommending him for investigation. That to me appears to be a very serious contradiction. They did not interface with Kazinda but in the report they are saying Kazinda should be investigated.

Therefore, I wish to strongly propose that because of the evidence I laid on Table stating that Mr Mumanyire was the initiator and therefore the primary trouble causer together with Mubarak to whom he addressed the email, these ones be added for investigation.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Member. The recommendation that the committee makes is that the trio be prosecuted. Prosecution and investigation are different. Maybe you can bring another recommendation later but this is about prosecution. Bullet two - Yes, Attorney General.

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Fred Ruhindi): I seek your guidance, Madam Speaker, on this recommendation which strongly recommends the trio to be prosecuted for their actions. This is because if you recommend prosecution, it means that you have actually concluded investigations and you are at the stage of prosecution.

I am wondering whether that is the mandate of Parliament. I think the mandate of Parliament is to recommend full investigation with a view to possible prosecution.

THE SPEAKER: So we are meant to –

MR WADRI: I concede, Madam Speaker, that the trio be further investigated with a view of prosecution.

THE SPEAKER: I think since we have moved from “prosecution” to “investigation”, you can add Mumanyire and Mubarak. Since it is investigation, I think we can take the amendment of hon. Mulimba. Okay, it has been amended. Bullet two.

(ii) 	The Commissioner, Treasury Services be held responsible for sanctioning the transfer of the said funds based on an irregular request.

(iii)	The Accountant-General and the Commissioner, Treasury Services be held responsible for negligence in failing to detect and stop the fraudulent transfer of funds.

5.05
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Madam Speaker, I want to move an amendment to bullets (ii) and (iii) in the same spirit of mentioning people’s names. That the Commissioner, Treasury Services who is mentioned in the observations as Isaac Mpoza be mentioned here. In the same spirit, the Accountant-General who is Gustave Bwoch also be mentioned by name in these recommendations.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that is a legitimate request otherwise they may grab the present office bearers. Okay, with the amendments proposed, I put the question that recommendation 21 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 28 

The committee makes the following recommendations:
(i)	Ms Bright Atwine, Mr David Mugisha and Mr Amon Takwenda (deceased) should be held responsible for uttering false documents to cover up their fraudulent transactions. Ms Bright Atwine and Mr David Mugisha, save for Amon Takwenda the deceased, be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution.

(ii)	Mr Wilbert Okello, Mr David Mugisha and Mr Charles Mwasa be held responsible for the fraudulent transfer of UShs 14.8 billion. The trio be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution.

(iii)	Mr Wilbert Okello, Mr Tony Yawe, Mr David Mugisha and Mr Charles Mwasa be held responsible for the fraudulent transfer of Shs 5.2 billion on 30th January 2014. The quartet be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution.

(iv)	Mr Gustave Bwoch and Mr Isaac Mpoza be held responsible for transferring funds from the holding account to project account in contravention of the JFA that they were privy to. The duo be referred to the appointing authority for appropriate disciplinary action.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, in bullet (i) concerning Mr Amon Takwenda, deceased, I want to humbly move that we do not go as far as prescribing investigation of the deceased and that we delete the deceased.

THE SPEAKER: No, but they said, save for Amon Takwenda, they are talking about the others who are alive.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I also propose that in bullet (iii) where it says, “the trio be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action and prosecution”, we amend that by providing for “investigation with a possible view to prosecution.”

THE SPEAKER: So, you are proposing that in bullets (i), (ii) and (iii) we make that amendment to be in line with what we agreed earlier. Honourable chairperson -

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I would like to believe that proposing an inclusion of investigation does not mean doing away with being referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action because to refer somebody to an appointing authority for disciplinary action in Public Service is a heavily loaded recommendation. It can talk of dismissal, demotion, caution or adjustment in your salary. So, are you proposing that we let that be on top of what we have recommended so that we scatter and stretch wide our net to make sure that either way we are able to succeed? I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, what he is adding is what the Attorney-General advised; that we should include “further investigation with a view to prosecution.”

MR WADRI: That is okay. I am in agreement, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 28 as amended be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 32

The committee makes the following recommendations. Mr Gustave Bwoch and Mr Pius Bigirimana be held responsible for diversion of funds from the Norwegian support to PRDP North Account at OPM.

THE SPEAKER: Members, I put the question that recommendation - 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I read the report and I think it will not be good if we lumped them together – Pius Bigirimana and Bwoch because in the report. It is the Accountant-General who ordered for the transfer of PRDP money to that account and that account is not a personal account. And the authority to transfer funds lies with the Accountant-General. I thought an amendment could be another recommendation which separates the two men because each of them has a different role to play. When you read the report, it says: “Transfer of funds from Support Peace Recovery and Development Plan in Northern Uganda account number…at Bank of Uganda: This is to authorise you to transfer Shs 6,953,527,579 on account number…Support Peace Recovery and Development Plan in Northern Uganda.” That means the person who authorised the transfer of the money is responsible; you cannot lump them together. Maybe you can separate them because the authority lies with the Accountant-General and I believe that if we investigated that account, the responsibility to transfer money to it and the signatory is the Accountant-General and not the PS. That is it.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, allow me take a little while to share with you how money is transferred in Government. Every ministry has its own vote and account that are under the administration of the accounting officer. Treasury or Ministry of Finance can never at any one time transfer any money into your account without your consent. And if by any chance that ever happens – as you may remember, it once happened in the Ministry of Internal Affairs, where Treasury for unknown reasons transferred money to the account of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and because the PS was not involved, he did the most honest thing of saying, “I have seen strange money on my account which I did not requisition for; please take it back.”

So, for any transaction to happen, the recipient ministry which operates the account must direct and requisition for funds from Treasury to be deposited on that account. So you cannot come out and say that the receiving PS is in the dark; that can never happen.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification from the former chairperson of PAC. When you go to page 28 of your report, you talked about 473 security papers which were confirmed and you said that, “74 percent were confirmed with the Principal Accountant, Geoffrey Kazinda. 10.6 percent were confirmed by the PS, Pius Bigirimana while 14.9 percent were confirmed by the other OPM staff.”

Now, is this one in this 10.6 percent or in the 74 percent? This is because we want to be clear; surely by the time you say that people were confirming with Kazinda and not Bigirimana, how do you hold him accountable now?

MR WADRI: Thank you, hon. Bitekyerezo. I want to correct that record that you made; I am still the Chairperson of the Public Accounts committee. You know the Rules of Procedure; Parliament is yet to announce on this Floor the composition of the new accountability or standing committees and that has not yet been done. So, I am still the chairperson of PAC until Parliament announces otherwise. This is in line with our Rules of Procedure.

Secondly, it is unfortunate that you have taken us a step ahead. But nevertheless, I will respond to it.

THE SPEAKER: No, why don’t you respond at the right time?

MR WADRI: I also thought so but now he has asked it at the wrong time – because that is one of the areas.

THE SPEAKER: No, you leave it out; you will respond to it when the right time comes.

MR WADRI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, hon. Mulimba?

MR MULIMBA: On the issue of diversion, under Recommendation No.32, I want to support what hon. Kakooza said because the key word here is “diversion” and we are looking at people who are responsible for diversion. Where were the funds? They were in Bank of Uganda holding account. Who had the powers over this account? It was the Accountant-General. And therefore they move these funds into OPM; how can you charge the PS in the OPM for diverting funds from a Bank of Uganda holding account, which he did not have control over? We should be clear; we want to find culpable people but we want to be –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to supplement that point. Madam Speaker, I have been in the bank; if I gave you a cheque with my specimen signature forged and you cash it, the first person to be blamed is the person who gave out the money because my specimen signature is there. 

That account in Bank of Uganda does not bear the signature of the PS of the OPM because the Accountant-General is entitled to scrutinise the money on that account through the intertwined activities that are agreed and approved. If he finds that those activities are intertwined in that account as PRDP, the Accountant-General could not have authorised. So you cannot lump them together; you must separate them. That is how things run in the bank.

So when you say that Pius Bigirimana and the Accountant-General – this money did not go to a personal account and the policy is very clear in Article 108; there are activities of PRDP. So, if the Accountant-General himself did not take time and authored a letter – look at documents no.8 and no.10, he transferred funds twice; one was signed by Mpoza, the Commissioner of Treasury Services and also the Accountant-General. These are the people who authorise that money to go to the PRDP account. So if you lump them together, you lose the case. The only thing you can do is recommend that they be investigated so that it is discovered who took this money.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been trying to follow the arguments by the Accountant-General’s supporters and I have found difficulty – can you clarify whether such a crime could have been started by one person and ends with that person. In other words, which docket was PRDP under? What was the OPM handling? Why are you trying to isolate the Accountant-General and hold him separately liable apart from putting them together? If that is so, why don’t we do it simultaneously so that where the Ministry of Finance has messed, we do not connect it with the OPM. Just help me clarify because I am finding it difficult to understand. 

MR KAKOOZA: According to these two documents, no. 8 and no.10 – (Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am wondering whether hon. Kakooza has applied his energies on to the framework that governs the Norwegian Support and whether he noted that for the funds to be shifted from Bank of Uganda, it necessitated an initiative from the PS of the OPM. And whether he noted particularly the attachment of a letter dated 26 January 2011 which originated from the PS requesting the Accountant-General for those funds to be shifted to that particular account of PRDP North. 

At the end of the day, when you try to delink the two principals, you want to ask yourself how one could have acted without the other. 

MR KAKOOZA: The answer is simple. The work of the Accountant-General is to look at the vouchers before he authorises to have the money transferred. If it is not right, then he should not write a letter permitting the transfer of that money. If the vouchers of the activities from the PS who originated this found out that the money was not supposed to be transferred then the money would not move. The letter which – 

THE SPEAKER: So, hon. Kakooza, are you saying that the originator must have convinced the Accountant-General that the money should be moved?

MR KAKOOZA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: So then there is no problem. I put the question that recommendation 32 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 36

The committee made the following recommendation:
(i)	The Accountant-General be held responsible for failing to ensure an effective internal audit function at the ministry of finance planning and economic development

(ii)	The internal audit function in Government be strengthened to ensure its independence by separating its mandate and reporting structure from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 36 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 39

The committee made the following recommendations:

1. 	Mr Chris Lubega be held responsible for fraudulently assigning excess privileges beyond what was required that enabled Mr Kazinda to authorise payment. Mr Lubega be prosecuted for this fraudulent act.
2. 	Mr Pius Bigirimana be held responsible for negligence of duty in executing his responsibility in the IFMS.
3. 	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should ensure that accounting officers are fully competent in operating the IFMS.
4. 	The former Principal Accountant, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda be investigated for causing financial loss through fraudulent approval of invoiced on IFMS amounting to Shs 15.2 billion. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 39 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 47

The committee made the following recommendations:
1. 	Internal audit function in Government be restructured with a view to rationalising its responsibility without negating its functional complementarily to management. 

2. 	Government should urgently establish and operationalise audit committees in each MDA to supervise the work of internal audit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that recommendation 47 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 54

The committee made the following recommendations:

1. 	Bank of Uganda must comply with the guidelines with regard to confirmation of payments. In addition, Bank of Uganda together with Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should set a threshold above which confirmation must be made with the principal signatory. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, we cannot just wish away this recommendation like this because the attachment in terms of clearance of payment, the Director Banking, Mr John Kimongezi did due diligence at every request by doing what was right. He requested for confirmation from the accounting officer. 

Then, we have the assistant Director, Mr Opio Milton, who cleared 80 percent of the transactions by signing on the requisition as confirmed for Kazinda to pay. Therefore he did not do due diligence; he did not follow the rules of writing to confirm. 

I therefore propose an amendment that we say; “Mr Milton Opio should be investigated in his role in clearing for payment of 80 percent of the transition without confirming when the account holder who is a principal signatory –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I had a discussion with hon. Mulimba on this matter. I have no objection conceding on that. However, the issue which he has said, especially that of verification of signatures is yet to come when we will again give an appropriate action at that stage. As for his proposal, I concede. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 54 be amended by a new bullet as proposed by hon. Mulimba.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Recommendation 54, as amended, agreed to.)

Recommendation 60

The committee made the following recommendations:
The committee recommends that disciplinary measures be taken against officials involved at Bank of Uganda. The CIID should investigate possible corrosion and fraud with a view to prosecution. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I am reliably informed by the attachments on this report that allegations of forgery were made and a handwriting expert was duly invited and he carried out his investigations. He concluded on the findings about those responsible for these forgeries. They are clearly mentioned in the report. 

I am also privy to the documents which are listed in 3.3.3 of the forensic expert report of the handwriting expert therefore naming those who forged. 

I therefore move, that we state that “all those persons named by the handwriting expert’s report as having occasioned forgeries should be investigated.” 

MR WADRI: I concede to that proposal.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 60 be amended as proposed by hon. Mulimba. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Recommendation 60, as amended, agreed to.)

Recommendation 65

1.	The committee recommends that the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury be held responsible for causing financial loss by giving an open-ended authority to withdraw imprest above the limit set by the PS/ST. 

2. 	The committee further recommends CIID to investigate the extent of forgeries on cash withdrawals in OPM with the view to prosecution. 

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised this issue during the debate and the basis was; one, the 100 million which the OPM was granted to withdraw was meant for operations. And the PS/ST accepted this request from the accounting officer based on the explanations he gave. One of them was to cater for the daily operations of this office. Two, there are 13 ministers that work under the Office of the Prime Minister. It is true the cash limit for every department is Shs 20 million. But now, this is a department that has 13 ministries and 13 departments. So, the request for Shs 100 million for operations was only agreed to by the PS on account of the reasons that were given by the accounting officer.

Now Shs 100 million is just office imprest. I am aware that there are letters that were written by Mr John Chemonges asking the Ministry of Finance to give a cash limit. But the way office imprest operates is such that you use it – Shs 20 million can even take you for a month or even just a day. It is only replenished when it is exhausted and fully accounted for. And its use is based on daily cash vouchers that must be approved and authorized.

So, on account of that, Madam Speaker, I contend that the DST only did this in accordance with his authority and the usual powers granted to him as the national authorizing officer. So, based on that, I would like to beg your indulgence and the indulgence of Members that since the PS/ST or the DST did this as part of his normal duties and that by doing so he did not personally occasion the loss of the money that occurred in the Office of the Prime Minister - because the accounting officer also, in writing, said that withdraw would only be based on full accountability of the previous withdraw of Shs 100 million. So, it is assumed that it is the accounting officer who had the responsibility to make sure the money was fully accounted for before another withdraws would be occasioned.

In regard to this, my amendment is to the effect that this recommendation be deleted because the DST was only doing this as part of his normal duties. I beg to submit.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I request that we understand and appreciate the recommendations that have been put up. From the beginning, the Permanent Secretary and also Secretary to Treasury (PS/ST) wrote a circular to all Government ministries to the effect that every ministry would receive imprest of Shs 20 million per month. Many of us have run offices. We know what imprest is and how it is managed. But here is a situation that is specific that Shs 20 million would be advanced every month. And indeed rightly, the Office of the Prime Minister is a very big establishment. It cannot be compared to a ministry with only one or two ministers. That is the ground upon which they made their appeal to the PS and their request was granted.

But the manner in which this request was granted was open-ended and that is what we are questioning. There was no indication as to whether Shs 100 million was supposed to be withdrawn every day or once a month. And by the way, Mr John Chemonges wrote twice - on seeing the staff of OPM going to the bank everyday – to the Ministry of Finance and asked them to refer to the instructions they had given to the ministries and the other new amendments they had given to OPM. 

He wondered why people were going there every day to draw Shs 100. He asked the ministry to clarify on their earlier circular whether those staff were supposed to withdraw that money every day and it was supposed to be done once in a month. He wrote two letters but the Ministry of Finance just kept quiet. They never responded and that is why we are faulting them.

Mr Chemonges took trouble to bring this open-endedness to the attention of the Ministry of Finance.

MR OBOTH: I would like to benefit from the chair. What could have been the use of having an open-ended letter where there was no threshold? Are you now wondering whether – because by the nature of that office, it was upon the accounting officer to regulate what would be appropriate so that they don’t get the same permission all the time? This is just – I am thinking aloud. If you are given those open-ended instructions, like you have the discretion – are you saying the discretion was abused? Are you also saying that the open-ended provision was abused? And if it was abused, do you go for the person who gave the authority or the person who abused it? This is the question that I think hon. Rose Akol was putting up.

THE SPEAKER: But I think the point the chair was making is that the matter of overuse was brought to attention of the DST and asked him to clarify his powers in terms of the authority he had given.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, can we get clarification from the Chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, because when you read the letter from the PS, you realise that he makes reference to the letter Mr Pius Bigirimana wrote because he says, “…reference is made to your letter.” So, one would conclude that actually he was responding to what Mr Pius Bigirimana had requested for. So, what had Mr Bigirimana request for? Was it a month; I mean on that Shs 300 and was it part of the open-ended or what? This is because the letter from the PS/ST makes reference to the request made by Mr Pius Bigirimana.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We were not part of the PAC but we have a copy of the letter as part of the annexes. If I can be allowed to read it and it says thus: “Request for cash withdraws of Shs 100 for the Office of the Prime Minister.” It talks about Shs 100 million. And it makes reference to another earlier one, PD 4716310 dated 7 October 2010 and the one of 23 September 2010 which was requesting for authority to draw cash of Shs 100 to enable them facilitate activities in that office. The letter goes on: “Authority is granted to you to withdraw Shs 100 subject to proper accountability before the next cash withdraw.”

So, the letter talks about Shs 100 million; is a specific request and it had nothing to do with withdrawals of that money. And they were supposed to account after spending that Shs 100 million.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, you talked about what - before the next withdraw?

MR SSEBUNYA: The last paragraph says thus: “Authority is granted to you to withdraw Shs 100 subject to proper accountability before the next cash withdraw.”

THE SPEAKER: So, when would be the next cash withdraw? That is what I want to understand. So, if I withdraw this week and I account, I can withdraw again and I do the accountability.

MS AKOL: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Chairperson of PAC has made reference to some letter and with your permission, I would like to read the content of that letter. The letter is addressed to the permanent secretary and secretary to treasury and is dated 26 April 2010. It was written by Mr John Chemonges, Director Banking with copies to: Governor, Deputy Governor, Accountant General and the Auditor-General. 

The letter says thus: “Request for clarification on cash limit for the Office of the Prime Minister. Reference is made to your letter to the permanent secretary of the Office of the Prime Minister on the above subject reference SAD 94/140/01, dated 30 June 2009 with a copy to Bank of Uganda. In that letter you granted the ministry authority to draw cash of Shs 100 million subject to proper accountability before the next withdrawal. 

We wish to confirm from you that the cash withdrawal request and accountability thereof are made to your office and requests that are sent to Bank of Uganda have satisfied the requirements of proper accountability irrespective of the frequency.” This letter does not have all that the chair is trying to convince us to believe that even after telling the PS/ST that the withdrawals per day and all that – it is not in this letter. So, I am sure that if what the Chairperson of PAC is telling us was brought to the attention of the PS/ST, it could have occasioned an investigation. But what he is saying is not here. So, I believe that the PS/ST acted in good faith and in accordance with the duties that are given to him.

THE SPEAKER: The last sentence you read, “...Irrespective of the frequency….” What does that import to you?
 
MS AKOL: Now, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: What does that say to you?

MS AKOL: Office imprest –

THE SPEAKER: But even if I draw every day, do not say anything.

MS AKOL: Can I say this?

THE SPEAKER: That is what it says.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: You read that sentence again. Read the last paragraph.

MS AKOL: The last sentence says – 

THE SPEAKER: The last paragraph.

MS AKOL: The last paragraph says, “We wish to confirm from you that the cash withdrawal request and accountability thereof are made to your office and requests that are sent to Bank of Uganda have satisfied the requirements of proper accountability irrespective of the frequency.”
 
MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, this letter is self-explanatory and really confirms what we are saying –

THE SPEAKER: But that is what she is confirming.

MR WADRI: Meaning that you could even withdraw 10 times a day regardless of the frequency.

THE SPEAKER: That is what that last sentence is saying, “Do not worry about the number of times.” That is what it says. Hon. Bihande.

MR BIHANDE: Madam Speaker, the way that letter was drafted left a lot of loopholes and a lot of leeway for the OPM officials to withdraw money anytime from any account they wanted. 

When we cross-examined the former ST, this is what he said, “I am surprised that as a senior civil servant in this country that officials from four institutions of Government can sit in one place, connive and collude to steal money.” He further said, “I am surprised that the officials in the Treasury who are supposed to check the officials in OPM and the officials in Bank of Uganda who are supposed to check the officials in the Treasury and OPM sat at the round table and decided to defraud Government.” That is what the former ST said. So, everybody who wrote such a fake letter remains suspect and he should be investigated as we are recommending here. 

MR MULONGO: Madam Speaker, it is important to look at the original request itself, which confirms that fact that it was open-ended. In a letter written by Mr Pius Bigirimana, dated 12 July 2011, to the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury giving justification for the change of authority to withdraw the Shs 100 million. In his concluding paragraph (C), he says, “Given the above justification, I request you to confirm the withdrawal of at least Shs 100 million at any one withdrawal to avoid possible crises when dealing with emergencies. All funds withdrawn will always be accounted for.” So, the frequency does not matter and you can even withdraw 10 times a day as long as he provides accountability. So, there is no limit.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are wasting time. I put the question that recommendation No. 65 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Recommendation 65 adopted.)

Recommendation 70

Bank of Uganda be held responsible for causing financial loss by failing to execute terms of the Memorandum of Understanding meant to safeguard electronic transfers from Government. Accounts and failing to safeguard funds held on Holding Account.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 70 be adopted – yes, hon. Kabajo.

MR KABAJO: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek clarification from the Chairperson of the committee. How are we going to hold the whole institution responsible? Why don’t we take, maybe, the head of the institution and say that, “The Governor, Bank of Uganda be held responsible....” Madam Speaker, I seek his clarification.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Chairperson, that argument was made yesterday. Who in Bank of Uganda and not the building?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, you have rightly guided and we made correction and made mention of names and the name of Mr Milton Opio was mentioned as the Deputy Director for Banking – [Hon. Member: “And Bwoch.”] No, Bwoch is not a staff of Bank of Uganda, please.

THE SPEAKER: So, for “Bank of Uganda”, substitute with “Mr Milton Opio.”

MR JOHN OKOT: Madam Speaker, when it comes to accountability, Opio is the boss but those who confirm signatures are the juniors. Once they have already confirmed, that is when he will authorise –(Interjections)– you should not mention one person.    

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I want us to be very honest with ourselves. I am reliably informed that Milton Opio is a close friend of honourable – (Interjections) - he knows. So, why is he trying to defend this man? He is your friend and you know it. I am very sure.

MR MULIMBA: I want to give information here to substantiate the reason we should hold an individual responsible for this.

THE SPEAKER: I beg your pardon?

MR MULIMBA: I want to give information to substantiate the reason we should make an individual responsible and particularly, Mr Opio.

THE SPEAKER: But we have amended that. We are substituting “Opio” for “Bank of Uganda.” I now put the question that Recommendation 70 be amended, by naming “Mr Milton Opio” instead of “Bank of Uganda.”

(Question out and greed to.)

Recommendation 70, as amended, agreed to.

Recommendation 74

Bank of Uganda must adhere to the terms and conditions of the Memorandum of Understanding to ensure that dormant accounts are closed in time to avoid risks of loss.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that that recommendation be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 74, agreed to.


Recommendation 80

The committee recommends that the PS/OPM be held liable for spending funds that were not appropriated to OPM. The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant OPM, Mr Geoffrey Kazinda, be investigated to establish his role in the fraudulent transfer of Shs 20.1 billion and fraudulent payment amounting to Shs 4.6 billion.

MR KABAJO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, this recommendation says that the PS/OPM be held liable. Now, are we talking about the PS/OPM who is there now or we are talking about the previous one? Can we name him because currently there is another PS/OPM? Can we name him or say that, “The former PS/OPM, Mr……” Can we name him?

MR MULONGO: It is very important given these kinds of investigations to put names and then the office. For example, where we passed 60, we just said, “The Office….” but we never put the name there. It is very important to put the name and then you can add the office because it is the name that occasioned either the loss or the problem not the office. So, wherever there is an office, we should be specific to the name. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I entirely agree with you that we should be succinct by providing names. I also take notice of the fact that this report was made even before the transfers were effected. So, I concede that we insert the names of the people who were at fault at that time, that is Mr Kazinda and Mr Bigirimana.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us agree that sequentially, wherever the nomenclature OPM occurs, the PS in that office at the time should be named.

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, this particular Recommendation 80 is talking about diversion and we are talking about the PS/OPM. I would like to get clarification. The diversion occurred from Bank of Uganda holding account, which had its own managers who were the signatories. I want to refer you to document No. 10 and document No.8 both attached to the report, which transferred funds from holding accounts to Peace Recovery and Development Plan Northern Uganda accounts.

The persons responsible for the transfer were the Accountant General and Commissioner, Treasury. The recipient was the PS/ OPM. How do we then hold the PS, OPM liable for diversion of funds, which were not received? I want this clarification to be given to me because he receives into his Vote as Accounting Officer but the funds are being diverted from the holding account Bank of Uganda and the persons responsible are the Accountant General and the Commissioner, Treasury.

THE SPEAKER: Did he return to the sender?

MR MULIMBA: The two are different, Madam Speaker.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, you have made my work easy. I will not get tired of repeating this explanation for clarity. In Government financial management, there is no way the Accountant-General or the Commissioner, Treasury Services can transfer any money without it being requisitioned for by the recipient ministry. It cannot happen.

I gave you an example in Ministry of Internal Affairs where the responsible Permanent Secretary was saying, I have seen foreign money on my account, I do not know where it is coming from, can you take it back but this was not the case. This was money requisitioned. 

First of all, you need to appreciate that the government withholding account is like the common basket into which all donors put their money. They put specific tags on the money, for example, I am putting Shs 200 million to be taken to Kasese in the constituency of Dr Chrispus Kiyonga. That money must go nowhere else except to Kasese in the constituency of Dr Kiyonga and for a specific purpose. If you decided to divert it from that intended purpose and you took it to Rt hon. Prime Minister’s constituency in Kanungu, that is already wrong and that is what happened. You need to appreciate that. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that Recommendation 80 -

MR KAKOOZA: Clarification, Madam Speaker. Maybe, the Chairperson should inform the House -

THE SPEAKER: The Prime Minister is on the Floor.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I really want to be clarified on this point because I believe the principle that we embodied in our Constitution is that before one is accused, the offence must be clear. In this case, when you say the PS be held liable for spending funds that were not appropriated to OPM, what it means to me is that Parliament, which appropriates did not appropriate this money to Vote 003, OPM and yet this money was used under Vote 003. So, first, what is the offence? Second, under our Constitution and under our laws, you know very well that the Minister of Finance has the authority to spend up to 3 per cent of the appropriated money as supplementary, which was not appropriated. You can come back and get retrospective approval by Parliament. So, when I look at this, the confusion in my head is, what is the offence here, which Pius Bigirimana is being accused of?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, to the chairperson maybe, you need to inform the House because you interacted with all the witnesses. Were there any correspondences from the PS to authorise the Accountant-General regarding the money, which was transferred from the PRDP account? This is because in all the documents which are here, there is no correspondence on that account, which comes from the PS authorising the Accountant-General to transfer that money on this account, which is documents (8) and (10). That means it was collusion between Finance and Bank of Uganda.

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I want from the Prime Minister and the chairperson of the committee is that if this money was on the holding account, was it subject to the budgeting process? It was from donors and already on the holding account. I mean there was no need for budgets or appropriation.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, hon. Yaguma has made my work easy but before I conclude, I want to respond to the Rt hon. Prime Minister on this manner. Assuming you and I know you are a head of a family, you left your house in the morning to go to work knowing very well you have left no charcoal, no salt, no posho or other food items at home and God forbid, Madam is not of the working class and she equally has no money. In the evening, you go back and you are served with a five course meal. As a responsible husband, wouldn’t you ask your dear wife where she got this money to entertain you to such a meal? That is what you should do. As a responsible husband, you should be able to ask, “Where have you got this, Madam? Who was this kind person who has made manna to fall on us from heaven?” You should be able to do that.

These were pegged donor funds just like the Shs 1 billion, which was given by AU to which documents were laid on Table. That did not come through Parliament but there it was with stringent conditions attached that it must be for Bududa landslide victims. 

In equal measure, this common basket had money from development partners who were sympathetic to the cause of Northern Uganda and this money was with strings attached but now, here was a situation from where it was supposed to go, to other accounts for ease of accessibility. So, really, what do you read from this? And not only that, I have repeatedly said that if you are an accounting officer, there is no way Treasury or Accountant-General can transfer money to your account without your requisition; it can never happen. If it ever happens, a responsible recipient accounting officer will say, “I have strange money on my account.” Just like you, MPs, if you saw any money on your account where you usually get your emoluments, won’t you ask where the money came from? You would certainly ask. So, this is the same situation with this case.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 80 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 86

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with the view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds.

THE SPEAKER: No, the cashier should be named because I do not know who the cashier is - Oonyu is the cashier?

MR KASULE SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, my only concern is on the way we are recommending. This is because, if we want to recover the money, like in the previous recommendation, it would have been, “…investigate further with the view to recovering this money.” But now, we have just left there that “…be held liable…” How shall we recover this money? So the way we are recommending, it seems we are just doing for the sake of it.

THE SPEAKER: But you are free to make proposals.

MR SSEBUNYA: I was trying to do that on the earlier one but I did not catch your eye.

THE SPEAKER: You can still make a recommendation.

MR SSEBUNYA: You mean I can still amend the other one?

THE SPEAKER: You can create a new one - To recover? We can have a general one on recovery at the end. Let us hear from hon. Alaso. 

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I do not quite understand the intent of hon. Sebunya’s argument. This is because if you read this recommendation, it captures everything he is talking about. “The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with the view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds.” I thought it is covered.

THE SPEAKER: No, he was concerned about recommendation 80; he wanted to see “recovery” under Recommendation 80. But I have said that at the end he will make a general recommendation on recovery. Okay, I put the question that Recommendation 86 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 87

The committee further recommends that Ms Annet Namuddu, principal internal auditor and Ms Alice Nangoku, the senior internal auditor at OPM be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action for negligence of duty and be investigated for possible collusion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 87 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 91

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with the view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 87 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 96

The committee recommends that the PS OPM, Mr Pius Bigirimana, be held responsible for diverting PRDP funds to procure vehicles for the Prime Minister and other ministers at OPM.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I am just asking: Was the money which was diverted only that which bought the vehicles or was it diverted for vehicles and other things? (Laughter) hon. Winnie Kiiza might know better.

MR WADRI: I want to respond to the question asked by the Prime Minister. You see, as said earlier on, I won’t get tired of emphasising the fact this was money with strings attached; ordinarily, procurement of vehicles and office equipment of that nature in a government ministry under development account are the responsibility of the government and not development partners. If development partners want to go into projects and they want to support procurement of vehicles, the vehicles should be procured for project activities and not for the likes of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who is not a project officer. He will be seated in an air-conditioned office – that will not be one of the areas in which such kind of funds will be pegged to in terms of usage.

Secondly, if you read the memorandum of understanding between government and development partners, all that I am emphasising are clearly spelt therein – that this money is for this purpose. So the Shs 1.8 billion was a diversion from being used to alleviate the suffering of the people of Northern Uganda to the procurement of logistical facilities for non-project staff. (Interjections) Yes, they are not project staff. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, point of information from hon. Okot Ogong.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, I want to inform the member on the Floor that yesterday the Rt Hon. Prime Minister stated clearly that he was not the accounting officer and he could not bother to ask where the money was coming from. I am now wondering why the Prime Minister is bothering to ask the committee chair where the money came from. (Laughter)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much. I want to enjoin that information with what the Prime Minister said yesterday that diversion and reallocation of moneys in government are normal activities. Yes, it is true it is normal but only if it is government money and on condition that you ask for virement from the PS/ST and it is granted. But these were donor funds which could not be subjected to the virement process.

MR KAKOOZA: I know that all these accounting officers are regulated by the Public Finance and Accountability Act. If the PS did not have the money to procure these vehicles and interacted with these people – there is evidence in these documents that the PS, who is the accounting officer in the OPM, wrote to the ST and said, “I do not have this money to procure vehicles for ministers” and the Secretary to the Treasury okayed it. What could the PS have done? And the Public Finance and Accountability Act empowers the Secretary to the Treasury to spend on a vote and that money will be paid back. There is that evidence in you document. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, two wrongs do not make a right.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have a point of information from hon. Kwizera. 

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, this process of audit starts from ministries – queries are dropped there. And when it goes to the PAC, some queries can be dropped. I find that even this one can be dropped here – I am a member of the committee. Why? This is because the PS wrote on 21st of October to the ST, who is responsible for funding government and said, “You have appointed ministers; where do we get money from?” And then he was cleared to frontload. He also wrote to the Attorney-General, who cleared; he wrote to the Minister of Public Service and he cleared. So, it is erroneous to hold an individual for an issue that is committed by a system. I  you  would rather  hold all of them. I thank you. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is the responsibility of Government to provide vehicles for the ministers including the Prime Minister. Then we had donor funding that was supposed to ring-fence and not to go into procuring vehicles. And the PS knew it. It was him who initiated the idea that since Government did not have money; the money in PRDP account could be used. And he is the one who planned the whole procedure from the Secretary to Treasure up to the public service. 

Madam Speaker, two wrongs do not make a right; this must be made clear; it is the PS who initiated this. We are not against buying vehicles, but we are against a public officer who knew what he was supposed to do and he ended up diverting funds. For that matter, Northern Uganda lost a budget cut to the tune of Shs 1.8 billion. We are not against the Prime Minister and the ministers but the officer who initiated it. 

MR SABIIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When you look at this recommendation, the committee recommends that the PS of OPM be held responsible for diverting PRDP funds to procure – they are not saying that he be arrested. For someone to be held responsible means he has the opportunity to defend himself. We are simply recommending that he be held responsible. Let him be held responsible and he can defend himself on why he did that. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The PS did not stop at using funds from PRDP but also lied to Ugandans. We even paid for that lie. On Wednesday, May, 23rdMonitor Newspaper, he ran this advert. It said: “On the 15 May, 2012, hon. Odong Otto, Aruu County, MP made three allegations to the press.  One, That the Prime Minister diverted PRDP funds to purchase a vehicle; two, that the vehicle cost was Shs 600 million; that it was not necessary to buy another vehicle.” 

This is his response. “I would like to respond to the above allegations as follows: it is not true that funds to purchase the vehicle were diverted from the PRDP. PRDP funds are released directly to districts and other implementing ministries, departments and agencies on the basis of work plan, developed and prioritised.” 

Madam Speaker, this is information from a person who knew how PRDP funds were supposed to be used. He even went ahead to run an advert here. You cannot claim that he was doing it the normal way. Otherwise, he should have indicated in this advert that we diverted that money due to these reasons. 

MR CADET: Thank you, Madam Speaker. During the writing of the report, this issue was greatly contentious. The first issues where those which Kwizera raised. The argument then was that if the purchases were being okayed by Ministry of Finance and the Solicitor-General – but the Government had to refund the money of the donors, which Government did not do. So, in the committee we noted that Government officials directed their servants to purchase the cars. 

And since Government did not refund that money, it was hard for us to sacrifice one person for diverting it; he was under pressure from the ministers – they appointed minister’s which he did not plan for. 

So, Madam Speaker, the best thing would be for Government to refund the money; instead of holding one person responsible, who was authorised by Government agencies. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are wasting time; that was an advert in the papers saying there was no diversion. Did you find there was a diversion? 

MR WADRI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 96 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 96, adopted.

Recommendation 100

The committee recommends that the PS OPM be held responsible for diversion of PRDP funds to Karamoja for cattle branding. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that recommendation 100 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 100 adopted.

Recommendation 104

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that MrOnywu be investigated with a view to prosecution and recovery of the lost funds.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 104 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 104, adopted.

Recommendation 105

The committee recommends that the PS, OPM, Mr Pius Bigirimana, be held responsible for diverting PRDP funds to procure a ferry on Lake Bisina and to pay some engineering for ploughing in Karamoja PRDP North Account.
 
THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 105 be adopted. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 105, adopted.

Recommendation 109

The committee recommends that the Principal Accountant and the Commissioner Disaster Management be investigated with a view to establishing their role in the utilisation of these funds. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 109 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 109 adopted.

Recommendation 116

The committee recommends that the cashier be held responsible for gross negligence of duty and causing financial loss. The committee further recommends that Mr Oonyu be investigated with a view to prosecution and recovery of lost funds. 


THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 116 be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 116, adopted.

Recommendation 122

The committee recommends that the PS, Mr Pius Bigirimana, be held liable for approving imprest withdrawals over and above the authorised monthly limits. 

MR MULIMBA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering. The matter has already come in the case of PSST. Again, we are moving here to recommend charging him as well. I wonder whether one matter is being used to charge two respective people and yet the authority is held by one. 

THE SPEAKER: This one is about approving the withdrawals; the other one said you can take the money and this one approved the day by day – honourable chair, please explain. 

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I couldn’t be any clearer than what you guided. You can have one offence – somebody can be arrayed in court for receiving a bribe to the turn of Shs 200,000 and for soliciting a bribe to the tune of Shs 200,000. It is the same person and the offences seem similar, but they are different. So I do not see any contradiction in that. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that recommendation 122 be adopted by this House.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 122 adopted.

Recommendation 123
The committee further recommends that the former Principal Accountant Mr Kazinda be investigated for violating imprest warrants and forging cash withdrawals. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 123 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 123, adopted.

Recommendation 117

The committee further recommends that Ms Annet Namuddu, Principal Internal Auditor, and Ms Alice Nangoku, the Senior Internal Auditor, at OPM, be referred to the appointing authority for disciplinary action for negligence of duty and be investigated for possible collusion. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 117 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 117 adopted.

Recommendation 118

The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda, be investigated for his role in the management of cash withdrawn by the cashier. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 118 be adopted by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 118 adopted.

Recommendation 126

The committee recommends that Mr Yahaya and Ms Nalwanga be held liable for causing financial loss of Shs 16.2 billion and be investigated with a view to prosecution. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 126 be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 126 adopted.

Recommendation 127

The committee further recommends that Ms Birungi be referred to the appointing authority for caution. 

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 127 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 127 adopted.

Recommendation 128 

The committee recommends that the former Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda be investigated for his role in the fraudulent transaction amounting to Shs 16.2 billion.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 128 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 128 adopted.

Recommendation 140

The committee recommends that the accounting officer be held liable for failure to secure accountability documents and the circumstances under which the documents are alleged to have disappeared; be investigated.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 140 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 140 adopted.

Recommendation 141

The committee further recommends that the police investigate whether activities for which funds were advanced were implemented and value for money achieved.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 141 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 141 adopted.

Recommendation 142

The committee recommends that the staff who claim to have submitted accountabilities amounting to Shs 10.9bn but could not provide evidence to the committee, be investigated with a view of recovering any outstanding sum.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 142 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 142 adopted.

Recommendation 143

The committee recommends that staff who received and claim to have returned funds to former Principal Accountant be investigated with a view of establishing the authenticity of the purported acknowledgement document and apportion responsibility.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 143 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 143 adopted.

Recommendation 144

The committee recommends that Mr Martin Etyang and Mr Abdu Muwanika be investigated with a view of recovering the money they claim to have returned to Mr Kazinda without acknowledgement.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 144 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 144 adopted.

Recommendation 145

The committee recommends that Ms Lydia Nalwanga be investigated for loss of Shs 95 million she received from Mr Dhikusoka, which she claimed to have handed over to Mr Kazinda.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 145 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 145, adopted.

Recommendation 146

The committee recommends that the staff who availed photocopies of accountabilities amounting to Shs 3.1 billion be investigated with a view of recovery of any outstanding sums.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 146 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 146, adopted.

Recommendation 147

The committee recommends that the former, Principal Accountant, Mr Kazinda be investigated for transferring money to staff personal accounts purportedly in error and allegedly receiving the same from the staff of OPM.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 147 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 147 adopted.

Recommendation 153

In absence of the explanation of the whereabouts of the money purportedly returned, the committee recommends that Mr Kazinda and various suppliers be investigated with a view of recovering all the funds involved.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 153 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 153, adopted.

Recommendation 161 (1)

The committee recommends that the officers involved be investigated, prosecuted with a view of recovering the sums involved.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 161 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 161 adopted.

Recommendation 161 (2)

The committee further recommends that New Caltex Ntinda be investigated in the role played in the fraud with a view of recovering the funds received for fuel not supplied.

THE SPEAKER: That is part of 161. I put the question that the second part of Recommendation 161 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 162

The committee recommends that in the event that a company is found culpable, that company be blacklisted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 162 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 162, adopted.

Recommendation 178

The committee recommends that a joint police and audit investigation be undertaken to determine the scope and course of actual work done by Farm Engineering Industries Ltd with a view to recover the excess payment. The committee further recommends that such future projects be implemented by district local governments.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 178 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 178 adopted.

Recommendation 185

The committee recommends an engineering audit to be carried out to establish the extent of poor workmanship and value for money. The committee further recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should restrict itself to monitoring and coordinating Government programmes and not implementing activities for which they have no technical and supervisory capacity.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 185 be adopted – yes, chairperson of the Committee of Finance.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Speaker, I do not know what we intend to achieve with this recommendation. It is too general. And well knowing the Prime Minister’s Office houses about five other ministries. I do not know whether we are recommending to Government to disentangle them immediately or – because this is more of an administrative than an executive function. So, I do not know what we intend to achieve.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: In addition to that, let me just read out the function of the Prime Minister in Article 108 A (2) (a) and it reads as follows: “The Prime Minister shall - a) be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions.” So, that is why you have implementing agencies under that office because implementation is one of the functionalities of this office.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I want to draw your attention to what I would call the head note and it comes under 3 – “construction of chiefs’ houses, construction of houses for primary school teachers, construction of staff houses for health workers.” This recommendation comes under those -

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, we are not inventing the wheel. The Constitution that we so dearly revere is that of 1995, as amended and the provisions of Article 108A that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has just quoted, has not been amended at all. When this Constitution came into operation, I was a civil servant and I want to inform you that at that time, the type of arrangement in OPM as of now was never there. There was only the Ministry of Relief and Social Rehabilitation, under which Disaster and Refugees fell. So, at that time, the duties for the Office of Prime Minister were only about monitoring and coordinating Government ministries and services and at that time they were clean; they were never embroiled in such kind of scam. What has happened now is that this office has grown bigger than what is envisaged in the Constitution. That is where the root cause of this problem is.

So, this recommendation should not be read in isolation of Recommendation 198, which talks about restructuring the Office of Prime Minister so that those that are involved in service delivery go to their respective ministries like I served under hon. Dr Stephen Chebrot, who was my minister – yes! Some of the functions there weren’t your responsibility? 

So, even these programmes you are talking about here like NUSAF – go to Government coffers, you will find my signature as having conceptualised that programme yet we were not under OPM; we were in the Ministry of Rehabilitation. So, we are helping you – please your institution is too amorphous; it is compromising your constitutional role. Actually the Rt Hon. Prime Minister should be very happy with this committee because it is helping him to streamline.

Lastly, I want to pray to the Executive – we are all targeting one thing – efficiency in Government and efficiency in service delivery. That is all we are targeting and aiming at. We will be disappointed if this noble recommendation that we thought would help to streamline service delivery is ignored by the Executive; we will be disappointed.

Really, I would like to beg you, Members of the frontbench on the Government side and the Executive at large to take this in good faith. This is a recommendation coming from allies who mean well for this country. I beg to submit, but please I beg you to support this recommendation.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support that – you say that the issues under the construction of staff houses – there should be a recommendation on those. And I would like to confirm that some staff houses were constructed in Zombo District for health workers and teachers. But despite their completion, the houses have never been handed over. As I speak, staff have already entered and living in there yet I see the committee recommending an engineering audit to take place. So, I do not know how this will be done when people are already using these structures.
I also –(Interruptions)

MR WADRI: I have got pictures taken by the committee when it went to the field to monitor all those houses that were constructed by “engineers” from the Office of the Prime Minister. There are some standards and they have been laid on Table. But I also still have my copies here to show you that actually the Office of the Prime Minister is not competent in all those areas, which is the more reason they should give it to the right and competent authorities to do a noble duty so that they only can monitor and supervise.

MR CADET: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Actually, when we were drafting that recommendation, the purpose was to heal the inefficiencies in the OPM. The person who was responsible for building those houses was not an engineer. He was Mr Lubega, a teacher of Luganda and Fine Art – (Laughter) - that was the person responsible. 

When you look at whatever they did, you realise that it was only duplication. We are talking about a ministry that houses serious sectors for example, disaster, which is like a department in OPM. But we keep crying that we have had so many disasters in our areas and that they cannot be responded to. This is simply because this is just a department; it should be elevated to a ministry level. But also take note that OPM can only be efficient if they are limited to monitoring and evaluating Government programmes. Otherwise, when they implement, who will monitor them. Madam Speaker, that is where the problem lies.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to convince the Prime Minister and the Members that this recommendation relates to the work done on the chiefs’ houses, primary school teachers’ houses and staff houses for the health workers.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: You know, first of all, that I am not disputing the findings of the committee in terms of the quality of work in the construction of those houses and so forth. All I am saying is, really Parliament cannot pass a resolution which is clearly unconstitutional. So, I think – can I propose an amendment?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, do.

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: No, I am not being investigated. You know this problem of misunderstanding – I do not know but we must find time to really help – (Laughter) – I am just thinking aloud – let it read as follows: “The committee further recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister should restrict itself to monitoring and coordinating Government activities and not implementing activities until it has built capacity to do so.” Or something like that. That will make your recommendation not to run counter to the functions of the Office of the Prime Minister, which are constitutional.

MR WADRI: Before the clarifications come to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I have the following to say. We are aware of how constitutions are amended and more particularly how Uganda’s Constitution can be amended. Excuse me, I listened to you in silence. Hon. Patrick AmamMbabazi, you are always a reasonable person – (Interruptions)

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: I also listened to you in silence and I decided not to let what you said, and which was not actually accurate, pass to her but you are repeating it. Article 108A was as a result of the amendment. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR WADRI: I am very grateful for that information. However, I have the following to say. The Constitution is not cast in stone. If it is amended and it is later realised that it is not working properly, Ugandans can again amend it. And I know that in amending the Constitution, one will go to higher heights but will fail to jump if they do not receive the support of the Executive. That is the reason we are making appeals to the Executive that they see reason in what we are recommending and what we are engaging them into. That is all we are saying. 

We know it requires a constitutional amendment but also I know the important role you, as Government, play in doing a constitutional amendment. And since within the next one year or so, we may touch some of the constitutional amendments, if only you could say, this becomes one of the things to be considered, I will appreciate that.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, maybe at a later point, we may, for the sake of effective management of public affairs, consider the amendment proposed by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister – until such a time when capacity is built to do the implementation. 

But looking at Article 108 A (2) (a), it says thus: “The Prime Minister shall - (a) be the Leader of Government Business in Parliament and be responsible for the coordination and implementation of Government policies across ministries, departments and other public institutions.” I see the burden on the Office of the Prime Minister being lessened by maintaining that coordination role to ensure all the programmes across ministries are implemented.

The way I understand implementation here is implementation across ministries, Government departments and institutions. If we take that, it would be more positive and more alleviating even on the Office of the Prime Minister. That is my view.  But if you say that really the Office of the Prime Minister under this Constitution is principally charged with the implementation role within the Office of the Prime Minister itself, then it becomes very challenging on the part of Government.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 185 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 185 adopted.

Recommendation 188

The committee recommends an engineering audit to be carried out to establish the extent of poor workmanship and value for money. The committee further recommends that Office of the Prime Minister should restrict itself to monitoring and co-ordinating Government programmes and not implementing activities for which they have no technical and supervisory capacity.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, that relates to the housing project for the landslide victims. So, I put the question that recommendation 188 be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 188 adopted.

Recommendation 190

The Committee recommends that hydraform machines be recovered from the abandoned site with immediate effect and be transferred to NUYDC where they can be utilized in training the youths in hydraform technology.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that Recommendation 190 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Recommendation 190 adopted.

Recommendation 198 

The committee recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister be restructured and the departments that do not fulfil the core mandate of the Office of the Prime Minister be removed from it. Such non-core mandate departments that include the Department of Special Programmes, Disaster and Refugees, Information and National Guidance should be stand-alone ministries.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that recommendation 198 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Yes, there was a one “no”- (Laughter)

Recommendations on advances to staff

The committee noted that there was no indication in the audit report that the minister had travelled to Israel nine times. However, OPM advanced to Mr Boniface Obbo, the cashier at OPM, a total of Shs 125.988 million for this activity.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is for noting. Money was spent but not by the minister. It is important and it is to be noted that the minister did not travel but there is someone who took the money and he died.

MR WADRI: Can I shed light on that Rt hon. Speaker? We had to bring this on the forefront because the newspapers and FM stations in Kampala were all awash with the news that the minister had gone to Israel nine times in one month. I have a copy of the Auditor-General’s report.  With all honesty, in this report, there is no mention of that information that the minister went to Israel nine times but because it was already in the public domain, we felt obliged to ask the minister and we even demanded her passport as proof. So, we could not make any recommendation but just to clear the air that we have satisfied ourselves and we want to dispel the wrong information circulating that the hon. minister went to Israel nine times in a month. That is all we wanted to say.

As for Mr Obbo, I did tell you yesterday that he really died. That one you cannot doubt, he died so we could not make any recommendations on a deceased person. I thank you.

MR SABILA: Madam Speaker, although this statement falls short of a recommendation, there is need to have a recommendation and according to my amendment, it would be as follows: The committee should recommend that the source of information be investigated with a view of prosecution because we cannot continue allowing people to make erratic statements that are in fact very dangerous. We need the source to be investigated to the finish. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, it was something that came in the public domain and you cannot ignore it. Have you seen the Auditor-General’s report?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, what is reflected in the Auditor General’s report is that the late Boniface Obbo, cashier then, received the UShs 125 million ostensibly to facilitate the First Lady and ministers for Karamoja Affairs to go to Israel and that she went nine times.I want to tell you, hon. Colleagues, that even when we questioned the minister, we discovered that it is true she went once but she did not go using the money of the Vote of Office of the Prime Minister. She went under the State House Vote. 

Yes, we did a thorough job honestly. By that time, we were still 29 members and there is no way I could come on this Floor and say so and so has gone there nine times when I do not have evidence. I would be belittling myself. So, let us take it that the 29 members of this committee were thorough in their investigation and believe what they have stated.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted clarification on the demise of Boniface Obbo. How soon was it after cashing the money and as the chairman, did you bother yourself to get interested about the cause of death of this man who had to die after receiving Shs 125 million and this blackmail? I actually support hon. Sabila that there should be a law stopping people from blackmailing others but were you aware of the cause of this death?

Obbo sounds like a man that I can associate with. I want to establish whether you know the cause of his death and when he died, so that we can also tell the Jophadholas to follow up if he was just killed.

THE SPEAKER: Was that part of the terms of reference?

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, by the time this report was tendered and tabled on the Floor of the House and referred to Public Accounts Committee, the late Boniface Obbo had long died. I never had an opportunity to see his appearance unlike Takwenda who at least made an appearance before the committee.

Two, the Public Accounts Committee is not competent to establish death of whoever has died. If we want to follow that further, there are established institutions that are responsible for that. We have got government pathologists who can go and exhume the body -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, let us not waste time. Mr Obbo is dead, let us move on. Now there were some recommendations on particular staff.

    (i) Mr Frederick Mugenyi Sansa was advanced Shs 565.7 million. The committee recommends that the issue be dropped.

    (ii) Mr Benon Kigenyi was advanced Shs 165 million to pay for hire of space at Africana against the advice of the PS. The committee recommends that the Principal Accountant be investigated for flouting the procedure by depositing cash on the personal account of this staff.

    (iii) Ms Christine Kiwanuka was advanced Shs 1.2 billion. The committee recommends that the amounts not accounted for be investigated.

    (iv) Mr John Martin Owor was advanced Shs 145 million. The committee recommends that the officer be investigated with a view to recovering the money.

    (v) Ms Patricia Agaba was (a) advanced Shs 99.2 million. The committee recommends that the officer should be investigated for uttering false documents and the money is recoverable. (b) The same officer was advanced Shs 99 million to pay pre-qualified suppliers. The committee recommends that the Principal Accountant be investigated for irregularly sending money for suppliers to the personal account of the officer. The same officer was advanced Shs 60 million. The committee recommends that the officer should be investigated for possible utterance of false documents. The same officer was advanced Shs 50.2 million. The committee recommends that the accountability be investigated. The same officer was advanced Shs 44 million. The committee recommends that the issue be dropped.

vi)  	Ms Rose Nakabugo: Her accountability of Shs 472 million and Shs 120 million was questionable. The committee recommends that the respective accountabilities should be investigated with a view to recovering the money. The same officer was advanced Shs 10.5 million and the committee recommends that the transaction be investigated. The same officer had an accountability of Shs 7.1 million that lacked evidence. The committee recommends that Shs 400 million of this amount be recovered. The same officer had an accountability for Shs 25.1 million that was doubtful; the committee recommends that the officer should be investigated for possible utterance of false documents.  The same officer refunded Shs 64 million; the committee recommends that the refund be investigated.

vii) 	Mr James Okuja: He was advanced Shs 1.3 billion. The committee recommends that the issue should be dropped. The same officer had an accountability of Shs 306.8 million, which was questionable. The committee recommends that the Principal Accountant be investigated for this payment and the accountability document should be investigated.

viii) 	Mr Cyprian Dhikuzooka: He was advanced Shs 1 billion and the committee recommends that the issue be dropped.

ix) 	Mr Abdul Muwanuka: He was advanced Shs 917 million and the committee recommends that the issue be dropped.

x) 	Mr Samuel Mweru Byaki: He was advanced Shs 728.6 million and the committee recommends that the issue be dropped.

xi) 	Mr Robert Kasirabo: Was advanced Shs 44.2 million and the committee recommends that the Police should continue with the investigations. The same officer submitted accountability of Shs 11.4 million that seemed doubtful. The committee recommends that the Police should continue with the investigations.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question –

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to move a motion under Rule 50(k) and Rule 50(2), which reads: “The following motion may be moved without notice: (k) Any motion, which in the opinion of the Speaker, is a matter of emergency.”
Rule 50(2) reads: “A member may move a motion without notice in the following manner; Mr/Madam Speaker, I rise to move that the House considers the following motion without notice under Rule 50(k) and under Rule 50(2).”   The motion I wish to move is as follows:
“That Parliament resolves and it is hereby resolved that Government makes a deliberate effort to identify and place patriots in critical areas in the civil service with a view to safeguarding Government funds and improving service delivery in the best interest of the people.” If you allow me, Madam Speaker, I will give the justification. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us first vote on the recommendations then we can proceed. Hon. Members, I put the question that this House adopts the recommendations relating to the staff. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to sincerely thank you and the entire institution of Parliament that made it possible for us to carry out this very tedious assignment. This was one of the hardest assignments I have ever held – with a lot of political overtones and as said earlier on, with three other players all in action at the same time. But I am happy that we have finally arrived.

Secondly, this report took long to be debated and the public, of course, had a lot of misgivings – some thought Members of PAC had been compromised. But I am happy that it has finally come up and the Members who judiciously handled this matter have made it possible for these recommendations to reach here as proof that we went as per the evidence on paper.

Madam Speaker, for some of us, it was even more difficult – those of us who have served in Government – that you find litigants in courts brought before you; people with whom you were in the same hall of residence at university; people with whom you were contemporaries; people with whom you had one time worked together in a ministry but are now appearing before you and you have to dispense justice. (Interjections) Yes, there were those who were my fellow Northcotters but we had to stand our ground and stand for the truth. 

So, I thank you colleagues but more importantly make this appeal to the executive; all this work we have done and others that are yet to be tabled will be in vain if reports and recommendations of parliamentary committees are passed just as a ritual. We would rather do other things than read documents as though you were reading for an exam and a year down the road, you would have forgotten about every other thing to concentrate on it but at the end of the day, recommendations are not implemented. That is the most painful thing that we go through. 

Madam Speaker, I want to make a passionate appeal to the Leader of Government Business, let committee recommendations not be in vain; let Government play its role so that within six months, you issue to us Treasury memoranda so that we know which of these recommendations adopted by Parliament have been implemented. Then we can subject it once again to the Auditor-General for audit. That is how democratic governance is seen. We are not an island – Uganda is a member of the East African Association of Public Accounts Committees that I chair and the countries out there have a lot of respect for us as a country – that we have good practices from which they want to learn. And even as I speak now, this morning I hosted a delegation from Kenya, which came to see how PAC does its work. So, let not these efforts be in vain; at least swing into action and allay the public fears that we are not walking the talk about the fight against corruption.

Lastly, I still want to appeal to the Prime Minister that let the members of the executive sieve their words; because when a statement comes out of the lips of the Prime Minister or the defence minister or the President, Ugandans take it serious – rightly or wrongly. The message that comes out is seen as gospel truth or Koranic truth. So, let us not deflate our own Members by discouraging, especially when they are doing such a noble task. For someone to come out and say “so-and-so is a star performer” or “so-and-so is innocent.” Why don’t you allow the Police to investigate and the courts of law to declare such a person innocent? This is because the moment you say, “so-and-so is innocent.”  Then we begin asking ourselves whether it is worthwhile for us as a committee to lose gas into such probes. That is something for which I appeal to this House that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister as the Leader of Government Business assists us. The public is looking up to us. It is true we are doing badly as far as corruption scale is concerned; Uganda is doing badly. And it is upon each one of us to redeem the image of this country. We in the Opposition cannot succeed without the commitment of the Executive.

Even the backbenchers on the NRM side cannot succeed without the goodwill of the Executive. That is my prayer; please, treat these recommendations seriously that have been made and please, make us appreciate your efforts by regular issuance of Treasury Memorandum so that we can weight our performance in the course of our work.  

Once again, thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you very much colleagues for at last putting this report at our back. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I put the question that the report and the recommendations as amended be approved by this House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

RESPONSE ON THE REPORT OF THE ADHOC COMMITTEE ON ENERGY ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE ELECTRICITY SECTOR IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Are you tired – your heads are circulated? Hon. Members, I am ready and the minister is ready, but if you say your heads are circulated, we can defer it with your agreement. 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, if you remember, there were issues which were already on the Floor, but because the ministers were not prepared, you deferred them to tomorrow – 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, I am ready and the minister is ready; let that be on record. But we have the minister for lands, who had gone to check on the land titles for – is it Maddu? 

7.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS (MS Aidah Nantaba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In March, 2012, a compensation report was prepared by the Chief Government Valuer and submitted to Uganda National Road’s Authority Executive Director to prepare a compensation schedule for the project affected persons. 

Before verification and valuation is done, land titles have to be submitted to the ministry of lands to verify and authenticate these titles before valuation is done. That was done and that report was finalised and submitted to Uganda National Roads Authority. They have it ready and it is not up to them to compensate the project affected persons. 

Madam Speaker, this is the report from our Chief Government Valuer on compensation. The land titles are already with UNRA and they are the ones now responsible for the compensation. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, are you saying the report was done in March 2012?

MS NANTABA: Yes, March, 2012 and it was submitted to UNRA – the land titles are with UNRA already. I beg to lay the report of the Chief Government Valuer on Table. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable minister for alleviating our stress. Now, what do we do; the report has been there since March 2012?

MR KIVUMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know, this is a project that does not only go through my constituency and hon. Mariam’s. It goes up to Sembabule and through Gomba and hon. Amelia Kyambadde’s constituency. So there are several members involved. For some reasons that I cannot establish, it was decided that they start in Butambala, in the middle of the project. But we will deal with those reasons later. That is why we take great care that every letter of the law is followed to avoid more issues. The law is very clear. Article 26 can reiterate; it states that compensation shall be prompt and prior- To that extent, the work going on in that constituency is illegal. And this Parliament cannot sanction an activity that is thoroughly contrary to the command of the Constitution. 

I can pledge to do the political mobilisation for this Government and for the project; because we desperately need it – and you can take my word. Since they are starting payment on 3rd March halt the on-going distraction of people’s property and we first conform to the dictates of the Constitution. I pledge to do the necessary mobilisation of the people in that area for people to understand why that action has been taken and it we will be in our best interest. But we cannot go on with an activity that is thoroughly illegal. 

The Attorney-General can advise otherwise, but that is my layman understanding of the law. Much as we need the project desperately, let us conform to the law. That they choose to start in the middle of my constituency, I take a little care in the way it is being done. 

THE SPEAKER: My concern would be, if the report was ready in March, 2012 and the funds were brought in July, 2013 what have they been waiting for? 

MR KWIZERA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to help this House by saying that there is no way you can get the value of Shs 29 billion if you never carried out valuation and ascertaining the owner of the funds. The practice in UNRA is that they get initial certificates to commence the work and divert the money for compensation and give it to the contractors to start the work. So this money could have been diverted; instead of paying off the beneficiaries, they have advanced the money to the contractors. In Kisoro, the road was finished about three or four years ago. Today, they have overpaid the contractor Shs 9 billion yet the people are not fully compensated.  So unless the minister gives us evidence of where the Shs 29 billion is, we will not believe his statement. 

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, similar works are going on in Buikwe District and this is Kyetume – Katosi – Kisoga – Nkokonjeru – Nyenga Road which is 72 Kilometres. Compensation is being done, because they are in the same phase of implementation. Compensation is being done on the basis of valuation done at the district of Mukono where we belonged before breaking off to become Buikwe District. 

Now, many of those valuations are defective and many of the constituents are coming to us Members of Parliament to link them with the authorities so that they can rectify situations. I am bringing this because we are in a similar event. These people have not been compensated and where compensations are being done they are inadequate and they need a re-evaluation of people’s land, buildings and so forth. 

Secondly, is for the ministry to do the right thing. To do the right thing means to have an established office near the people with officers who can explain to them how they should navigate to have their complaints addressed. If you don’t do it in Buikwe, then you are not going to do it in Butambala as well. So, even if you don’t answer now, you can go back and correct some of these situations with the technical advisors in the ministry together with people in UNRA and come back with a comprehensive plan for compensating, not only for the people in Butambala, but also those in Buikwe where this road is passing. I know you may not have the answers right now. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, also concerning what hon. Kiwanda raised that some people along Hoima Road have not been compensated 10 years after the construction of the road – okay, further information? I think receive the information because apparently I have a lot of problems.

MR ASUPASA: Madam Speaker, as we talk UNRA is fixing mark stones along Mbale–Tirinyi Road but they have never compensated anybody along that road. So, they are busy taking peoples land and people are already complaining to us. Mr Minister, since you pass along that road, you can bring a report here on what you are doing to people because they are now blocking NURA from fixing those mark stones. And what plans exist in terms of compensating people along Mbale – Tirinyi Road?

MS KYABANGI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kivumbi Muwanga suggested 3rd March when payments will be starting but we thought people are going to be compensated and given like two to three months to look for where to go. That is the information I wanted to give to the minister.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving the opportunity to contribute to the matter I am passionate about. Honourable minister, you had heard from this House that most of us don’t have confidence in UNRA compensating our people. Yes, we want the road to be made but, as I said earlier, not at the expense of our people. 

Now, I implore you to assure me, this House and the people of Butambala that by 3rd March the compensations will start and that they will start at the right point where the demolition is taking place.
I want you to assure this House that the procedures that were agreed upon between UNRA, Ugaserve and Energo of establishing offices in Butambala to do mediations, compensation and payments will be there by 3rd March. If you assure me and this House - and my people in Butambala are watching this debate – I will go and tell the people to allow the project to continue. Otherwise, if you don’t, I am not going to accept my people to be cheated. You know that the laws are very clear. People surrendered their land, gardens and homes – they have not been working and evaluation hasn’t taken care of that interest but now you don’t want to give them money. So, honourable minister, assure me and I will take your word.

THE SPEAKER: Let us first deal with that Gomba-Maddu-Sembabukle Road.

MR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, in my statement this afternoon, I apologized to the people of Butambala that it was wrong for them to destroy people’s houses before compensating them. I made that very clear. However, if there are people who feel aggrieved that the payment that is being made to them is not commensurate with the value of their land, they have six months to appeal to the Government Chief valuer and a verification can be made – (Interjections) – no, let me finish this. Maybe with my answers, you will be able to understand. 

Normally, before your house is broken, pictures are taken and there is usually a consultant valuer who values that and gives you a figure. So, if you feel aggrieved, they can use those pictures to revalue the house and they can give you another figure. So, my assurance to the House is that come 10 March, all those people whose property has been destroyed, will be paid off. We are going to pay these people within 15 days from now. So, I don’t see what the argument is all about.

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you, minister for giving way. The value that was given five years ago, cannot buy similar size of land today because the prices have gone high. Madam Speaker, there is a petition that came to your office from the people of Mbale where Nkoma University went and grabbed land from them when the value at the time was still very low. Today the value is very high. So, what are you going to do? Are you going to revalue it? Because Government took so long to pay off those people at that time when the value was issued, today the value has gone high. So, are you going to revise the value according to the market value?

MR MUWUMA: Thank you so much. Madam Speaker, the clarification I need from the minister – he is telling people and the country at large that the budget for those compensations is Shs 29billion. But we have figures that have been appearing in the budget for years and years but actually money never being there. So, can the minister tell the House how much is available for compensation such that we can be able to inform the beneficiaries? A budget is usually just on paper but how much money do we have available to take care of compensations?

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Speaker, the minister has just said that if the monies paid are not commensurate with the price of the property that is going to be destroyed, people are supposed to re-apply to the Chief Government Valuer. Yes, Butambala and Buikwe are not very far from here. But imagine people from rural areas – what are the procedures under which they are going to start to reapply to the Government Chief Valuer? Do they even know the Chief Government Valuer? Can’t you be compassionate to the people especially when their property is undervalued? How will they get into that process of reapplying to be re-evaluated? These are very difficult things and the minister must be able to get the feelings of our people at the grassroots.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really feel very uncomfortable to accept the promises of the honourable minister here because Butambala Road is recent project. The stretch from Lukaya to Kammengo was five years ago but nobody has ever received a coin. So, there is no way we can really say that what the minister is promising – Butambala can really be fulfilled like he is saying. There may be other reasons that the minister is not conversant about because we have been following these things with UNRA and one of the reasons that they give us is that they receive money in a lump sum – roads and compensation together and they give priority to contractors and not these poor people of ours and that is one.

Two, although the Minister for Lands has also – but I want her to go back and find out from these consultants; some of them have just presented to UNRA their work – four years back. How could these consultants really keep this work with themselves for four or even five years without being presented to UNRA? 

There is also another problem; again recently, the Ministry of Finance is coming in that even if UNRA finishes – that is what they tell us – that even if we finish our work here, it is somebody in the Ministry of Finance who authorises these payments and that group also sits on these files of the beneficiaries. So, I wanted you, hon. Minister, to really study more about these processes. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister – on Maddu – no, do not bring your issues because you are going to make that issue of Butambala disappear, and Buikwe and Kikandwa.

MR ATIKU: It will not disappear, Madam Speaker. We have many issues with compensations and particularly roads. In Arua, there is Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba Road that is being done. All these processes were done, verifications were done, people were told to submit their accounts and UNRA actually claimed that money was already advanced to individuals and yet, their accounts were reading “red”.

So, I smell a rat when our good hon. Minister of State for Lands confirms here that actually, work was done particularly in regard to titles and verification in the Ministry of Lands way back in 2012 and yet, our hon. Minister who is in charge is telling us that they have not yet done the little work that is meant to allow people to access their monies.

So, what has really been delaying the hon. Minister if the bulk of the work was already done way back in 2012? So, there should be some syndicate that the hon. Minister should declare to us.
	
I have a similar case with Arua Airport. Some land was grabbed from the community but recently, the Civil Aviation Authority accepted and recognised that about four acres of land was taken without proper procedure and they valued the land to a tune of about Shs 360 million. They accepted to pay, they embarked on the legal procedures and todate as we talk, the people in the Solicitor-General’s Office have refused to clear this because they want a kickback before they clear this particular project. This holding CAA backwards and yet, for us, we want the airport.  So, Madam Speaker, there is something that is happening with these ministries that are concerned that they should declare -

THE SPEAKER: Information from the Office of the Auditor-General.

MR RUHINDI:  Madam Speaker, I appreciate the concerns that my colleague may have as far as the Office of the Solicitor-General is concerned. But we are in a very - which is what we have been discussing the whole afternoon; we have been on corruption and impropriety in Government institutions. When you make that kind of statement without substantiation – because some of us would want to take action. We know what has been going on and cannot completely vouch for anyone who works in the Office of the Solicitor-General to stand here and clean all of them. That would not be proper but please, when you make such a serious statement, be ready to have it substantiated.

Let me tell you the problem with the Office of the Solicitor-General. More often than not, first of all, we are under-manned. These are professionals who are fully qualified and can actually earn better in private practice and some of them get out. So, we are thin on the ground but we try to do our best. Do you know that the Office of the Solicitor-General is a clearing house for practically everything that Government does? You can imagine you find staff of about 20 professionals in a department and they have got to clear every agreement for Central Government, local government and so forth.

Now, without prejudice to that, we also get problems with instructing ministries. When they give instructions, they give a bit of it and so, these people keep on writing to them, “Please, we want some more information” because the instructions must come from the sector ministry. But suffice to say, please, do give me or avail us with information so that where we can take appropriate action, we can do so.  

Now, on this issue of compensation, it is critical because our Constitution of 1995 is a paradigm shift from what we used to have in 1967. In 1967, compensation was adequate and prompt. Now, the 1995 Constitution inserted in the expression, “prior to acquisition” and that is fundamental. We have very many provisions of this nature in our Constitution. The problem that we have in our country is that we operate a cash budget. You only spend money that you have received. So, sometimes, you may actually have a provision like that but you have to wait against the resources that we have.

I agree with hon. Ssempijja that in doing these projects, priority should also be given to these peasants whose properties are being compulsorily acquired or destroyed because sometimes they have nowhere else to go and they cannot actually wait and wait for the compensation. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, is that also about –

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I thought I had given way for information. But I want to wind up on this.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MR ATIKU: It is true that our Attorney-General has given the right information and guidance but what I want to point out is that the gaps within the ministry are being abused either by omission or commission to disadvantage some of these projects and their beneficiaries.  And for this particular case of Butambala, his services are going to be very handy in streamlining the process of ensuring that these people get paid because if houses have already been destroyed in trading centres -

THE SPEAKER: But you are repeating what has already been said. Minister, please, conclude on those roads.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to make one clarification on the issue of compensation for the people of Butambala- 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Achia, it seems to be burning.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Madam Speaker and hon. Members, we have heard this problem in the Committee on Budget in the last financial years. Last financial year, the Ministry of Works and Transport came to request for over Shs 70 billion for compensating people along 15 different roads and it was before this House. Some of the roads had been completed many years ago, some were already being issued the last payment certificates and others were in the process, including Kasangati.

This problem would require the Minister of Works and Transport to come and brief this House about the compensation that has been done for the roads that we have constructed in the last five years because as we talk, it is very critical. Some of the roads have been delayed because a ministry claims that they do not budget for money for paying people and some of the money we have borrowed for constructing these roads are loans from different banks and countries. Every day that we do not start work, we lose an average of US $ 5-10 million and this is interest.

It is the same with some projects in the Ministry of Agriculture where we lose millions of shillings because of lack of counterpart funding and we continue to accumulate interest. That is what is driving up our indebtedness as a country.

Madam Speaker, I would request that the Minister of Works prepares a comprehensive response with regard to this issue of compensation, we are losing billions of shillings because of lack of clarity on how is being compensated, when and whether it is prompt or not. 

These things keep coming back before the Committee on Budget as supplementaries. It is also budgeted in the different loans. If it is budgeted in the loan that we passed before this House- We pass money together with the loan with specifications that this is for compensation. How come the ministry comes back years later asking for money as supplementary to pay for compensation of a project that is being completed?

It is a much bigger matter, hon. Members and it would be good that as we receive more roads, the ministry gives us a comprehensive response with regard to this issue of compensation at least for the last ten roads you have finished constructing or are in the process of completion.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, what he has said has just reminded me that the Appointments Committee had made a proposal to the Rules Committee and to the House that we need a Loans Evaluation Committee in this House but it was thrashed and rejected. Now he is saying we pass the loans with compensation and nothing is done. Anyway -

MR KABAJO: Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. What I am going to say is a bit similar to what he has just said. However, as follow up to the comment made by hon. Kiwanda about the portion of the Hoima Road in his constituency, one should note that this road passes through a whole lot of constituencies including mine and I also have a similar issue. I am sure if you ask other Members, they would also have similar issues with Hoima road, which passes in their constituency. So the clarification I am seeking concerns the issue raised by hon. Kiwanda. I request for that issue to be expanded to cover the whole of Hoima road and not just the portion covering Mityana district.

THE SPEAKER: Okay,  what we should do is to ask the minister to bring a report to this House about compensation on the roads constructed in the last 10 years countrywide so that Vurra, Oraba and all these - So that we can know who has been paid and who has not. Yes, minister.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  You have made the right ruling because I was not prepared to answer some of the supplementary comments and questions. I will now go and ask UNRA together with my ministry to prepare a comprehensive report on compensations over the last 10 years. If there are people who have not been paid on Hoima road, it will definitely come out in that report. So I request that you give me time to prepare a report and submit it to you, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

On the issue of compensation of Butambala, I wish to say that the Shs 29.7 billion is only in respect of the roads in Butambala not further. We are starting payment - I said from the 3rd to the 10th March.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: You said 3rd March then 10th March then you said within 15 days.

DR CHEBROT: Honourable, you were not listening. The new chair is too hot for you. What I said is this; that the payment will begin from 3rd to 10th March. Today is the 27th Feb. How many days to the 10th March? Isn’t it 15 days? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, earlier, we had questions but the Minister of Education was absent. You were busy on the iPad. He is going to bring a report including Hoima Road. We have said a report covering the last 10 years for all the roads constructed countrywide whether they have been compensated or not. Are you ready with our answers?

7.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John chrysestom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are sorry we were not here when you called us. All of us were out on duty but I pray that you give us time to present next time; on Tuesday next week. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I will decide when next week. You better be ready.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a procedural request and I am seeking your indulgence. The Minister of Energy has prepared responses and posted them on the iPads. I am requesting that you direct the Clerk to do the same regarding this report so that it is available for Members on their iPads as soon as possible so that we can discuss them concurrently with the soft copies.

THE SPEAKER: I think that is most expensive for my office. That will be the third time I am producing the report but Clerk, upload it on the iPads as well for the use of the Members.

MR KWIZERA: Madam Speaker, the Umeme report was presented to this House over a year ago. If it does not cost too much, we would request the chairperson to present it again because according to the information I have, and I am in the Natural Resources Committee, it would be beneficial if it is presented because it was done over a year ago. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable. It was presented; it was summarised for the second time and it is going to be on your iPads. What more do you want? No, put it on the iPads and that will be sufficient. House adjourned to Tuesday 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.40 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 4 March at 2.00 p.m.) 
