

Thursday, 27 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. at Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, welcome to this afternoon’s sitting. I have one item for communication; it is to do with the management of the coronavirus epidemic.

We have received information that Ugandans continue to go, in large numbers, to China especially to Guangzhou, which is one of the major epicentres of the disease. The disease incubates for many days and so, it is possible for us to interact with people who have it without realising that we are getting infected. 

In the circumstances, we are going to facilitate public health hygiene by increasing the number of hand sanitizers, which have been put at various locations. I think you have noticed that there are many more sanitizers. We are going to increase them in order to try to mitigate the possibility of getting infected.

I would like you to, first of all, make use of them but also to inform your constituents that we are not discriminating against them but that one needs to come to this facility with better hygiene. 

That is what I wanted to inform you about. I encourage you, to walk with some in the pockets because you meet many people at places like churches and funerals; you should carry your own hand sanitizers as well. 

2.10
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I would like to thank you for the mitigation measures taken by the commission. The other day I informed the Minister of Health that we do not have masks. 

We should ensure that masks are available because Coronavirus is mainly airborne, people have to wear masks. I think you need to require the Ministry of Health to explain to us when they are availing masks to Ugandans. Individuals would want to buy but they are not available. This needs to be taken seriously by the Ministry of Health and Government. 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Actually when the disease struck China, they went all over the world buying those masks. As we speak, in Uganda it is very difficult to get those masks. 

What hon. Okupa is saying is right, we need to be alert with that and see how to import more because in case it strikes, we will have no masks to protect ourselves with.

2.11
MR MOSES WALYOMU (NRM, Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for the love for this country and for Ugandans; you have taken the initiative to inform them about the problem.

While I was listening to BBC news programme, there ran a story that said that currently 20 countries are confirmed to be having people affected by this virus. Maybe we need to request the Minister of Health to inform Ugandans about other countries other than China because people are only thinking about China. We need to be given names of those other new countries that are infected by the virus too. Thank you

THE SPEAKER: What is coming to light is that the countries, which have got the infection, are those with people who left China to return home with the virus.

2.13
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am representing this bench for a few minutes. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, while I appreciate that the Parliamentary Commission is trying to help the Government, we also need to think about public places. The responsible minister should issue out a directive to schools. Otherwise, we are going to lose so many Ugandans. Most of the schools do not care; they are only trying to minimize costs. If they could come out with directives to safeguard public places. Thank you. 

2.14
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is about the restriction of movement. Much as the Minister of Health laid a report here, there seems to be no deliberate effort by Government to restrict movement of people to other countries, including restricting the movement of Chinese to Uganda. 

I was reading a document about Coronavirus and I got to notice that by the time somebody exhibits symptoms, the lungs are already affected and it is long after you have spread it to other people. It is not a simple thing. 
In Iran, the number has gone high. Italy and Germany are the same. And the deputy minister for health of Iran is among those who have tested positive.

Much as the minister said there are measures to check people as they come, my concern is that we may have interests in China and the rest but we do not check Chinese who are coming into the country. 

My appeal to Government is that they should issue a list of countries, other than China, that Ugandans should not travel to.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Do not just think about Chinese. I told you in my communication that Ugandans are continuing to go. So they will bring the disease here; it is a serious issue. 

2.15
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Coronavirus is real and it is still a threat to the world. I rise to update you on the plight of students who are held in Wuhan, which is the epicentre. 

You recall very well, when the minister presented the Government position to Parliament, she mentioned some steps that were being taken, among which was the provision of financial support to the students who are held up there to facilitate them get basic necessities. 

The feedback we are getting is that a few out of the 74 students – the minister mentioned 105 but the list which the students sent to us has the figure 74. Still, out of the 105, only about 20 received that money. 

As we talk, some of the students are living on one meal per day. They are spending whatever they have sparingly to be able to take them for some time. 

It would be important for us to hear from Government why this money has not reached all the students regardless of whether they are on scholarships or not. Any Ugandan student who is held up there should be able to be –(Interruption)

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that the cost of living in Wuhan now has gone up. I am told that one tomato is now going for over $10. That puts our people in a very bad situation. So, if Government does not respond faster to save the over 50 who have not been facilitated, very soon, we shall hear that people are dying of starvation instead of Coronavirus.

MR ATIKU: Thank you very much for the information. That is the situation. The cost of food stuffs has gone up because one has to source for them yet the market is running out of supplies because of the limited movement. The situation is not as good as we may be thinking. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure state the way people are supposed to be seated in this House, unless by special permission from your Chair. It is very clear that ministers sit in the front bench. Therefore, is it in order for my brother, hon. Mbwatekamwa, who has not been appointed as the minister to sit where he is not supposed to sit?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is the responsibility of the Speaker to ensure that all members are seated. I have now temporarily assigned hon. Mbwatekamwa to sit there pending the arrival of the ministers. (Laughter)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On a serious note, the parents, with whom I have been in touch, who are always in daily contact with their children in Wuhan, China have expressed displeasure with Government on the manner in which they are being handled.
When I was submitting here after the minister made a statement, I callously said that the ambassador had run away from China. As I talk, both ambassadors are here; the ambassador and his deputy. 

The person that the minister mentioned who should be in contact with the students seems not to be co-operating with the students. The students are on their own and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs seems to be doing their own things. Like I said here, not all the students have got the money and so, there is no effort being made to ensure that the students who have been held in quarantine in Wuhan are helped.

This morning, the parents sat at Speke Hotel to address a press conference to express their displeasure. We had agreed here that the minister meets the parents to assure them of what they are doing as Government but this meeting has never taken place. It is actually coming to two weeks.

Madam Speaker, we are talking about lives here and, therefore, it is important that the people who are manning this Government consider the lives of these students very seriously. We had a case, where the Indian Government sent a military plane to China to pick their students. Some of the Indian students have been staying together with our students. When they inquired whether they could be given a chance to travel with them, they said they have no problem but asked our students to link up with their embassy and Ministry of Foreign Affairs to see if they could permit the Indian students to take them to India with our students. They actually said they were ready to help.

Madam Speaker, our ministry and the embassy turned this down. They said their position as Government is no evacuation. This has caused a lot of trauma among the students and parents .Yet, on this side, there are no efforts being made to –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we discussed that matter and made resolutions. I think we shall just call upon the Government to update us on what they have done on the issues that we discussed. 

MS KARUNGI: Madam Speaker, I have some information. In China, I have a relative who called me two days ago asking whether Government can help them very fast. He said they finished the whole month indoors. They do not go out and that they are running out of pocket money. Even if we sent them, they still have no way out. They are eating little packed food, which is now over. He was inquiring whether Government will come to China to pick dead bodies because he said they no longer have anything. They are taking tea and they do not know whether they are human beings. Madam Speaker, this matter is very serious.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I still think that Government should come and explain to us what they have done about our resolutions. 

2.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issues and the dangers associated with the Coronavirus cannot be over emphasised. 

As earlier mentioned by the Government, several meetings are taking place between the Government Chief Whip and the Office of the Prime Minister. My understanding is that the Permanent Secretary to the Prime Minister is a victim because her two biological children are part of the people that are being rescued.   
I would like to therefore request that you allow Government to come here once again, to give the final position on this issue.  I will inform the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Item 3(I). The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. Honourable members, we have a lot of work. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY, 8 MARCH 2020

2.25
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Madam Speaker, I stand here to convey the statement to Parliament on the occasion of commemoration of the International Women’s Day, 8 March 2020 on behalf of hon. Mutuuzo.

In 1975, the United Nations declared an international women's year and recognised March 8th as the International Women's Day (IWD) on which, all member states recognise and honour women. 

The International Women's Day has its origins in the struggle by women for social change and their right to participate on equal terms with men in political and economic processes. The International Women's Day is marked to signify the achievements made on gender equality and women's empowerment. Uganda declared the International Women's Day a national day in 1984, and has been celebrating it on an annual basis.

The theme for the 2020 campaign is “Celebrating 25 Years of the 1995 Constitution: Milestones on Promoting Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment in Uganda”. This year marks 25 years, since the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, which has guided the national agenda on women's human rights. 

The 1995 Constitution provides the overall legal framework for the promotion of women's rights. It recognises equality between women and men and outlaws any form of discrimination. The Constitution guarantees women the right to be accorded full and equal dignity with men, and mandates the state to provide facilities and opportunities to ensure the welfare of women including protection of women's rights considering their maternal functions.

Uganda has made considerable progress in incorporating the principles and provisions of global and regional commitments on women's human rights, in national legal and policy frameworks as well as setting up the institutional mechanisms to facilitate implementation across sectors.

The International Women's Day celebration for 2020 will therefore take stock of the achievements registered on gender equality and women's empowerment since the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution. The International Women's Day will also provide an opportunity to reflect on the women's unfinished agenda and strategize for accelerating progress on gender equality and women's empowerment paying special attention to the third national development plan, 2020/2021-2024/2025.

Allow me to highlight some of the milestones under the 1995 Constitution on gender equality and women's empowerment:

Formulation of Policies and Programmes 

The Uganda Gender Policy (2007) and other sector specific gender policies are aligned to the provisions of the Constitution. Programmes that have benefitted women and female youth include the following:

(a) The Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP):

By July 2019, 9,660 women projects had been financed, directly benefitting 120,873 women, including those in rural areas who comprise 80 per cent of beneficiaries.

(b) The Youth Livelihood Programme (YLP)

Since the inception of the YLP in Financial Year 20l3/20l4, the programme has financed 20,159 projects reaching 241,799 beneficiaries, of which –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know you want to give us information but I think the paper is like a policy statement. Simply tell us what is going to happen at the National Women’s Day and so on. I am sure these details are what you are going to say when we are there.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I invite all local governments and KCCA, as well Members of Parliament to attend the International Women’s Day. I encourage Parliament to join the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the women and men, as well as young people of Uganda to come to Mbale District Local Government on 8 March 2020 to celebrate the International Women’s Day.

The Guest of Honour is expected to be the President of the Republic of Uganda, His Excellency Yoweri Kaguta Museveni. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I believe the statement was uploaded. You can look at the achievements and reflect on them as you go to Mbale to celebrate the International Women’s Day.

Honourable members, we have a lot of work. These are policy issues. You are members of the committees. You can discuss issues there. They are available for you to discuss in the committees, please.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WILDLIFE ACT

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is absent.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF STREET LIGHTING IN KAMPALA CITY

THE SPEAKER: What is killing you, hon. Nzoghu?

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising in respect to Rule 215. You recall I raised a matter about the massive destruction of the forests in Bundibugyo. You directed the Committee on Natural Resources to follow up that matter and the period that you gave them has elapsed. There is still massive destruction that is going on; I was in Bundibugyo last weekend.

Therefore, the procedural matter that I am raising is, having directed the committee to conduct work in a given period and they have not even gone to Bundibugyo and the people are crying and saying their forest should be saved, what happens, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you know I have an office in this building. You can write to me and tell me that there is a problem, instead of confronting me on the Floor to make rulings. 

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Kampala Capital City Authority is absent.

PRESENTATION OF PETITION OF THE RESIDENTS AND LAND OWNERS OF MORU LOKWANGAT, NYAKWAI SUB COUNTY, ABIM DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Abala is absent.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO AN ISSUE RAISED ON A FATAL MOTOR ACCIDENT THAT CLAIMED EIGHT LIVES ON SATURDAY, 22 FEBRUARY 2020 AT THE SAAKA BRIDGE WHICH HAD BROKEN DOWN OVER EIGHT MONTHS EARLIER

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is absent.

RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER TO AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE OUTBREAK OF A STRANGE DISEASE THAT HAD AFFLICTED BANANA PLANTATIONS IN OVER 10 DISTRICTS OF WESTERN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is absent.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QN. 87/04/01

MR JAMES ACIDRI (FDC, Maracha County East, Maracha: “The Vurra, Arua, Koboko and Oraba Highway, which is a distance of approximately 92 kilometers, is full of bends and bridges, making it unsafe particularly for pedestrians. For the period January to October 2019, there have been 12 fatal accidents, 35 serious accidents and 13 minor accidents on this road. 

The road does not have any humps and although it has numerous speed limit signposts particularly at trading centres, schools and hospitals, the Uganda Police Force does not have any equipment to enforce speed limits on this road.

i)	When will the Ministry construct humps on this road?
ii)	When will the Uganda Police Force be equipped with speed guns in order to regulate speed along this road?”

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Works and Transport is still absent.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QN. 62/03/01 

MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): “In the budget for Financial Year 2018/2019, Parliament appropriated money for salary enhancement for teachers in post-primary sub-sector. These included teachers in secondary schools, teacher colleges and tertiary institutions.

How far has the ministry gone in harmonising the teachers’ salaries?”

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Public Service is absent.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we concluded debate and had agreed to go to the second reading. Before we do, I will read the ruling on a matter which was raised just as we were concluding the proceedings.

Before I read the ruling, join me in welcoming students of Young Leaders Academy in Nakawa Division. Is that you? Please stand up; there they are. You are welcome. They come from Nakawa, represented by hon. Kabaziguruka and hon. Naggayi. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, at yesterday’s sitting, hon. Agaba, Member for Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge raised a procedural issue concerning the proposal to prescribe the qualifications for local government councillors. This followed proposals made by various members who, during the debate of the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2019, proposed to prescribe, in the Local Government Act, Cap 243 qualifications for local Government councillors.

You may recall that the said Bill, the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was presented here on 25 July 2019. The object of the Bill was as follows:

    1. To provide for the creation of local Government and magistrate units at least two years before the due date for the next general elections. 
    2. To provide for the demarcation of electoral areas. 
    3. To prescribe the manner of conducting campaigns. 
    4. To bar persons not ordinarily resident in a local Government area from contesting for councillor for that area. 
    5. To provide for the procedure for commencement of polls at each polling station, and 
    6. To align the Local Governments Act with the provisions of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2018.

During that debate, numerous members – as I have said - proposed this matter on the qualifications. I wanted to just address our rules relating to amendment of Bills.

The Rules of Procedure of Parliament guide that the amendment of Bills is before committees of Parliament and during committee stage of the whole House; so they are in two types: amendments by sectoral or relevant committee.

Under rule l28 of our Rules of Procedure, a committee to which a Bill – Let me read the whole rule”
”
    1) Whenever a Bill is read for the first time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate committee appointed under the provisions of these rules.

    2) The committee shall examine the Bill in detail and make all such inquiries in relation to it as the committee considers expedient or necessary and report to the House within forty five days from the date the Bill is referred to the committee.

(3) 	Except in cases of very minor amendments, and subject to rule l3l, all proposed amendments to a Bill referred to a committee shall be presented to the committee by the person proposing the amendment and the committee shall scrutinise it together with the Bill.

(4) 	The committee may propose and accept proposed amendments in the Bill as it considers fit, if the amendments (including new clauses and new schedules) are relevant to the subject matter of the Bill.”

Therefore, that rule obligates the committee to receive and scrutinise proposals for amendment of the Bill, referred to it by the person proposing those amendments. The committee is empowered to propose amendments to the Bill referred to it and also to accept amendments.

In determining what the subject matter of the Bill is, we look at rule 115, which provides as follows:

“Subject matter of Bills 

(l) 	Matters with no proper relation to each other shall not be provided for in the same Bill. 
(2) 	No Bill shall contain anything foreign to what its long title imports.”

Rule 1l5 of the Rules of Procedure, therefore, specifies the subject matter of the Bill to be its long title and prohibits the inclusion of any matter in a Bill that is beyond what the long title imports.

Amendments by the Committee of the Whole House

Proposed amendments brought during the Bill’s Committee Stage in the House are guided by Rule l33 (4) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The rule is reproduced as follows:

“(4) The Committee of the whole House shall consider proposed amendments by the committee to which the Bill was referred and may consider proposed amendments, on notice, where the amendments were presented but rejected by the relevant committee or where, for reasonable cause, the amendments were not presented before the relevant committee.”

So, the rule commands that the amendments to a Bill can be proposed during committee stage only in the following two circumstances:

    1. Where the amendments were proposed by the committee itself.

    2. Where amendments have been proposed by a member who has given notice, where the amendments were presented to the committee but were rejected or where, for some reasonable cause, the amendments were not presented to the relevant committee.

The effect of an amendment moved in contravention of Rule 133 was discussed by the High Court in Male Mabirizi Kiwanuka and others v. the Attorney-General Consolidated petition No. 234 of 2018, a decision that was affirmed by the Supreme Court in the Constitutional appeal No. 02 of 2018, Male Mabirizi and others v. the Attorney-General, where court, by a majority decision, held that such amendments are not only unlawful but unconstitutional.

Whether the proposal to prescribe qualification for councillors is irrelevant to the subject matter of this Bill 

The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, the Local Government Act, Cap 243 did not prescribe a qualification for councillors and chairpersons of a municipality, division or a sub-county. However, I know that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2019 proposes to amend Section 11(1) and 11 (6) in clauses 6 and 7 respectively to make provisions on qualification of councillors.

The proposal to impose educational qualifications on councillors is, therefore, in line with the subject matter of the Bill as numerated in the long title of the Bill and will be an additional requirement to the qualification of a councillor as proposed in clauses 6 and 7 of the Bill.

Whether the proposal to introduce academic qualifications for local governments can be moved during Committee Stage of the Local Government (Amendment) Bill 

A member proposing an amendment during the Bill’s Committee Stage must –

    1) give notice to the Speaker of his or her intention to propose an amendment to the Bill;
    2) specifically prove that the amendments he or she is proposing were presented to the committee that examined the Bill under Rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure and they were rejected by the committee;  or
    3) give justifiable reasons for not presenting the proposal to the committee at the relevant time.

The member proposing amendment must provide evidence of (1), (2) and (3). 

Therefore, honourable members, that is the position. Yes, we can receive amendments provided their relevance but members will have to satisfy the conditions I have stated above. Thank you very much. 

Hon. Nzoghu, can you stand up as you address the House? (Laughter)

2.42
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you for your wonderful guidance to this House. Secondly, yesterday, we did give notice to your Office in this House and I do pray this serves the purpose so that we can be able to proceed. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we shall deal with each case as it comes. I will not give a blanket ruling on that. We shall deal with it clause by clause. 

So, honourable members, let us go to Committee Stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILLS, 2019

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yesterday, we adjourned to 2.00p.m. and all the ministers were here. Does anyone know what has happened to them? 

2.44
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, first of all, I must admit that you caught most of us off guard. At 2.00 p.m., we had not yet adjusted our watches well. (Laughter) I am sure you were so much on the dot today that I believe the ministers were still using the clock of the other day. 

So, if one of the ministers is here – I do not know whether you could be able to give me a few minutes to step out to call to find out. I am sure, however, they are committed to this matter and we would be ready to proceed. I took it for granted that they would be here. 

However, we were supposed to be at the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Unfortunately, the procedures require the minister to move – The Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Youth and Children Affairs), can you move the House to resume for now?

2.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Madam Chairperson, I do move that the House do resume.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Mukitale had something. Where is he? Hon. Abala? 

2.47
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present the petition of the residents and land owners of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub-county in Abim District. 

Maybe before I read this petition, allow me lay on Table the original copy of the petition and the photocopies of the sale agreements for the land. I beg to lay. 

This petition is moved under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda. 

The humble petition of the residents and land owners of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County, Abim District is presented on their behalf by me, hon. Abala David, Member of Parliament for Ngora County, Ngora District: showeth and states that:

    1. The subject matter of the petition regards the arbitrary and unlawful eviction of 8,532 residents of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County, Abim District by Uganda Wildlife Authority;
    2. Your petitioners aver that;
    a. Since time immemorial, they have been residing, working –

THE SPEAKER: Do not go into the details. Go to the prayers. 

MR ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The prayers from the petitioners are that: 
“1. 	Parliament takes interest in arbitrary and unlawful eviction of the residents of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County, Abim District, covering seven villages.
2. 	The relevant committee of Parliament investigates-
    a) the eviction of the residents of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County in Abim District by Uganda Wildlife Authority;
    b) the ownership of the contentious land in Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County Abim District; and
    c) the contact of the officers of Uganda Wildlife Authority and other Government officials who were involved in this arbitrary and illegal eviction.
    3. Appropriate recommendations to the House including the settlement and compensation for the damage caused be made.
    4. Government takes immediate steps to provide all the necessities of life including food shelter, medical care, water, schools and hospitals to the former residents of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County in Abim District who are now living in IDPs at Koblin Primary School.
    5. The Government immediately carries out a border demarcation exercise to determine the boundaries of Matheniko Wildlife Game Reserve so that residents of Moru Lokwangat, Nyakwai Sub County in Abim District are able to return to their land. And
    6. The Government immediately takes steps to resettle the evicted persons back to their land pending the final determination of the dispute.

And your humble petitioners as in the duty bound will ever pray. Hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Abala. The petition is sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure for perusal and report back.

However, honourable members, the citizens have come here with many petitions. There has been a big delay in reporting back on those petitions and consequently starting next Thursday, we shall be putting one petition on the Order Paper to enable committees report. Therefore, if you have not yet sat, please sit this weekend and ensure you have got the report on the petitions.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural matter; a concerned citizen based in my constituency, who has been trading in South Sudan, is so concerned that while this House constituted a select committee that went to South Sudan to establish facts on traders who are demanding for compensation after the loss that they witnessed during the turmoil there - this House is well aware that this committee was set up around March 2019. Around May to June, a report was debated and a resolution was passed by this House. It was agreed that Shs 76 billion be first paid out to these traders in the financial year 2019/2020 out of the estimated Shs 964 billion; around 160 companies were affected.

However, Madam Speaker, to date, the traders have made me aware that they have not been paid. June is approaching and there seems to be a problem with the verification list. There was a list, which was prepared by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development internally. Another by URA and another done by Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; ISO also prepared one. Parliament itself through the committee did the verification and made a report.

However, there seems to be confusion now whereupon we are moving backwards again. I thought this House had already resolved on what to be done with these traders. But there whispers to the effect that there is work going on in Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development beyond what Parliament has already done.

Is it not procedurally proper that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes to this House and explains to the country, the status of payment to the affected persons who have been trading in South Sudan? That is the procedural concern.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, first of all, I do not think that it should surface as procedural matter. It is a matter that should have been on the Order Paper but it was not. Therefore, it is better you ask a question formally so that the minister answers. Just ask a question and ensure that he answers.

Honourable members, let us go back to our other work. However, I would like to announce that I have got four sets of notices for amendments. I have got a notice from hon. Alex Ruhunda, who wishes to amend the Presidential Elections Act; I have a notice from hon. Lyandro Komakech, who wishes to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act; I have a notice from hon. Elijah Okupa, who wishes to amend the Local Government (Amendment) Bill; and I have a notice from hon. Pamela Kamugo Nasiyo, the Chairperson of UWOPA, who also wishes to amend the Local Government (Amendment) Bill. I have four notices.

MR WAIRA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also submitted mine and it is already uploaded on the iPad; I submitted it to your office and the office of the Clerk.

THE SPEAKER: What was yours concerning about?

MR WAIRA: On amending the Electoral Commission Act.

THE SPEAKER: No, we have not - let us first deal with these ones. Let us do presidential, parliamentary and local government first.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have also submitted mine. It is to amend all the laws. I even brought a copy to your Office and it has been uploaded too.

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk will confirm if it has been uploaded. Let us go back to committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, in clause 2, we seek to amend section 4 of the principal Act. We are proposing to substitute clause 2 as follows:
“2 Amendment of section 4 of the principal Act - the principal Act is amended in section 4 by:

a) Substituting for subsection (1) the following: 

1) Subject to clause (7) of Article 15 of the Constitution, a person is qualified for an election as President if that person -
    a) is a citizen of Uganda by birth;
    b) is a registered voter; and
    c) has completed a minimum formal education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent.

(b) Deleting subsection (3).
(c) Substituting for Sub-section (4), the following:

(4) A person is not qualified for election as President if that
Person -
    i) is of unsound mind;
    ii) is holding or acting in an office the functions of which involve a responsibility for or in connection with the conduct of an election;
    iii) is a traditional or cultural leader as defined in Article 246(6) of the Constitution;
    iv) has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged;
    v) is under a sentence of death or a sentence of imprisonment exceeding nine months imposed by any competent court without the option of a fine;
    vi) has, within seven years immediately preceding the election, been convicted by a competent court of an offence involving dishonesty or moral turpitude; or
    vii)  has, within seven years immediately preceding the election, been convicted by a competent court of an offence under any law relating to elections conducted by the Electoral Commission.”

The justification is to align the provision with the current position of the law as espoused in Article 102 of the Constitution.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, part (b) of the principal law reads: “The person shall not be less than 35 years and not more than 75 years of age.” I think we put in the age that “For somebody to be a registered voter, they must be 18 years.” 

The committee has not put an age. The moment you do not indicate the age, one day the law will be made and someone younger can become a voter.

I would like to propose that for sub-section (d), instead of maintaining “35 years”, we say, “The person shall not be less than 18 years” because that is the voting age.

The justification is that one day a person of 15 years might become a voter yet he is not 18 years when the law states that a mature person must be 18 years. We do not want to come back here to amend the law.

Secondly, what the chairperson is reading is already in the old law. I would like to know what the chairperson wants to cure. He has copied word by word of sub-section (4). There, it was named in alphabet (a) and (b). 

When it came to sub-section (5) – Sub-section (4); Qualification of a candidate –

The Chairperson: We are still at Clause 2. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Clause 2 is amending sub-section (4) of the Principal Act. That is where I am. The principal Act talks of qualification of a candidate.

The Chairperson: Is your problem that there is no section (1)(b)?

Mr nandala-mafabi: Section (1)(b) should be, “Not be less than 18 years of age.” It is a constitutional matter to say “18 years of age.” If you have copied “Not a citizen of Uganda”, “Citizen by birth”, then we should also not leave “18 years of age.”

The second issue I was talking about is sub-clause (4) of the Principal Act, which the committee has copied word by word. However, they are deleting sub-sections (5), (6), (7) up to (24). 

I would like to find out from the committee why they are deleting such important sub-clauses. They are even quoting the laws.

I would like to make a proposal that we retain the sub-sections (5), (6), (7) (8) up to (24) unless there is a reason they want them deleted. 

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, what should be clear is that Article 102 of the Constitution was amended. If you look at what was in the Bill, it was seeking to amend Section 4 of the Principal Act. That is Clause 2.

Section 4 of the Principal Act is amended by repealing sub-section (1) (b), which you were talking about. We do not have a problem with that if you looked at our report to criticise and say it is not complete. The proposal you are stating is what the Bill is giving that there should not be restriction on the age.

We had to make the qualification you are talking about to align with the Constitution as was amended. It is more in detail and that what is being covered under Section 4 of the Principal Act. That is the only proposal we are making. 

I did not get to understand, other than you saying the age of 18. That is covered under Clause 2, which we are not attacking at all. We are agreeing with Government in the Bill that Section 4 of the Principal Act should be amended by repealing sub-section (1)(b). I do not know whether we all have that.

Sub-section (1)(b) is not relevant now in view of what we all did in this House. (Laughter)

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, what the Government is repealing is the age of 35 to 75. I am saying that they should have said, it should be a person who is aged “18 and above”.

The justification is that if you say, “a registered voter,” suppose one day we say even 15 year persons vote, it means that a 15 year child will also contest for presidency. Yet for someone to be called “mature” under the laws, they must be 18 years.

Therefore, we should say, “The person should be 18 years of age or more and a registered voter.”

the Deputy attorney-general (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Chairperson, I have listened to my colleague’s submission. My concern is that it is not possible for a 15-year old person to contest for presidency because he is not a registered voter. We register to vote at 18. What is your assertion? Help me to understand it. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, one time it was between 35 and 75. We came here and amended it. Next time we can come here and say, “Any voter” and that person can also be 15 years. It will bring us a problem. 

What we are saying is that, as much as you are a registered voter, even when they brought here a citizen, it is in the Constitution but we have brought it here for emphasis –(Interruption) 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, what occupied us during the amendment was removing the age restriction on the assumption that every voter – when you are a voter, you should not have a limit for any office. 

Therefore, to speculate that there will be time again when we shall have registered voters of the age of 15, then, that would actually have an effect. It would call for a consequential amendment. 

Here, every voter can contest for presidency or any office in Uganda. The details you are giving would only be if it was not clear. Now, this deletes the whole paragraph on the age aspect but you have to be a citizen of Uganda. You must be a registered voter. That is the operating law now both in the Constitution and subsequent legislation.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I think you would have to concede on this so that we proceed. Your concerns are well intentioned but it is taken care of. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the current provisions of the Constitution relating to the qualifications of the President are very clear. The wordings, as passed by this House, are that we amended it and said, “Not less than 18 years of age.” That is how it is in the Constitution. That is what we stated there. 

When you go to the Presidential Elections Act, they have lifted the provisions of the Constitution and brought it here. Therefore, we cannot use two standards. In the Constitution we are saying, “Not less than 18 years of age.” That is the minimum. Here, we have changed it to, “a registered voter”.

Legally, a registered voter is not the same as a person of 18 years of age. That is what it means. They are two different things. Being not less than 18 years of age is not the same as being a registered voter. Let us put what is in the Constitution and bring it here.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, like my honourable colleague had put it, we are here to activate the instructions of the Constitution, which are very clear, according to the way this House decided to amend it. There is no way we can move backwards. We need to put what we put there here now. 

The other one was the principle and we needed the details. It has to be very clear that you should only be above 18 years for you to be eligible to contest for the office of President. This is something that is already in the Constitution. How do we activate it if we do not put it in the law? It has to be “18 years and above”.
  
If we decide to say that as long as somebody is registered, they qualify. There are so many people of varying ages that are registered. The definition will be difficult to attain. We need to be very explicit and clear in the law. That is all we are saying.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to send for the latest version of the Constitution. For now, let us stand over it and go to the other clauses. 

Clause 3

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 3 is insertion of Section 9A in the principal Act.
Clause 3 of the Bill is amended by substituting for the proposed Section 9A the following-

"9A. Eligibility to stand as independent candidate
(1) 	A person is eligible to stand for election as an independent candidate if that person is not a member of a registered political party or organization-
(a) 	having ceased to be a member of a political party or organisation before nomination day;
(b) 	having had his or her membership of a political party or organisation terminated before the nomination day; or
(c) 	having never been registered as a member of a political party or organisation.”

Justification

To remove matters that infringe on the Constitution, specifically, Article 1, 7, Articles 1, 21, 29(1)(e), 72(4) and Article 102 of the Constitution and Section 3(2) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. 

Members, you know this is where the committee differs with the Bill. The Bill proposes 12 months and the committee proposes no months. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we wish to make some adjustments to the amendments as follows: 
For clause 9A, substitute the following: 

“9A Eligibility to stand as an independent candidate

    1) A person is eligible to stand for election as an independent candidate if that person is not a member of a registered political party or organization -
    a) having had his or her membership of the political party or organisation terminated before the nomination day; or
    b)  having never been registered as a member of a political party or organisation.
    c)  having not participated in the primaries of  - “

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, can I finish? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Honourable members, just listen first. Yes, minister? 

MR KAFUUZI: “c) Having not participated in the primaries of a political party or organisation prior to general elections.” 

Justification: To prescribe eligibility requirements for a person wishing to stand for election as an independent candidate. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there are two proposals. Can we just have a – 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, yesterday, we exhaustively debated this matter and I think the learned Deputy Attorney-General would have revised his notes to go by the mood of the House. 

Madam Chairperson, I stand very strongly on this matter that we move by the committee’s proposal and position. 

MS BINTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The reason we introduced this clause, when we were transiting from the movement political system to multiparty political system, was because we envisaged that, at times, some people at one time might be deprived of the fairness of elections and their results. This has been translated into the big numbers of the independents who are here, after participating in primaries. How can somebody stay without being declared for a whole month under the primary elections? Somebody is supposed to be declared immediately the results are out but somebody takes a whole month without being declared. This traumatises the members and that is why most members after primaries, they decide to stand as independents and people decide. 

I, therefore, strongly urge members not to support the honourable minister’s proposal and let us support the chairperson’s proposal. Let members be free according to our Constitution.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am standing here to oppose both the provisions of the Bill and even the position of the committee as presented by the chairperson. If you look critically, first of all, both proposals by the chairperson and the minister; they are unconstitutional and they are against the Constitution because the Constitution guarantees the right for you to contest as an independent without any string attached. Now, what the chairperson is proposing, which is dangerous, let me read to you “having ceased to be a member of a political party or organisation before nomination”, what if your party says “he is still ours”? They can say because “having ceased” you have not defined who will cease the membership of a political party, it is subjective and dangerous.

Secondly, he is saying “having had his membership of a political party or organisation terminated” if the party says “we have not yet terminated”; both provisions by the chairperson and the minister are unconstitutional and the House should reject them wholesomely so that we don’t tie. 

Madam Speaker, I now move that clause 3 as proposed by the Bill and committee be rejected and deleted. I beg to move. The effect would mean that we remain with the status quo as it is in the law.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Thank you, colleagues, for expressing your views. I would like to refer you to Article 72(4) of the Constitution and this was one of the guiding principles and Article 29 the right to associate. You can associate today and in the next few minutes, you can – We have evidence in this House. Now, Article 72(4), “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or a political party”. Our understanding is that when you choose to contest as an independent, you cannot say at the same time that you belong to a political party. That is why it is safer to do it the way we have done. 

Madam Chairperson, I would really love to benefit from hon. Jonathan Odur to share those constitutional provisions that our proposed amendment would be offending in the Constitution so that we debate it here and now.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Jonathan Odur, can you substantiate. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I am also relying on Article 72(4), which he has ably read: “Any person is free to stand for an election as a candidate, independent of a political organisation or a political party.” You mark the word “free”. A person is “free” you don’t have to attach any string to it and that is what the Constitution says.
 
So, the command of the Constitution is clear; to be “free” means you cannot attach anything else to me and that is the Constitution as it is. (Applause) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree with hon. Jonathan Odur because according to the information provided by the chair, the committee has no locus to interpret this Constitution. It is only the mandate of the Constitutional Court to interpret this Constitution. So, for the committee to interpret this particular –(Interjection)– yes, in a manner that they have interpreted it, is not in law –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: One of my closest friends in this House is hon. William Nzoghu and it is on record. We are very close but for him to say that the committee interpreted, Madam Chairperson, that committee cannot constitute itself into a Constitutional Court neither is any of us here, we never attempted to interpret, translate or otherwise. What we did was to try to align, if you see our justification, this with and removing what would be unconstitutional. If you look at the report, we are actually in support of an independent candidate. 

Is the honourable member, who is my friend until a few minutes ago, in order to insinuate and expressly say that the committee clothed itself with a Constitutional Court mandate to interpret a Constitution when we did not interpret anywhere? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nzoghu, can you substantiate how they converted themselves into a court, if it happened, if not you withdraw. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to confirm that actually hon. Oboth is one of my closest friends in this House.

The regional tire brings us together and you know very well. I was simply quoting from the statement, which the chairperson had given and he actually put it that in their understanding of this particular clause - that is why they were giving the proposal which hon. Jonathan Odur said was really unconstitutional. I was simply emphasising that let the status quo remain. 

Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This matter was ably discussed yesterday. You will recall we said this is the party you participated in in primaries and they cheated you in a broad daylight. When you decide to come as an independent, this poison they have referred to as (b), stating that “…having had his or her membership of a political party or organisation terminated before the nomination day...” one will go to them to be discharged and the same tormenters will refuse to discharge them; such contenders will not stand as independents. I support the idea of the status quo.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, would you then want to import Article 72(4) into the Bill? Is it there?

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Chair. The issue that the chairperson is proposing to say, “…one must have ceased to be….” The moment one fails to go through the election, it means they are now free because the party will have selected its own and therefore – (Interjections) - what I am saying is that since the party will have selected its official candidate, therefore you are not part of that party. They do not even sponsor you; you sponsor yourself. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, the clause we are debating has wider implications on the political systems this country is going to have.

I would like to draw your attention to Article 69 of the Constitution, which says: “(1) The people of Uganda shall have the right to choose and adopt a political system of their choice through free and fair elections or referenda.”

And we did a referendum and the people of Uganda choose to have a multiparty political system as a system of governance in this country. So each clause we pass in this Bill should be to strengthen the multiparty political system –(Interjections)– I know what I am talking about. 

The system of political governance in this country is a multiparty political system. That is what the people chose. Consequently, if you take it together with Article 83 of the Constitution, you will realise the importance of this provision. 

In Article 83, which cured – before this Constitution, there was a situation here in this Parliament of people crossing Floors. A member would be elected to Parliament in one party but along the way, they would cross on the Floor of this House by joining another party. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I had the privilege to stay in hon. Kamuntu’s constituency because my parents were working in Kitagata Hospital at some point in time. 

I recall very well, even when they were campaigning - hon. Kamuntu was actually UPC though now he is NRM. Anyhow, he has not given us any proof that UPC discharged him. (Laughter) He might still be holding his membership in UPC. (Laughter) 

Therefore, is the honourable minister in order – a person who has not proved to this House that he was discharged from the UPC – to support an amendment that the members are saying cannot genuinely work? Is he still UPC, is he NRM? What is he? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you tell us what party you are in and how you left UPC? (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chair, the only constant in life is change. I am a member of NRM - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Allow him to tell us how he left the UPC party. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Just allow me to make my point because it is very important. It has a wider implication about the stability, security and sustainability of the efficient delivery of services of this House by making a law that – (Interjections) - I am making a point. 

If you look at Article 83 of the Constitution, you realise it cured the situation, which we witnessed, of people crossing the Floor.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, a question has been put to the honourable minister, who was a member of the Uganda People’s Congress, to answer. Is it procedurally right for him to continue without telling us how and when he left UPC? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, how did you leave the other side? (Laughter)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, what I am saying is very important. I am drawing the attention of members – for instance, hon. Mawanda’s constituency and mine neighbour each other. His constituency is yellow all over yet hon. Mawanda is an independent. So, he cannot be independent of NRM!

MR MAWANDA: Is Prof. Kamuntu in order - in the first place, he has never told us when and why he left us in UPC. (Laughter) He is the very person who used to come to us to campaign for UPC. He left and he has never told us why. Therefore, is he in order to say that the whole of my constituency is yellow when he has not shown to us his discharge certificate from UPC?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kamuntu, we are trying to understand how you can discharge yourself from a party or how it can discharge you. That is what I wanted you to answer. How were you discharged from UPC? This will help us to resolve this matter.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, I am sure Members have very fresh memories. In 1986, the system of governance was the Movement system. It was inclusive and nonpartisan. As a result, I was included in the movement system of governance –(Interjections)– Why are you denying it? It is me saying so. 

Madam Chairperson, people are asking whether I was a member of UPC. What were you before NRM? Anyone who was alive before 1986, what were you? Hon. Mawanda, what were you and what are you now? (Laughter) They have now changed. Hon. Kassiano Wadri, what were you and what are you now. (Laughter) You were in the Democratic Party. 

Madam Chairperson, at least one thing is very clear; people have changed and I have as well changed. I would like to pose a question; if the political system we have in the country is multiparty, suppose - for purposes of argument - Independent members of the House became the majority, what political systems would you have? [MR MAWANDA: “It is happening in Malawi.”]

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, we now understand why the minister is insisting on amending the clause to remove Independents. He has asked a question that if majority of Members in this House were Independents, what type of political system would we want?

This means that he is really bent on removing Independents. We should, therefore, not tolerate and accept this amendment because we know why it is being targeted. Yesterday, you gave an example of Malawi and it is operational. If it happens that way, we can take that direction. I would like to, therefore, propose that we import Article 72(4), like you said, in the Bill so that we can move. I beg that we maintain the status quo –(Interjections)– Otherwise, we know the motive from the Government side.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, this clause is very controversial. (Interjections) I think we need time to reflect on this provision. I know that fundamentally, if you want a system of governance that is stable, you must make a law that strengthens the political system we choose to take.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, shouldn’t political parties strengthen themselves? They are the reason this has happened.

MS ASAMO: Madam Chairperson, I am part of the committee and consultations. This Article discriminates and so, I would like to propose that we go with the status quo. What are you curing now – (Interjections) – If they could explain that, then we can come. Otherwise, we want to protect the rights of the people. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, our difficulty is that we are required, under Article 72(5), to make a law to regulate how Independents seeking political office would operate. We have that obligation.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I have also looked at the same Article. That clause talks about one’s participation. After becoming an Independent candidate, where you are free, how do you participate to prevent you from using the yellow colour of the NRM or the red colour of UPC? It is to regulate you as the Independent candidate so that you are purely independent. 

It is not about one becoming an Independent candidate. It is to regulate how you participate as an Independent candidate. (Interruption)

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank the honourable colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give him is that Article 72(2) instructs political parties to operate democratically.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which Article?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Article 72(2) of the Constitution asks political parties to operate democratically.

We are in a situation where political parties have chosen to operate as they wish and this is happening across the board. Now they want to push us to create a law to support what they are doing. I would like to propose that we continue and let people be free. Once the political parties continue to operate the way they are operating, people will have freedom to participate in their country. (Applause) 

This will force the political parties to start respecting Members. The political parties will start to know that it is not about the individual; it is about the country. They will start valuing members and everyone will make sure that they operate in a manner that will keep their members. Thank you very much for the information.

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I want to believe that we are legislating upon this amendment in respect to the elections when, going by the timetable of the Electoral Commission, nominations will be in October and the same law is talking about 12 months. If we go for the next election with this law - assuming that we pass it - which one shall we apply in the forthcoming elections? 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to maintain the status quo and delete this provision –(Applause)- because it is farfetched and has been overtaken by events?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think that these proposals infringe on the rights of the people in the Constitution. I think we should let the status quo remain. (Applause)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I have observed and I have done some consultations –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, please! Honourable chairperson, please go to the Floor and tell us because you had proposals.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, from day one and even when we were putting the Government on notice that we do not agree with them on this, it was unanimous in the committee. The difficulty we probably got into with you is trying to prescribe, complying with Article 72(5), whether you have participated in primaries, it would cover that. However, Members do not want to hear anything about that.

I should put it on record that we went on countrywide consultations about this proposal and we never found where they were supporting it. You all or some of you misunderstood the recommendation of the committee. We actually mean well. None of you has been more independent in this House than hon. Oboth Oboth. (Laughter) 

Having participated in the primaries - that did not influence the report - what influenced the report was the outcome of what we had in the committee. Most people would have loved – (Interjections) – Madam Chairperson, can we have some –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order! Honourable members, please calm down.

MR OBOTH: People want me to say what they want to hear and not necessarily what is correct. Madam Chairperson –(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, the Member who is on the Floor is the chairperson of the committee. He signed the report that is before the committee and his statement variously seems to suggest that he supports it. He has actually conceded by the positive affirmation. 

Is he in order to continue wasting the time of this House by meandering and meandering? We do not know where he is going to lead us. Is he in order, Madam Chairperson? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I will rule later.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and thank you, honourable chairperson. As you can see, the whole House - just like the field was - is in unison that people must make their choices and that at no single time should people be barred from making choices of their political will.

I am very sure that my chairperson is one of those people who have been affected by the past, like he said. I am convinced that my chairperson has felt what Members feel. From the guidance of Madam Chairperson, I implore him - being part of his committee and very loyal to him - that we concede, move in unison and we delete that matter and maintain the status quo.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, under Article 69 of the Constitution, we have a multiparty system of governance. If I understand it clearly, without multiparty, then we would not have independents. Being independent is also part of being in a multiparty dispensation –(Interjection)– yes, because you either belong to a political party or you are independent.

Article 72(5) enjoins this Parliament with an obligation to make a law as to how independents would operate and should participate. I humbly want to request and to submit that the clause we are trying to formulate here – in my understanding – would have covered the requirement under Article 72(5).

In the event that you find it insufficient, I would request that you give us time to redraft this clause – (Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I would like to read for the Deputy Attorney-General Article 72(5) and I would like Members to listen.

It says, “Parliament shall, by law, regulate the manner of participation in and financing of elections by individuals seeking political office as independent candidates”.

Once the word “candidate” appears, it means you have been nominated. If the Constitution had said, “aspirant”, that could have been before but here it is; “candidate”. It means you have already been nominated and you are participating in the elections. 

We are discussing issues of admission. So, I would like the Attorney-General to concede that these are already candidates nominated as independent candidates. Therefore, you only regulate how the independent candidates campaign but not how they can be admitted or nominated. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have listened to arguments on both sides but it is clear that this proposal is not popular. I, therefore, propose that clause 3 be deleted. I put the question that clause 3 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, deleted.

Clause 4

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is amending section 10 of the principle Act. Section 10 talks of the procedure of nomination. 

Section 9, so that I can put the amendment, is talking about sponsorship of candidates by political organisation or political party. It means any candidate who stands under a political party is sponsored by that organisation or a political party. 

Madam Chairperson, if you look, first of all, at what the minister is trying to address in (d), he says that for somebody to stand, he or she must have a certified copy of the Advanced Level certificate of education of or its equivalent. In Uganda, it is the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) that gives you this certificate of education. So, why do you want it to be certified yet it is given by UNEB? 

Somewhere, it says those who do not have their qualification from Uganda will go for equating from the National Council for Higher Education. 

Secondly, clause 6 says that nomination papers shall be accompanied by a declaration in form of - but sub clause (b) states a non-refundable fee of 400 currency points. I think it has been changed.

How can a candidate who is being sponsored by a political organisation have to pay money as if he or she is an individual? The argument I am raising here is that it should be the political party, which is sponsoring a candidate, to pay and the one to attach the certificate of clearance. 

The justification is that all candidates who will be sponsored by a political party will be the property of the political party because they are the ones who have sponsored them. If you are an independent person, then that is a different story. However, the moment you are in a political party, they should be the ones to pay. My argument is that this non-refundable fee should be removed if a candidate is sponsored by a political party or organisation. 

The only way it would be is that there can be a prescription under the election law of how a political party can pay money, whether it is refundable or non-refundable, for its members. The justification is to promote multipartism. 

The reason this law has a nomination fee is because we are still hanging over the one party system. This was the real law, which was applicable in 1996. The only thing we did in 2005 was to change the Act, the year and the purpose of the law.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that clause 6 (b) be deleted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 4. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is amending section 10. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is amending section 10(6) (c).

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. Madam Chairperson, we are talking of section 10(6)(b). The moment you are in a multi-party system, you are the responsibility of your party. This will apply even in local governments and Parliamentary elections. The justification is that in a multi-party system, if you have nominated a candidate, the candidate is your responsibility as a political party.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I also have an issue with this because in clause 4, they are proposing to introduce sub clause (d) on certified copies of the certificate of education of Advanced Level or its equivalent. 

Madam Chairperson, I do not know what this proposal will solve because under Section 4(7) of the principle Act, any person who wants to contest for the Presidential office is required, two months before nomination, to go to the Electoral Commission to establish whether they have the qualifications. It is already in the principle Act here. 

If you want to contest as President, you have to go to the Electoral Commission two months prior to the nomination to establish whether you have the qualification. To again, under the procedure of nomination, introduce something else does not serve the purpose because it is already taken care of in the principle Act. It is in section 4(7) of the Presidential Elections Act –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I think it is not the one. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: It reads that for the purpose of sub-section (3)(c), any of the following person wishing to stand as President shall establish his or her qualification with the Electoral Commission as a person holding –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that the Presidential Election Act of 2005?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why is it different from mine?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Sub-section (4) (7) reads, “For the purpose of sub-section (3)(c), any of the following persons wishing to stand for election as President shall establish his or her qualification with the Electoral Commission as a person holding a minimum qualification of Advanced Level or its equivalent at least two months before nomination day, in the case of normal Presidential election or where a Presidential election is held otherwise than as a result of expiry of the term of the President, at least two weeks before nomination day.” 

Therefore, it means that whoever wants to contest for President should go to the Electoral Commission two months or two weeks before nomination for the purpose of establishing whether you have the papers and so, clause 4 is redundant; it should be deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 6 is about the item that will go with the nomination papers. That is what it is.

MR OBOTH: We got him but the committee did not consider that much although what he is raising is very valid. Clause 4 seeks to amend section 10 of the principle Act and in subsection 6, by inserting, after paragraph (c), the following: “a certified copy of the certificate of education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent.”

As a committee, we agree with him that that is quite a redundant provision because already, it is provided for. Since it is a Government Bill, the minister and his deputy might just refuse. Otherwise, I concede on behalf of the committee.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I have nothing useful to add to that. I concede.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, since they have conceded, now I would like to deal - (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: For the record, I only conceded on behalf of the committee on the proposed amendment by hon. Jonathan Odur. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi said that they have conceded - I hope he is not referring to his proposals, which I did not follow keenly. I did not follow what he said.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are aware that he never followed me because he was still thinking about the independents; it disturbed him; that I know. What I raised is that section 9 of the principle Act talks about sponsorship of candidates by political organisation or political party. 

It says that under the multiparty political system, nomination of candidates may be made by a registered political organisation or a political party sponsoring a candidate; or by a candidate standing for election as an independent candidate, without being sponsored by a political organisation or a political party.

Therefore, the moment a candidate is not independent, it means that candidate is being sponsored by a political party or organisation. The responsibility is with the party -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is what you are saying under clause 4?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is under clause 4 - what I was trying to do on clause 4 - as it was here before we delete it - it is amending section 10 of the principle Act. And if you read section 10(6), you realise that it says that the nomination papers shall be accompanied by - and then it talks of a declaration form under the fourth schedule then a non-refundable fee of 400 currency points, payable to the Uganda Administration by cash or bank draft.

Now, the argument I am putting across is that a candidate who is being sponsored by a party cannot pay money because he is being sponsored by a party; whether at LC I or LC V or whatever other level.

Therefore, the nomination forms should be accompanied by a clearance from the party to prove that that is their party candidate. If there is any demand to be made from candidates, it should be made to the party. That is why I am saying that in making the rules for the Electoral Commission - maybe amendments will be prescribing how much a party can deposit so that it can participate in an election.

The justification is that an election should not be an expensive venture. In countries like South Africa, they pay R605,000 which is about Shs 150 million for the entire membership of any party participating in the general elections. And when they win, even if it is just one councillor, the money is refunded.

In Tanzania here, it is Shs 100 million and when the party gets even one candidate pass, the money is refunded. 

During the UPC Government in the elections of 1980 in which Prof. Kamuntu participated - (Laughter) – they levied a nomination fee, which was refundable. (Interjection)- I know because my father participated in that election; he was even your close friend. Unfortunately, when he died, you never came to bury him - (Laughter) - because you had crossed over.

Anyhow, what I am trying to put across is the fact that one of the things that can make money for parties to run - let us charge parties and not individual candidates.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Even on presidential candidates.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, yes, even for presidential candidates. What will happen is that it will be block figure, which will include a presidential candidate because a presidential candidate is also property of the sponsoring party. Do not look at NRM, which has a lot of money. Even JEEMA can bring their candidate and they will have that little money to deposit, if you want.

MR OBOTH: That is completely a very progressive idea and proposal. However, apparently, it is not one of those that we considered. First of all, it would be contrary to the spirit - we have just adopted the idea of having equal treatment for candidates. If you have this powerful - you will just disadvantage independents because political parties –(Interjections)– this is my view like you had yours - if political parties agree now to put a lot of money, or some amount of money that for every nomination, whether parliamentary or not it has to go to all the ranks, that would be to disadvantage the independents who are footing the bills themselves for nominations. 

It would be contrary to the spirit. That is where what happens in South Africa - you will find not more than 30 people as independents, where parties control the process. This is just to stifle the process. Honourable members who ganged up against the independents issue should turn their anger and oppose this one too. (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I do not know whether I am going to gang up against anybody the way hon. Oboth has put it but I am finding difficulty in understanding what hon. Nandala-Mafabi stated. Going with the reasoning that we had previously, in situations where the parties would want to gag the members, in situations where a party is going to pay Shs 300 to 500 million as a lump sum, wouldn’t that also tantamount to wanting to conscript the members that would be paid under that party?

However, going with what we have been doing, what has been the problem? Has there been a problem? To me, we have never had any problem because members have got nominated after paying the nomination fees on their own. Where the parties have proposed for some, they have paid for some and not paid for others. Therefore, I think there is no harm for us to go with the status quo. Let us proceed with the status quo.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, I thought that the law is supposed to cure. The situation, which hon. Okupa has explained, is very disappointing because it is not progressive. 

If we are going to build a strong multiparty system of governance, we need these parties to support their members. If the party is to have the loyalty of a member, then it must invest in that member. However, if a member is the one investing in the party, how will the party begin asking for loyalty from that member?

We need to see how the law can strike a balance. I think Hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal carries some water. We need to give it a look and see how we can commit these parties to support their members.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, our rules require that if you have a serious amendment, you go to the committee and present it; it is scrutinised and evaluated. Did you take this one to the committee?

Mr nandala-mafabi: I went to the committee. All these things you see are here. That day, it was hon. Rwakoojo who chaired. I made my case there and told them, “If you don’t do it, I am coming to the committee.” I said that I had done research.

The Chairperson: What was the reason for rejecting it? At least let us know because we were not in the committee.

Mr nsereko: Madam Chairperson, I can see my comrade hon. Nandala-Mafabi labouring to explain something that has taken off in multiparty democracies that normally have proportionate representation.

Whereas it is true in democracies that have that, it is the strength of political parties in those democracies that builds the strength of the democracy. We are in a country that has a hybrid situation; both a presidential system where we have adult suffrage and also a string of control from the parties.

However, it is individual proposals for positions on which we premise to see to it that each individual, who has the capacity, is endorsed by the party but can contribute their nomination fee. Indeed, it cures the issue of saying – for example, if you have 1,000 candidates at Local Government, a few of whom are not very wealthy but they say, “Present a lump sum of Shs 300 million”. This again threatens the smaller parties that are growing and cannot raise the Shs 200 or 300 Shs million.

That is why everyone was reluctant to take it up because in democracies that are similar to ours, it had not been studied and there is no correspondence through benchmarking that you would make to justify its presence in the current law. In any case, the question was; what was it curing?

Mr oboth: From the beginning, I said this was a progressive proposal. I thank the brilliant addition from hon. Nsereko. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi appeared as Secretary-General of Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). They made a number of proposals. Some of the proposals we have not captured are those that went way beyond what was in the Bill. It would require some study to be made. 

As FDC, they had very good proposals and you know we shared that. Now the fear has been exposed here that what we are proposing, we needed to have even consulted other parties about. We did not.

Therefore, let it remain on the record that it is a very progressive proposal for future legislation -(Laughter)– it should be taken seriously. It will strengthen parties and discourage independents.

Mr nzoghu: Madam Chairperson, in fact independents do not pay money. Let me make this case –

The Chairperson: Honourable member, what you are saying is important but it is very far from the objectives of this Bill.

Secondly, not many people have had the time to study and see its implications. I recommend that we study it further but not to put it in this Bill now. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about campaign financing, which starts from the day of the nomination. You said that everybody is free to contest for any position and being free does not mean you must restrict me with money. 

There are very many people who could make very good councillors but they cannot raise Shs 50,000 to be nominated. He also must get Shs 50,000 to go to the Commissioner of Oaths where you may not even get a magistrate. 

Secondly, I do not want us to look at ourselves. Madam Chairperson, you will recall that when we increased from Shs 200,000 to Shs 3,000,000, there were petitions here, which we never listened to, as members of Parliament. We were the members of Parliament raising it because we were here. Unfortunately, or fortunately, only 17 per cent returned. The 83 per cent of that time never returned.

What we are trying to put up is that even –(Interruption)

Mr patrick nsamba: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. I would like to understand you and see how I can conceive this proposal. We have strong parties in the country but also small political parties.

Your argument is that political parties should sponsor and find money for candidates, which sounds very good. However, if you look at the number of the 57 political parties, you may get National Resistance Movement (NRM) and FDC who are strong to be able to cater for that – maybe Democratic Party (DP) and Uganda People’s Congress (UPC). Thank you for that information. (Laughter)

Assuming we legislate here and say, a political party will pay this amount of money, say Shs 4 billion for all its candidates, will it not be a way to exclude small political parties who are also trying to work their way out? Thank you.

Mr nandala-mafabi: In fact, what we are trying to say – Thank you, Madam Chairperson and thank you, my brother. You have raised the point. 

Even the political parties, if hon. Kamuntu will agree with me, in 1980, the money was just a nominal value. It was not a lot; I think they paid about $11,000 at that time and it was for the entire party.

The independents during that time never paid even a single shilling. We are trying to say that even – first of all, you appropriate here and give to parties to go and run activities. You want to pick the same money to say that they should nominate candidates.

What is the commitment that you are going to participate in an election as a political party? You can say even Shs 5,000 or 10,000. What I am trying to put across is that the amount of money to be put should not be given much - political parties should make a non-refundable nominal payment. 

Independents are like individual parties because people who should pay money in the parties – individuals should not pay anything before they can participate. If you want, you can put 10,000 or whatever because in an election, from the day you start paying the nomination fees of Shs. 3,000,000 is when campaign financing begins. 

Madam Chairperson, what I am talking about is money and I am sure if people are going to stand in Kamuli, many of them may come to you, which is not right.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, deleted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The other one was just a proposal but hon. Nandala-Mafabi, it is important and very interesting. I think we need to discuss it, first as parties, and then make it a policy. 

Clause 5

MR OBOTH: Clause 5 is amendment of section 21 of the principle Act.

Clause 5 is amended in the proposed subsection (1a) by inserting the words “or his or her agent” immediately after the word “candidate.”

The justification is to extend the provision to candidate's agents since the law already allows agents to campaign on behalf of their candidates.  

Therefore, the proposed amendment is to insert the words, “or his or her agent” immediately after the word, “candidate.” 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the provisions of clause 5, it is creating an offence yet we have Article 98(4), which protects some other candidates. For example, if a sitting President is also a candidate, you cannot take him to court. It is constitutional. Why would you provide an offence that you can only apply to other candidates and not all the candidates? 

If, for example, the President commits an offence, he has immunity under the Constitution. Therefore, I find this one discriminatory. Therefore, I propose that it should be deleted entirely because it would be difficult to implement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: is it clause 21(1a)? Can you read your full amendment in the whole sentence? 

MR OBOTH: In clause 5, we are seeking to amend subsection (1a) of the Bill. 

Clause 5 of the Bill reads: 

“Section 21 of the Principle Act is amended by inserting immediately after subsection (1) the following: 
1(a) notwithstanding subsection (1), a candidate or his or her agent shall hold campaigns between 7 O’clock in the forenoon and 6 O’clock in the afternoon -” 

This is where we are saying that where you are not and you are a Presidential candidate, you can have your agent to campaign and hold the campaigns for you but it should be within the timeframe. The proposed amendment here only takes care of the candidate not the agent of that candidate. What was missing was “his or her agent.”

What hon. Odur was talking about is not what we were proposing for amendment. He was talking about referring to Article 98 of the Constitution. That is not a – (Interruption) 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Under the same clause 5, in the Bill, you have provided for an offence. My argument is that the entire clause 5 should be deleted. Why should you put some standards and provide an offence for it yet you know that in a Presidential election, one is likely to be an incumbent, who is protected by the Constitution. Even if they commit a crime, you cannot prosecute them for it. Why would you discriminate against others so that one is free to violate the law and then the others not – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, hon. Odur. Do you want everybody to campaign all the time? What will the Electoral Commission do if one is addressing a crowd at 9 O’clock and another one is at midnight? No, let us have some order.

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The mischief has been that one candidate has been commanding arrests. Since it is the Presidential Elections Act, the President is not above the law. It is the provision of the law, which puts him above the law. 

In the circumstances, in light of the immunity that the President has got - unless we are saying that once he becomes a candidate, then his actions or those of his agent should have the same reprimand like the other aspirants. What we shall see tomorrow is that once my brother, the chairman, hon. Oboth, becomes an agent of the President, he will even claim Presidential immunity because he is an agent of the President. 

That is why hon. Odur was proposing the deletion of the whole section because it is discriminatory. It only applies to other candidates, other than the President because as he is contesting, he is at the same time a President, who has Presidential immunity under Article 98. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not think we are making a law for a particular Presidential candidate. We are making a law for all the Presidential candidates in the country. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I had sought for clarification from the Chairperson. Sub-sections (1a) and (1b) are not even clear. I was waiting to hear from the chairperson what campaigns actually mean. 

For example, if I have a radio talk show from 8.00 – 9.00 p.m., isn’t that a campaign? Therefore, can I hear from the chairperson the provision for that; if someone is on a radio talk show from 10.00 – 11.00 p.m. 

Madam Chairperson, I thought the chairperson would clarify it to possibly say that this only pertains to the rallies but to say campaigns, becomes ambiguous because it does not clearly spell out what campaigns mean in this context; on TV and so forth. 

MR NSEREKO: Thank you. I think these are things we can talk about. Madam Chairperson, the issue of campaigns entails the following; you have the day-to-day canvassing, we have the public rallies that we hold because we are all candidates and we know what happens and then you have meetings even within your residences or in hotels. I envisage that let us take an example - and in good faith - that the President is meeting people beyond 7.00 p.m. in State House, it is campaigning. 

So, why don’t we be as clear as possible to restrict this to open rallies? Initially, this was meant for open rallies.

Madam Chairperson, my proposal – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you read clause 21(2), “Every candidate may hold individual or public campaign meetings in any part of Uganda…”  They are talking about public meetings.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Chairperson, what we may consider as public meetings - I think this is what you were talking about yesterday. Any public place, for example a hotel, the police will come and disperse you and say this is a public meeting, you did not get permission and it is beyond this time. We cannot conduct all meetings within our own residences but these are time-to-time situations that you will meet during campaigns. 

So, whether we define public meetings to refer to rallies only but if we correct the mischief here and there now, and we insert a word and if the chairperson has a proposal, it makes it clear. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I wish you could support the committee position because you are part of it. When you come here and start submitting your things –(Laughter)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for giving me this opportunity. My biggest concern is that at least they should remove “his or her agents.” The reason is that we may be at a funeral, which happens even at night, and my agent is canvassing; what are you discussing at night when you are there? Definitely, even if we gathered and were taking our local brew, people are canvassing and talking about politics. 

What if my agent is seated there, should they penalise me? This law must be clear that agents should be excluded. Maybe, for us we can –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mbwatekamwa, the chairperson is actually assisting your agents to be able to do the work in your absence.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we wanted to make some concession to redraft that because the concern from a few of the Members and I thought my brilliant friend, hon. Nzoghu would have just added after the word “campaign”  and then say “campaign rallies”. By the way, it is saying, “notwithstanding subsection 1, a candidate or his or her agent shall hold campaign rallies between 7 O’clock in the morning and 6 O’clock...”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why should anyone object to that? They are allowing your agent to assist you and that is what the chairperson is doing.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we concede to the committee position.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any other amendment on clause 5?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, there are areas in this country whereby 7.00 p.m. is still day time. The reason they are trying to put it at 6.00 p.m. is that it will be dark by that time. I know there are candidates who have participated in elections, including President Museveni, and by 7 O’clock, they are still campaigning. It should be changed from 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank you very much. My senior colleague has suggested that from 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. but in my opinion, our societies vary and that is why for example, if we are going to talk about 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m., we might be giving licence to a lot of emerging issues that might be difficult to contain. That is why my opinion is that the proposal by the committee of 7.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. will be an ideal period. 

Today, we are saying it is okay but tomorrow, the people who are going to be endangered are the voters and you and I. That must be a concern about –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Abala. You studied geography very well and during the months of December and January, you find that six O’clock the sun is still up and that is why we are proposing 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. Just go back to your history and see; during the months of December and January and that is when we are going to have the campaigns. Six O’clock is still early, if it was any other month because for other months, by six O’clock it is already dark.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is not just about the candidates; it is about the people you invite for those meetings. People have got to walk back to their homes, there are mothers carrying their children and there are children attending those rallies. No, I do not agree with the extension to 7.00 p.m. You are being inconsiderate to the population.

MS NANTABA: Madam Chairperson, we need to be mindful that this happens once in five years and nominations this time will be in October. From October to January, it is only three months of campaigns and people are aware that that is the campaign period. 

Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete sub clause 5 because where we are not, our agents are doing our work. They are going to arrest them, imprison them and you will find yourselves without them because without them, sometimes you are nothing in the field. My proposal is that let us leave the three months and campaign from 7.00 a.m. to 7.00 p.m. because when we restrict ourselves, this is going to catch up with every one of us here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are dealing with the Presidential Elections Act for now.

MR NANTABA: Madam Chairperson, the President has agents.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, why don’t you think about the population who are invited to attend and sitting there the whole day. This is not right.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the rationale is simple. When the Electoral Commission was set the period for campaigns, it limited the period for the candidates; that each candidate will not even be in position to be in every district for each day. We have 135 districts and the Electoral Commission for whatever reasons have allocated 120 days for each candidate. This means that the candidate may even need to be in two districts in a day. 

There is no way a candidate will traverse one point of the district to another. Sometimes they reach the district when it is already 6 O’clock and this calls for rationality on the part of the Electoral Commission. 

If what we are doing is going to inform the Electoral Commission to adjust their programme to allow candidates to have at least a day in each district, I will have no problem with 6 O’clock.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS NANTABA: Thank you for the information. We, the members of Parliament who represent districts – for example, I have 500 villages. I have to traverse them in three months - 

THE CHIARPERSON: We are dealing with the Presidential Elections Act.

MS NANTABA: Unless this is not going to apply to the parliamentary elections. 

THE CHIARPERSON: We are dealing with the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill now. 

MS AMULE: Madam Chair, I consider 6 O’clock most appropriate. During the presidential campaigns, we collect voters from all corners of the district or constituencies. We are looking at the mothers and the young people who are going to attend these rallies. 

The issue of saying the sun will still be bright does not apply here. When it is late, anything can happen and nobody will be in position to contain it. 

I propose and support the idea that the Presidential campaigns be from seven up to 6 o’clock so that people have the time to take back the chairs and collect other gadgets.

MS WATONGOLA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. This is a Presidential campaign where candidates need security. If they end campaigns at 7.00 p.m., it may be disastrous. How will the security manage to protect these people? They are very important people? I suggest that presidential campaigns end at 6.00 p.m. 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I have no problem with the rallies ending at 6.00 p.m. However, when you look at the penalties proposed, you realise it talks about a fine not exceeding 48 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both. 

That is where I would like to suggest an amendment; that anyone who overshoots 6 O’clock by 30 minutes should be liable for this. 

THE CHIARPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

THE CHAIRPERSON: Before we got to clause 6, there was a new proposal by hon. Ruhunda. 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I had given notice earlier that I have an amendment to make. It is about an insertion of a new clause in the Bill, immediately after clause 4. 

The amendment is, “insert the following new clause: Amendment of Section 16 of the principle Act 

Section 16 of the principle Act is amended by deleting sub section 2.” 

The justification is that section 16(2) of the Presidential Elections Act prescribes a period of 90 days from the nomination date as the period for campaigns. 

This period is impractical because it does not accord the Electoral Commission adequate time to undertake all the processes that accrue after nomination, including determining and printing the relevant ballot papers since before nomination, the candidates participating in a particular election cannot be ascertained. This makes the design and content of the ballot paper unascertainable. 

Secondly, the provision is not aligned with the amendment made to Article 61(2) of the Constitution, where in, the period within which to hold presidential, parliamentary and local government council elections was expanded from the first 30 days of the last 90 days, to the first 30 days of the last 122 days. So, setting time in the enabling electoral laws might face implementation challenges. 

Third, the provision is not in harmony with the provisions of Section 21(1) of the Presidential Elections Act, which is about allowing a candidate in a presidential election to campaign in every district of Uganda. Currently, Uganda is divided into 130 districts. If the content in section 21 is to go by, the requirement to campaign in every district of Uganda will be impossible to comply with. 

To grant the Electoral Commission the discretion of determining the campaign period as well as the polling day, amended by way of deletion, given that timelines for the conduct of these elections are already provided for under. I beg to move.

MR OBOTH: We realise that under Article 61, we provided for the campaign period and we made that justification. I believe it was an omission on even the part of Government and I must thank hon. Alex Ruhunda for bringing that up. I concede to the amendment.

THE CHIARPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 16 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR OBOTH: Clause 6: amendment of section 22 of the principle Act. Clause 6 is amended in paragraph (b), in the proposed sub section 4(a), by deleting the words, “foreign government.” 

The justification is to remove the ambiguity in the proposed sub-section 4(a), which appears to allow the receipt of financial and other assistance from a domestic source, which has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established Government of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda.

Secondly, it is to expand the provision to prohibit the receipt of funds from any source, foreign or domestic, which has demonstrated an intention to overthrown the lawfully established Government of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we reject the proposal. There is no ambiguity in the proposed sub section 4(a). Funding from foreign governments is permitted subject to the restrictions imposed in section 14(6) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005.

Further, deleting “foreign government” would have the unintended effect of permitting funding from a government, which has demonstrated an intention to overthrow a lawfully established Government of the Republic of Uganda.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. What are we trying to cure? Are we trying to say that a candidate should not get money from a foreign government? Are you allying that the candidate should get funding from their own government? We need to be sure so that we can cure this.

If you are talking of foreign funding and leaving out others, that means that there are those who are allowed to go and get money from government coffers because it is within government. 

I would like the chairperson to assist me before I can make my contribution. How do you treat a sitting president using state resources to run a company? We want you to help so that we can know how to make it. Why are you legislating for others and leaving out the rest? Why don’t we have a clause that regulates our resources? I could go further. 

Madam Speaker, for instance, from here to Kanungu by road transport, it would take one 10 hours or more. However, there would be a candidate who will jump in a helicopter and within 40 minutes, he is in Kanungu. Then after Kanungu, in about 20 minutes, he is in Karamoja. How do we deal with such? We are making this law for presidential elections and so, we want it to be free and fair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, how is you submission related to this amendment?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: It is clause 26. Madam Chairperson, if you read financing of campaigns, it says that security protection and facilitation of candidates during a campaign. They are trying to restrict others yet others are not being restricted. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, why don’t you address the proposal made by the chairperson to remove “foreign government”? That is what you should be addressing because the rest is already a law. You should contest what he has proposed if you have a reason.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am contesting both. If we are removing “foreign government”, then we should also remove domestic government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But there is no domestic Government. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We should insert it in the law so that it is just and it is not made for others.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I have made some observation in regard to the proposal by the chairperson.

I would like to understand from the chair how under the law, they intend to measure intension to overthrow the government. If you see (b), there is Anti-Terrorism Act, which defines an organisation as a terrorist institution. Yet in subsection (a), they are talking of intension. How are we going to measure that and who is going to declare that this government or entity had intension to overthrow? Do we have any yardstick for measuring that before you criminalise it? I think that way, we will create a competitive environment for people to get financing from the right sources and avoid entities that indeed are qualified as those that want to overthrow a government. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that should go to the sponsor of the Bill because the Bill belongs to the Government. Honourable minister, can you respond to this issue?

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am being irked by “foreign government.” Some foreign governments have their foreign companies or investments here. What are we going to do with these foreign governments, which have foreign investments here? If we are going to do that, I think there is going to be a great fear and there will be no freedom. 

When it comes to elections, we begin to bring issues of fear embedded with risks, which is a measure that the country is not at peace. Otherwise, if we want to eliminate this – there are some investors here who are even supporting some candidates and this is known. So, how are we going to avoid this? Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are the private investors contained here? Honourable members, please focus on the contents of the Bill. Can someone satisfy us why they want to remove “foreign government”? Could the minister tell us why he put it there?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I did not sign the committee report. If we leave the clause as is, it will mean that it will refer to everything as foreign. It will also mean foreign governments, institutions, bodies and foreign persons.

We would like to lift this “foreign government” and put it immediately after the words “body or person”. It would read, “Obtain, solicit or receive any financial or other assistance from any institution, body, person or foreign government, which has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established Government of Uganda.

Regarding how this can be measured, section (14)(6) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 enjoins the minister to determine who this foreign country or enemy is. 

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to the Attorney-General but I think he is looking for a tool that they can be able to deploy where necessary to endanger - I am submitting that basing on the information the Attorney-General has given to us; it is clear to me that someone is looking for tools they can be able to use to deny candidates resources.

One, we should have clearly known – as I indicated earlier as in section (b) – that there is a clear law, which is going to help determine whether any government or any entity has intention to overthrow our Government.

In the absence of that, we cannot leave such a big decision to an individual to declare at whatever time and say so and so, “the sources of your money are from this kind of entity, which intends to overthrow us”. To me, that will be empowering the minister beyond the tools we need to be able to run free and fair elections. Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Chairperson. The learned Attorney-General and senior counsel is making reference to section 145 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act. However, the section he refers to may not be applicable under the Presidential Elections Act.

The section you are referring to says, “A political party or organisation…” The restriction is on political parties and organisations. However, there are also instances of individuals who are candidates who may seek support. Therefore, this provision may not help your case.

It is also fundamental to observe that the proposal you make – just for information of the Members – is already enshrined under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. These restrictions were already brought under the Political Parties and Organisations Act. There are similar restrictions under the Anti-Terrorism Act.

For purposes of the Presidential Elections Act, it would be important that either you make a cross reference or we be very clear to address some of the issues being raised, for example, on the yardstick. Otherwise, there are other laws that are empowering line ministers to declare who a terrorist is - which Government demonstrates - and also to address the issue of hon. Nandala, where he was talking about the issue of the money and the individuals and the like. 

When you read this provision, there is a way it is restrictive to political parties and organisations. We need to make that very clear. Having introduced independents as a very critical player in the electoral processes, that must also be captured, so that independents do not have the leeway to get money everywhere and we in parties do not have that leeway.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to concede to the position of the committee. However, we wish to redraft the clause as follows:
“Obtaining, soliciting or receiving any financial or other assistance from any institution, body, person or foreign Government which has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established Government of the Republic of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: How is it different from the other one? How is it different from what the chairperson proposed? 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, what is proposed right now says “foreign Government institution”, which would mean foreign institution, foreign body or person.

In the new proposal, our intention is to separate these and say, “Any institution…” - it could be foreign or local – “body, person or foreign Government, which has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established Government of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda.”

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek this clarification from the learned Attorney-General. You are talking about the intention to overthrow. Is it defined in this proposed Bill or you are about to define it for a debate of this House? We would love to know it clearly.

What amounts to intention to overthrow? How sure are we that tomorrow, if you put it in the regulations, we shall have a minister who has the capacity to determine exactly who has the intention to overthrow the Government?

MS AMULE: Madam Chairperson, I think the proposal by Government has no harm. We have had history of countries being at loggerheads and this being a Constitution, I do not think we are going to demand from the Attorney-General and the chairperson who produced this report to bring all the nitty-gritties that we think should feature into the Constitution.

However, the truth of the matter is there are circumstances that countries will always be at loggerheads with other countries. Whether you want it or not, it happens. There are also circumstances where we have to have safety valves for our candidates.
Today, you are thinking because the other side is in the sitting Government, therefore, it is okay to have a laissez-faire attitude. If, tomorrow, you are the Government in power and you think anybody should simply get funds and resources from wherever, why don’t we have the law –(Interjections)– Madam Chairperson, I need your protection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to hear from the Attorney-General whether the Electoral Commission is actually in position to supervise this part of the law? 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Before the Attorney-General comes, Madam Speaker, let us look at the principal Act. The entire provision is already in the principal Act if you read through, meaning it is a law even before this amendment.
However, the question the committee asked, which I also support, is the Government appears to be uncomfortable with a foreign Government that wants to overthrow it. What about an institution here that wants to overthrow the Government? 

I think that is when the committee said, “let us remove the word ‘foreign’”, so that even if you are based in Uganda or outside, as long as you want to overthrow, you cannot finance. Otherwise, the principal law has the same provision. It even has the intention. I do not know the people who made it; it is the same thing.

MR OBOTH: Actually, the principal objective of this Bill, among others, is exactly what hon. Odur has said, which means he has read the report. He has also read the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002, which spells it out. 

What we are now doing with this is to tie it. What Government was trying to do is to reproduce this but it is under harmonising it with the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002. So, we are not changing much if we have to give the same effect and meaning, which hon. Basalirwa also hinted on.

This is not a new proposal per se. We already have the law and now, we have to put it on this one. (Interruption) 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you for giving way, Mr Chairperson. The clarification I am seeking from the chairperson is – the law does not provide for a situation where they will establish the list of those institutions, Governments and individuals who are hostile or who have intentions of overthrowing Government. So, how are you going to enforce this law? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I asked whether we really expect the Electoral Commission to administer this part of the law. Can they? 

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Looking at this clause, it is true that if we do not amend it, it will be very difficult to measure. Also, I wanted to ask the chairperson of the committee. How will you identify a particular Government, institution or individual as being hostile and ready to overthrow when they are putting money in a campaign, which is a legitimate way of changing Government? (Laughter) How will you differentiate? 

Money is being put in campaigns and campaigns are provided for in the Constitution. This is a legitimate way of changing Government. So, how will you say this is a hostile or – (Interruption) 

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. When you look at the committee’s report, the committee was only shy to delete this provision of the law. The committee, on page – the report has no page number. It is on the page before the recommendations. 

The committee says the proposal should be contained in a standalone legislation that deals with all aspects of election finance and expenditure as is the case with countries such as India and Kenya where there are dedicated legislations detailing all the procedures applicable to electoral financing, all prescribed in standalone legislations. 

In 5, the committee report is indicating that the provision is also ambiguous –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you tell us the heading under which you are reading?

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, this report has no pages but the heading is “5.3. Election Financing” and I am talking about the observations no. 04 and no. 05. Observation no. 05 in the committee report says that the provision is ambiguous since it does not prescribe who is to make the determination that a foreign Government, institution, body or person has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawful established Government of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda.

Those were observations of the committee and it indicates that members of the committee discussed and gave that observation. It is only that they were shy to say this provision should be deleted from the law.  

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chairperson, the provision in the Bill, as the chairperson of the committee said, makes a slight change on the provision in the Act itself, which is clause 22(4). So, even if you propose that we delete the proposal in the Bill, it will actually remain in the Act. 

Let me give this Parliament information. From my experience, the only time this Government has brought information to this Parliament about a foreign Government was in 2006 when they brought Rwanda and it caused problems. Since then, although Government, under clause 22(5), is supposed to bring information to Parliament, they have never done it again. 

Therefore, even if the Act remains, I am sure it takes a mad Government to begin listing other governments that they are hostile to it. That is why after Rwanda in 2005 towards 2006, they have never brought any other list. 

I would leave it because I know they will not bring the list. 

MR ACIDRI: Madam Chairperson, can I conclude?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please, conclude. 

MR ACIDRI: Based on these submissions, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that we delete that clause. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I know from the mover what the difference is between what is in clause 22 (4) and what is being proposed?

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. When we were debating this yesterday, I remember I made mention of this very clause that we are dealing with now. Minus the list of the institutions, the Chairperson has proposed to include even domestic institutions and persons and yet, we have not provided the list to enable the Electoral Commission to implement this clause that we are suggesting. 

In Uganda, political parties are funded. Every year, the Government gives the political parties money based on the numerical strength of Members present in this House. This money is given to strengthen political parties. For example, UPC was in power. This money given to us, as a party, we want to use it to take over power from NRM and if the list is not included, I am scared that maybe, during the implementation of this law, we can also be considered or counted as an institution or a body or persons who want to overthrow Government.

Therefore, I suggest that this clause be deleted completely because it is redundant. 

MR KAFUUZI: I wish to clarify some issues. First, you asked me the difference between what I am proposing and what is in the – I am saying it is the nomenclature. If we leave the clause as it is, the meaning is different. That is why we are proposing to redraft it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: If we leave the clause in the parent Act or the one in the amendment -

MR KAFUUZI: It is the amendments. It is different because it will be referring to foreign institutions and bodies. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Honourable Attorney General, please, help us. You brought this Bill and took it to the committee where you were. Clause 22(4) of the Bill is very clear. Tell us, what do you want to cure? You see, section 24 is talking about soliciting from whatever you are talking about. What are you trying to cure so that we deal with it despite UPC saying that they want to take power from you, yet, they are together with you?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, my understanding of section 14(6) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 - I am answering those who are referring to overthrow -  okay, because a foreign Government is to be determined by the Minister of Internal Affairs making a Statutory Instrument with the approval of Parliament, meaning that there is an overthrow, which is legal and recognised. 

However, the overthrow referred to in the law is by force. Therefore, there is a change of Government, which is legal but that envisaged –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, learned Attorney-General. The biggest mistake you are making is to assume that the role of a minister is clarified in this Bill. Chairperson, with due respect, if you read the Anti-Terrorism Act, who declares terrorist organisation is an exclusive preserve of the minister through regulations brought to Parliament, debated and gazetted.

Even under the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005 that provision is very clear. Where you cannot get donation and support, again the minister makes regulations and they are gazetted and Parliament debates them.

Under the Presidential Elections Act, you are making it silent. Actually, it is not there and that is where the problem is. By now, you would be proposing because the chairperson asks whether you want this responsibility to be undertaken by the Electoral Commission. With due respect, it cannot. These are matters of security and foreign relations and the Electoral Commission cannot do it.

Therefore, why don’t you borrow, for example, the provisions under the Political Parties and Organisations Act that require the Minister for Internal Affairs to gazette regulations, they are brought here in Parliament and they are debated so that by the time we go to elections, we know which organisations and Governments  we cannot seek support from. Those regulations should be debated here.

That should be really included in that Bill. It is not there and that is why Members are asking. What is the yardstick of determining intention? What are these organisations and intuitions that you do not want us to go to seeking for support? that can only be cured if there is a clear provision under this law, a mandate given to the minister, with clear regulation that are debated here in Parliament on behalf of the people. That is the line you need to take and that is the information I would like to give.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, as a committee, we faced difficulty also because the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 could be very limiting. These terrorist organisations are involved, some names have come up; so, in case we just limit as it is in the proposed Bill, we could not even serve the purpose.

However, I believe that Members have enriched the debate on this matter and the House can decide.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I note that in the Principal Act, this matter is already provided for. We have listened hard but I have not seen the value addition by bringing this amendment. Therefore, I suggest that we would remain with the old law as it is. I put the question that section 6 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Section 6 deleted.
Clause 7

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and hon. Mafabi for being attentive. In clause 7, we would like to substitute for clause 7 the following; 

“(7) amendment of section 24 of the Principal Act. Section 24 of the Principal Act is amended by; 
    a) By substituting for sub-section (1) the following; ‘the commission shall ensure that all presidential candidates are given equal treatment on state-owned media to present their programmes to the people.’”

By inserting immediately after sub-section (1) the following; 

“1(a) a state-owned media house shall within 14 days after nomination inform all presidential candidates of the availability of time, the broadcasting schedule and cost of presenting their programmes; 
1(b) state-owned media means ‘a media house in which the controlling interest is held by the state.’ 
1(c) a state-owned media house that contravenes subsection 1(a) commits an offence and it is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points. 
1(d) For the purposes of this section, a person in charge of the state-owned media house may, where the state media house is found to have contravened subsection 1(a), be held liable for the offence committed by the state media house and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency point or imprisonment not exceeding one year or both.”

The justification is to impose an obligation of Electoral Commission to;

1. 	To ensure that state media provides equal treatment to presidential candidates.
2.  	To define state media.
3. 	To require the state-owned media house to inform all presidential candidates of the availability of space and time.
4. 	To fully comply with the recommendation of court of Supreme Court in Amama Mbabazi vs Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General, in the presidential election petition no.1 of 2016, on the obligations of state media.
5. 	To impose criminal liability on the person in charge of state media house where a state media house contravenes this obligation.

You all know that this was a matter litigated about and it was recommended that there should be equal treatment. And I beg that Members support this amendment.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we concede to the committee position with the following proposed amendments.
 
MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Chairperson, since the Attorney-General has conceded to the amendment of the chairperson –(Interruption)

Mr kafuuzi: We do not concede entirely. We propose these amendments;

“1(a) A state-owned media house shall, within 14 days after nomination day, notify in writing all presidential candidates of the availability of time, the broadcasting schedule and cost of presenting their programmes and shall allocate time to the candidates.

1(d) For purposes of this section, a person in charge of a state-owned media house may, where the state-owned media house is found to have contravened sub-section 1(a), be held liable for the offence committed by the state-owned media house and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding two years or both.”

Ms osegge: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. He talked about the amendment of providing a programme and its cost of airing whatever programme of any political party. 

I do not know whether it will not be important for us to be specific. It looks like we are allowing the broadcaster to discriminate on price. I will come and be charged Shs 1 million another person will be charged Shs 10,000 and the other zero shillings –(Interjections)

He is talking of a cost and if it is state media, must we attach a cost for purposes of electioneering? We either remove that and make it an obligation for them to provide time for all the candidates equally without any cost, or you will be leading them to exercise price discrimination.

The Chairperson: The Opposition is saying that the state media should be availed for free.

Mr osegge: He has put a cost, so, we should delete the word, “cost”. 

The Chairperson: That is what I am restating that the Opposition says that state media should be free.

hon. Members: Yes.

Mr centenary: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek clarification from the learned Attorney-General. He has concentrated on a state-owned media but we know that the media in this country has been liberalised. 

We have been faced with situations where a particular presidential candidate will pay money for airtime at a radio station and before he even introduces himself, the security operatives come, switch off the radio or even pull him out of the studio. The radio station is surrounded. Uganda Communications Corporation (UCC) writes a directive threatening to close the media house. 

Where have you provided for a punitive measure for people who indulge in such a kind of act that impedes the presidential candidates from expressing themselves?

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I am trying to answer hon. Centenary’s query. The justification for this provision is to impose an obligation on the electoral commission to ensure that state media provides equal treatment for presidential candidates. We are not legislating for private media houses.

Private media houses would have individual contracts with these presidential candidates.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I think part of this arises from the Supreme Court making judgments and saying that the state media should be shared. 

Mr ssemujju: The problem with this kind of proposal – first of all, the right proposal would be to ask the state media to provide airtime of either an hour or two per day. Within that, you can say there should be equal share. 

Even the Electoral Commission does not regulate media and they have no penalties to hand out if you have defied them. Media has its own regulatory bodies from UCC to the Media Council. 

My proposal is that the lawyers should help. Media has its own standards on what determines news and programmes. To impose an obligation only to the state media that they must be the one giving all the time to everybody will be very difficult. However, we can, in a law say that during campaign period, they will put aside two hours for candidates, which can be shared. It is not easy to balance in all programmes. They have entertainment programmes. If one of the candidates is a musician, he will certainly by his own right appear in that programme and another who is not cannot appear. 

Mr mbwatekamwa: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking clarification from the Attorney-General. We know that in the media, we have a certain time called “prime time”. Here, we are proposing that they are supposed to be given programmes. They can decide to give a certain candidate fake time, say from 10.00 when people are not even watching television. Another candidate is given prime time from 8.00 – to 10.00 when people have returned home and are watching television.

How are we going to make sure that the time –, there are even some days, which are lousy. How are they going to address that to make sure that all presidential candidates –(Interruption)– I take the information in good faith.

Mr PATRICK NSAMBA:  Madam Chairperson –

The Chairperson: Honourable members, are you going to prescribe what the media house does, in this law?

Mr PATRICK NSAMBA:  Madam Chairperson, I would like to appreciate the Member for giving way. The information I would like to give him is that the biggest prime time is that of the news. All Ugandans will be waiting during news time to know how the campaign rallies moved. What the courts faulted Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC) was to cover only one candidate in all those programmes. 

Therefore, it is very important that we target the prime time and the news. We need to ensure that during the news, these state-owned media houses cover all candidates, not only one. Thank you very much. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I am just seeking a clarification from the Attorney-General. Colleagues, recently, there was a directive by Government that all radio stations and media houses across the board, private and Government, give free airtime on a weekly basis for the programmes to be aired by RDCs and LC 5 chairpersons. Is it possible to have that approach for this also? It was at no cost and they said it was their contribution to the Government by promoting and sensitising people about the programme. Can this also be applied? They can also contribute to democracy in this country, if such a directive can also be given so that it is done across the board; that Government media and private media give free time weekly.  

Madam Chairperson, at the moment, it is happening for RDCs and LC 5 chairpersons. On a weekly basis, they go and give information to the citizens. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should that really be in the law? 

MS OSEGGE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am still standing on my clarification, which the Attorney-General has not responded to. In that amendment, he talked about attaching a cost. My query was, how are they going to regulate how much is going to be charged to which candidate? There is going to be price discrimination and on top of that, mistiming. 

However, my point was on the cost. I propose that we remove the aspect of cost. Let that be a contribution of the state-media to the electioneering process.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would just like to give clarification on this aspect. When we were in the Supreme Court arguing the petition on behalf of hon. Amama Mbabazi, the concern was two sided. There was the issue of equal coverage in state-media and space to articulate. It was far discovered that State-media was virtually giving almost 90 per cent of time to one candidate at the expense of the other candidates. When the other candidates sought space on state media, it was not accorded. 

The Supreme Court disagreed with us on many aspects but when it came to that aspect, they agreed with us. In fact, it was the reason the recommendation was made because the issue of absence of a punitive provision was emphasised. I am glad that in the amendment, that is coming out. 

However, what should not be lost is the fact of equal coverage and availability of space. This amendment does not address the issue of equal coverage. It seems it is addressing only the issue of space. You will communicate and say you can come and articulate your issues but when it comes to equal coverage, it is not coming out very clearly. We might not be addressing the recommendation of the Supreme Court, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, members of Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I do not know what to do with you. You sat in the committee and had time to discuss these matters. You had time to design the right language. Hon. Basalirwa, you had the opportunity but now you come here and –

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I think that is reason enough for you to accord the Members who are non-members of the committee a bigger voice here. Most of the Members spoke several times and we now also need the time to speak. 

My concern is on the issue of duress. In a situation where a person who is in charge of a media house breaks the law under duress, how do we secure him or her? If somebody has come to surround the premises and the manager is bound to comply with the forces that have surrounded him, what do you do? Are you going to take that person to court? Are you going to prescribe the five years? Are you going to give the 500 currency points? Is that normal? Is it workable? Is it proper? It is something that I need the Attorney-General to answer. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The information I would like to give you is that a state owned company means the state pays for it. Even the 500 currency point you are talking will be upon the tax payer to pay. 

If it personal liability to be punitive, 500 currency points is Shs 10 million. Assuming the NRM decides to commit that offence and they give that individual a billion shillings and he gets coverage on every station; whenever they arrest you, you pay 500 currency points. 

What would be better is for the person to pay 500 currency points and even be taken to prison. When a man hears about prison, because he cannot buy his way out, he will be sensible. 

Therefore, the information I am giving hon. Aogon is that the coverage should be equal. However, if an individual commits a crime, he should pay money and even be taken to prison so that the person can make a decision whether to commit a crime or not. 

MR AOGON: Thank you for that brilliant information. Madam Chairperson, these people that raid the premises of the media - we must prescribe a penalty for them, which is also person to holder so that we bar them from doing this. That is very important.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking two clarifications. One is on prime time. We need to have a definition of prime time. What is prime time on NTV might not be prime time on UBC. When it comes to private media, it is different. 

Private media houses are regulated. Even State media houses are regulated by UCC. We operate on different rules and regulations. Therefore, if we sit here, regulate and want to enact laws that affect media houses, we will run into a challenge of fulfilling the regulations of UCC. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, what do you say about the proposal? 

MR OBOTH: I think we are not getting this clearly. Government was very reluctant to legislate on this. You should know that this came as a result of the recommendation of the Supreme Court and this is being done in fulfilment of the same. The reason we are bringing in Electoral Commission is that its role is purely to write to the media houses about the presidential candidates and ask them to comply with the various sections. 

Therefore, for us to think that we should be able to do the nitty gritty, the administrative, and ask what prime time is, when every presidential candidate is given time, it should be prime. 

When I am going to be hosted on Government owned radio, then, that should be prime. Why shouldn’t we accord each other some decorum? We are treating it as if in the law, here we should legislate that you must accord prime time then we would be going into the administrative work and it is not only radio and television. If you put the face of hon. Ssemujju on the front page, equal treatment means with the same size, you should accord another face of maybe Jonathan Odur. 

Therefore, we are not only talking about television and radio, I see we are trying to lose it but the truth is that this is a command and let us have a basis in the law where the Electoral Commission and other people can lodge complaints if there is a breach.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think that what the committee did was okay. We are legislating for the future and we have to look at the reality. I would like to suppose we have 50 candidates and for example, we have the last day where we put in the law that they should all be accorded prime time. It will not be practical and I think that we should not go into all those details. The recommendation of the committee is okay and it was there to fulfil the recommendation of the Supreme Court. It is not going to be practical at one time. What we do not want is to hear that candidate X has been denied access to a national media house. I beg to submit.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, I think it is clear that we cannot go into the details. However, I wanted to beg for the indulgence of the chairman instead of him posing the obligation of scheduling and lighting to the candidates. Why don’t we borrow the practice after nominations that UBC who is a state-owned organisation invites all the candidates and agents and then, they agree so that you avoid taking the bias that I gave you this time, which is not proper? 

We can take your proposal and then, put an obligation on the Electoral Commission with either the Minister of Information, Communication Technology and National Guidance or ICC invites all the nominated candidates in a meeting, gives them the time that is available and they agree amongst themselves. That would be better.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We cannot put that in the law.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Madam Chairperson, in the amendment, the committee is using the word “treatment”. To take care of the matters of coverage as was by the courts, I propose that we change the statement to say that the Electoral Commission shall ensure that all presidential candidates are given equal coverage instead of equal treatment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can we say “opportunity?” 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, when you talk about coverage, even if you are engaged in what is not newsworthy, we just keep on giving you equal coverage. I think that it should be equal treatment, that an opportunity should be availed to a candidate so that you know that if you conduct yourself in a manner, which makes your business newsworthy, we give you the treatment. 

However, if you engage in something, which is not newsworthy, then you do not because coverage would require that we have to create space for you for anything you are doing, which does not promote what is intended to cover. 

MS AMODING: Madam Chairperson, I just wanted to make a comment on that issue of State media. I imagined in a presidential campaign that it is in the interest of the media houses to showcase all the candidates. Of course, a presidential candidate should be somebody who is newsworthy. It should not just be anyone who will not attract any attention. It should be someone with substance and therefore, I think that in terms of legislating the details, since it is not easy to monitor media houses, perhaps, what we could do is what hon. Okupa had earlier on proposed because there is one hour usually in these private media houses, which can be utilised.
I have a problem understanding how we can legislate on the nitty-gritty on the administrative provisions on that particular issue.

Secondly, we are proposing criminal liability in terms of the State owned media houses and I am wondering a situation where there is a Managing Director in UBC, an Executive Director and a deputy; there is a Manager in charge of Programmes and then, there is a programmer himself and you are proposing criminal liability here. Who are you going to be scouting out under the law? We are moving away from civil provisions and so, who is the officer responsible in this instance? Is the officer in charge defined?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us move, honourable members. Give information but speak to it.

MR OBOTH: The information is that really, if you have an Managing Director, the honourable member there said that I was meandering like a river but I think she is meandering more. (Laughter)

Where you have a Managing Director, would you again ask who is in charge? Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, was actually whispering from down here, the law cannot go – yes, because when you have a Managing Director, you do not go beyond the Managing Director to ask who else is in charge. 

Madam Chairperson, this is a matter that we did not know it would attract a lot of debate on the state owned media, which we thought was a new innovative way to hold both Government-owned media houses liable and also to create space. I believe that what the Deputy Attorney-General did was to be more specific and he was building on, that the notification should be in writing.

Secondly, in the issue of sentencing, 500 currency points is equivalent to two years; for us we had put one year. So, we would concede to that and the question could be put and we sort out this matter. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 7 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8

MR OBOTH: We propose to delete clause 8. The justification is that the proposal to remove the time within which the Electoral Commission may deliver polling materials will disfranchise voters, cause delay in commencing polling and it is likely to affect the readiness of the commission to conduct election. Yet, readiness to conduct elections is an essential ingredient in delivery of a free and fair election.

Secondly, consequential amendment arising from the proposal to delete clause 3 of the parliamentary – we are not there yet. The justification would end at the first one, on the proposal to remove the time within which the Commission may deliver polling materials. For the benefit of us who do not have the Bill, amendment of section 28 of the Principal Act is amended by substituting for the words “within 48 hours before polling day” the words “at any time before polling time.”

We had a lengthy debate on this matter. When you stipulate the time, the current position is that within 48 hours and the Government was proposing that at any time before polling time, which almost means no time. So, we propose that this should be deleted. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of Government, we reject the committee’s proposal. 

Our justification is that ensuring safety and security of election materials including ballot papers, which have been delivered 48 hours before polling day as currently required by the law has presented logistical and other challenges to the Electoral Commission. 

Permitting delivery closer to polling time will help address these challenges. I beg to submit.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In 2016, what the Deputy Attorney General is trying to give as justification is what they actually did in Wakiso and even in Kampala. They tested it here in 2016 and they want to replicate it in 2021. Kampala and Wakiso are just here. What about in Karamoja or Gulu or Kasese? There, they will deliver the materials after the polling time has passed. 

I would like to persuade the House that we must vehemently reject the proposal from hon. Kafuuzi and support the committee’s submission. I would like to request. (Interjections)

Honourable chairperson, I have been with hon. Mwiru; he is my friend and we share the same opinion. That is why I wanted to proceed to move a motion.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I rise to support the committee position. Other than the materials the Attorney-General is talking about, whenever they issue election materials, there is a packing list. They give one to a political party. It is not possible that if they narrow the delivery, you can photocopy the material they have brought. 

I will give an example of Jinja. We got fake ballot papers. We removed them from the ballot box because we had photocopied the packing list and the ballot papers of Electoral Commission were different from those, which were on the station; meaning that if they delay to give you that file, you will not know what materials – unless you have gone for recount. 

I rise on the basis of that. We support the committee position that time be maintained. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, I think you are only looking at one side. I do not know whether you are looking at the people who are supposed to participate in the election. When will they be sure that the items have arrived? Suppose the fellows say that, may be, we leave one hour to election?

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, we were even very lenient. Some of us had proposed that we make a criminal provision against the Electoral Commission officials who do not comply with this particular timeframe of delivering electoral material within this timeframe. 

They abused it in the last election and they intend to abuse it more in the coming election. Honourable Attorney-General, if you insist, we will make an amendment under this clause to make a criminal provision against any electoral official who does not comply with the time frame. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 8 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8 deleted.

Clause 9

MR OBOTH: Clause 9 of the Bill is amended in paragraph (c) by substituting for the word “five” with the word, “ten”

The justification is to increase the number of persons that must be demonstrating from five to 10 in order to enhance transparency of the vote. This is to amend section 31(8) of the Principal Act. 

The presiding officer at each polling station shall, at the commencement of the poll and in the full view of all present, demonstrate to the satisfaction of all present that the ballot box is devoid of any contents and after that, place the ballot box on the table referred to in sub section 5(c). 

This is where we said the amendment they were trying to propose is – here, it says all present. “All present” could be the presiding officer and one constable. It is not talking about other interest groups. We needed 10 because if we say five, five could be just the officials of Electoral Commission. That was the rationale. I think Members want to maintain the status quo. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chair, we need to allow that the committee has done a great job. That is what they call transparency because the five could be only officials, the presiding officer and his assistants. We should agree that we have been doing badly because we have moved from five to 10. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, you are talking of five or 10 yet, they can even bring 10 policemen.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The chair is proposing 10 registered voters.  That is what he is proposing.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, on behalf of the sponsor of the Bill, we reject the proposal. (Interjections) Our rational is that assembling 10 people at a polling station, for purposes of confirming that a ballot box is devoid of any contents each time a new box is required, is a challenge. (Interjections) Five people are considered an adequate number in order not to halt or delay the polling process, which is time- bound.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are boxes going to be substituted? There is only one box. Are they going to bring other boxes?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, it is honourable enough if the Deputy Attorney-General could concede. Since you started making amendments, none of them has gone through. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I need protection because I am being intimidated by hon. Okupa. I concede to this proposal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 9 be amended as proposed.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make the following amendments. One, in 5 (b) (1) on ticking – the Bill is proposing that we should mark instead of dipping.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are we?


MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We in clause 9(a) and (b). They are saying instead of dipping, they can mark. This means that you can make a small mark, which cannot be seen and so, a person can go and come back. I think to avoid that, there is no problem with us dipping. You would stay with your mark on the figure.

I would like to, therefore, propose that we delete 9(a) and (b) and maintain the dipping because it has been done successfully in reducing the number of people who cheat. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: What was the rationale? 

MS BADA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the idea of a mark because it can be done anywhere in the body and it can be seen. This marking would be done with a pen, which can be seen like a marker pen that is clear. If we say dipping, suppose I had no arm – there are many people with disabilities without arms. So, which part will you dip? I think marking is better to cover everyone. Otherwise, you will be leaving out persons with disabilities without arms and limps. (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: The principal Act, under section (31)(7)(d) states that where the voter has no hands, the process shall be applied to any other conspicuous part of the voters body as a polling assistant may determine. It is covered.

MS BABA DIRI: How is it covered? You are saying dipping. I have not understood how a person without limps will be dipped.

MR NIWAGABA: The polling assistant will determine which part of the body will be dipped or marked.

MS BADA DIRI: Will you dip the whole leg into ink? This is not possible. Marking is better. Thank you. 
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to check whether the provisions are similar for the Parliamentary Elections Act. Otherwise, in the other one, nothing changed. It is only this one that they are changing from dipping to marking.
 
MR OBOTH: I have to crosscheck. I believe it should be similar since those who will vote for the presidential candidate will also vote for the parliamentary candidates.

Whether dipping, it is all indelible ink. The mark will be there whether they put it on your nose or fingers. For purposes of consistency, whatever we shall adopt here will affect even the Parliamentary Elections Act and Local Government Elections Act. Maybe the Attorney-General has something to say.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think we can put the matter to vote. Honourable members, I put the question to clause 9. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR OBOTH: For Clause 10, we propose to substitute it as follows: 

“Clause 10: Amendment of section 39 of the principal Act-

Section 39 of the principal Act is amended-
    a) In sub-section (1) by inserting immediately after the word -
    i. “persons”, in the fourth line, the words “employed in institutions engaged in the administration of elections and”
    ii. “gazette” the words “and in a newspaper of wide circulation” 
 b) by substituting for sub-section (2) the following -

“2. An area provided for voting for members of the Uganda People's Defense Forces shall be outside of any barracks and the Commission not to create special or separate polling stations exclusively for the army or any other security personnel.

The justifications are; 
    i. To allow the making of rules for the collection of votes from persons employed in institutions engaged in the administration of elections
    ii. To require the publication of the special provisions in the gazette and in a newspaper of wide circulation
    iii. The current section 39 is broader than the proposed amendment since it allows the making of rules for the collection of votes from a wide range of persons and not exclusively from the military
    iv. The current provision is a furtherance of the command of Article 59 of the Constitution, amending it as proposed in the Bill will be considered regressive to the enjoyment of such a right by the general populace.

The proposed amendment does not introduce anything new since the Commission is already empowered to make rules for the collection of votes from soldiers and military personnel. We are talking about section (3) of the Presidential Elections Act, 2005.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I accept the proposal to clause 10. However, on (ii), where they talk of wide circulation, we want to add the words, “wide national circulation”. This is because circulation in Kyegegwa is wide enough, but if it does not reach West Budama it may not be national.
Secondly, we want to reject (b) (2) because it already exists. It is already provided for in section 39 (3) of the Presidential Elections Act. For the rest, we accept.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question –

MR OGUZU: I would want us to peg this publication by the Commission to a timeline because the electoral process must have certainty. We have had cases where elections are a few days away and the Electoral Commission publishes something but people may be busy in different parts of the country and they cannot get access to such a publication.

Therefore, it would be good to say that the publication should be in a week or two, so that everybody is in the know. Otherwise, the publication could come a day to election time and it will not have an effect. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: In response to the Attorney-General’s comments on section 39 (2) on the committee’s amendment, I implore the Attorney-General to accept it because the current subsection (2) only says, “An area provided for voting for members of the Uganda People’s Defence Forces shall be outside any barracks.” The committee is amending it by adding the following words: “…and the commission shall not create special or separate polling stations exclusively for the army or any other security personnel.”

That wording, in my view, is the best and we need to adopt it for emphatic purposes and to leave no room for doubt. So, I beg you, Attorney-General, to concede to the amendment by the committee. 

MR KAFUUZI: I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Clause 11 is dealing with transmission of the results. I would like to ask the chairperson of the committee if he considered technology in this matter. We are now in an ICT period; don’t you think we should really consider that?  Why shouldn’t we have a mechanism at every polling station that would enable the transmission of declaration forms to the tally centre?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does (2)(a) mean?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is transmission of documents and tally sheets.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have not understood you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, section 56 is dealing with transmission of results. This one is applicable in analogue but in the digital world now, we should make a law where we cater for transmitting the results electronically.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It this is here. I think that is what is in the Bill. That is what the Bill says - “transmit to the commission the following documents electronically - the return form; tally sheets; declaration of results…”

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. What I am trying to say, Madam Chairperson, is that as the transmission is being done, they should be able to also transmit copies to the participating candidates and political parties –(Interjection)– Yes; that is what is done. Why do you fear? If you transmit results to the tally centre, everybody - whether a political party participant or an independent – should be able to get his or her copy.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, hon. Mafabi. The information I would like to give you is that in the 2016 presidential elections, I had the opportunity to rush down to Kampala with a hard copy of the results declared in Arua, which were signed by all the agents of the presidential candidates and the Electoral Commission officials of Arua. However, when I reached here, what they declared in Namboole was different from what I was carrying. It was completely different. So, I think what you are saying, that political parties or the agents of presidential candidates must also be notified of the results being declared by the Electoral Commission electronically, as compared to hard copies, is very important.

MR CENTENARY: Madam Chairperson, when he speaks about that, he reminds me of the cumbersome situation we went through in Kasese after we had been elected. The election officials abandoned their computers. They did not want to feed the results into the computer in order for them to transmit and finally declare us as the elected leaders.

I do not see us taking care of that situation where the electoral officials become adamant to capture the declaration of results and put them into the computer and also declare the candidates. It took us three days at the tally centre for those results to be uploaded, transmitted and also the declaration to be made. How do we cater for that?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR CENTENARY: My proposal is that we should provide for a punishment for those electoral officials who intentionally refuse –(Interjection)– Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us hear from hon. Opendi.

MS OPENDI: Madam Chairperson, I have listened to hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Since we are all moving our systems from analogue to electronic means, I think in the interest of transparency, while submitting the results, there is no harm in putting “Cc” to the others, so that everybody knows what has been transmitted. I do not see any harm in that.

What I was simply trying to say is that we are all conversant with the computer systems. If I have attached a document, I can copy to as many people as I want, so that they are all aware of what I have transmitted. I was saying that in the interest of transparency - I have listened to hon. Mafabi - I do not see any harm in the electoral official who is transmitting data to the centre to copy in the other people, so that the candidates are aware of what has been transmitted. I do not see any harm in that. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move the amendments. First of all, when we are transmitting electronically, the clause should say, “transmit to the commission the following documents electronically, copied to all participating parties and candidates…” We should also add - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The candidates have official agents. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the reason we are getting a problem is that by the time the official agent reaches the tally centre, there is a difference -(Interjections)- Please listen to me. The transmitted results will reach the tally centre before the official agent gets there. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I was saying that they should be sent to the agent because when you register, you have an official agent known by the returning officer who if you are not there, he or she will do everything for you. Therefore, they can give a copy to the official agent. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is okay. It should be sent electronically, copied to the official agent. 

Madam Chairperson, also to cure the issue of time, I think there must be a timeframe in which to deal with this. We should put provisions that election results shall be transmitted on real-time basis and not more than two hours after completion of the vote counting. 

The justification is that you have finished counting and you have got everything; why do you take long to transmit the results? 

MR AOGON: I think it is a very good idea. We can lock the time and say two hours but what happens now in case of a technical problem? In case you have a scenario, which will not permit you to do it within the two hours, can we put an exception? 

Madam Chairperson, can I request hon. Nandala-Mafabi maybe to propose something to that extent? What is it that we can do in case we have a scenario which is complicated and you cannot remit the results within the two hours that we prescribed? 

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, let us be very practical. In the last presidential elections, one of the complaints which came up was that results were not being remitted directly to the tally centre in Namboole. There was first a station in Naguru, which was being manned by security personnel. Let us be alive to this fact. 

What can we do to cure that, so that the Electoral Commission is really left independent to receive these results from the districts and the results do not first go to a place where people doctor the results and then remit them? This is a reality people have seen. Let us be Ugandan and be true to the situation so that we come up with something that will save the whole situation.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I am alive to the concerns of my Old Boy (OB), hon. Kassiano Wadri. However, sincerely speaking, it would be difficult for us to limit the time. One, there may be logistical problems; two, for us who have upcountry polling areas, there is no power, no good roads and even no network for phones. Therefore, when you limit this to two hours, you are creating an insurmountable problem for the Electoral Commission. 

The question would be: Is it two hours after the closure of elections or two hours from when the results arrive at the district tally centre? The results may take long to move from my village to the district and then the district tally centre has to send them to Kololo.

MR NIWAGABA: I will invite my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to concede on that. It is because once the results have been transmitted and copied to all interested political parties and candidates or their official agents, then I think the question of time will not arise because you will not still have transmitted and they will not declare. So, once you have transmitted and copied the results to all the candidates or their official agents and political parties, to me that will be sufficient enough because after all, you have the results to be transmitted and declared. 

 MR OBOTH: On the issue of transmission of results, again I thought my former Guild President, hon. Basalirwa, and a lawyer for the petitioner who lost Election Petition No. 01 of 2016 should have helped us. He did a good job. 

One of the issues was about the use of electronic transmission. We had no law to support it. So, it was a matter that now we find in this law. To that effect, we should be able to adopt it and not create many layers since it is going to be – You cannot trust electronic things here still. When you create many layers for it and then it fails, they will say we attempted. 

The proposal made by Government for electronic transmission, however, is good enough. I thought we could support it and get the facts that this was a matter that the Supreme Court made a decision on and said there should be – There was no law. They were asking under which law they were sending it electronically. The Electoral Commission and the Government never had any legislation. So, this is the law. 

I would not mind copying in but you would have an agent at every polling station. That should be from Government. As a participant, I would need to get every copy now and then. However, what does Government say? 

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, as an IT expert, I know computer systems are susceptible to downtimes that you may hardly insure against. For us to arrive at effective communication, sending the results to a national data centre is one thing and acknowledging that they have actually been received is another thing.

Therefore, I would think that after the results are sent to the tally centre, the Electoral Commission should be able to have a system to acknowledge receipt of the results, which copy goes to those that have been copied in while the results were being sent. That way, we can guarantee that the results have been sent and acknowledged. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, my colleague from West Budama, hon. Oboth, has talked about the Supreme Court canvassing the question of electronic transmission of results. It is a new thing and we are trying to legislate for it. However, I believe that we are opening too many avenues for it and we are likely to cause problems. 

I would categorically oppose the idea of copying because if a candidate has agents in the tally centre and the results are read out and he knows what is –(Interjections)- We have declaration forms that come in from the field and each candidate’s agent has copies of those declaration forms. The tallying is done in broad daylight. Everybody can add up the numbers so that they know that what is being sent to the national tally centre is what they have. If it not what they have, then they can dispute results based on the declaration forms. 

This business of transmitting and copying to the agent what they already have is similar to - Maybe I did not understand the copying you are talking of. You can clarify.

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are trying to put in place efforts to ensure we have a free and fair election in the history of this country ever since this administration came to power. We have suggested that there must be an elaborate mechanism of copying results so that we can triangulate and secure a free and fair election. Is the Deputy Attorney-General in order to say, “I reject the idea”? I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, just try to make everything possible to ease the lives of the candidates, voters and the work of the Electoral Commission. I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 11, agreed to.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, basically there are three scenarios: copying to candidates, their agents and the political party. Those are the three areas, which we highlighted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You have got an official agent, why do you now send? That is tedious. The official agent of a presidential candidate is a very highly respected person.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the amendment is on section 56(2) that is now going to mandate the returning – “Upon completing the return under subsection (1), the returning officer shall transmit to the Commission, with a copy to the political parties and official agents of participating candidates, the following documents - a, b, c and d” so that at least there is that transparency. After all it is electronic and they will have submitted their email addresses, and it is at the level of a returning officer at the district. I pray that that particular amendment be allowed.

MS NAMUYANGU: Madam Chairperson, from the experience in local governments under the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS), some of the local government officials have to travel to their regional offices. I hope we shall have internet everywhere. (Interjection)- I know but I am telling you the experience –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in this country there is no place, if you have done analysis, where one will not get a network. You will get MTN, Africel, Safaricom, even Safaricom. Hon. Oboth knows that they get Safaricom that side.

Madam Chairperson, IFMS is only using what we call the Local Area Network (LAN). Let us go through the internet – space. The moment we agree to use the space – So, with the internet, there is no problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you know we are talking about the returning officer transmitting this but recall you have got 120 returning officers and they all will be sending to one official agent.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. The mandate of the Electoral Commission is to conduct free and fair elections. Whoever has passed around the offices of the Electoral Commission will read that one of the tenets of their mandate is transparency. The fact that there is nobody that is affected by the transparency should be the very reason as to why my colleagues should concede.

The rationale, Madam Chairperson, is that once there is transparency, even these agitations after elections will stop. After people have lost elections, they will always say that they were cheated. However, if we copied them in on all the results as they came in, everybody would be saying, “go to your database and find out that actually you lost.”

I would invite my colleagues, my good friend the Deputy Attorney-General - He has had the benefit of being where we are and that should enrich his arguments when he is on the other side. I implore him to concede.

MR OGUZU: Madam Chairperson, I still insist that sending and copying people in is one thing; it does not mean the message has been received at the other end. The message could be lost in the middle. It is important for the Electoral Commission to acknowledge and reply that they have received this result from this place so that we know that there is transparency. Otherwise, we have had many cases where results are just loitering in the air, and that is not what we want.

MR KARUBANGA: Madam Chairperson, we all acknowledge that we want to ensure transparency and trust. However, I would like to seek clarification from those honourable members who are saying that we should send a copy. I do not know in which format the message would be sent and which system would be used, because the candidate may not have – If, for example, I send a message or any information which is encrypted, you may not have the system to read or to decode it - (Interjection) - That is why I am seeking clarification on what format the Electoral Commission uses before we put it in the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, allow me assist the Minister of State for Public Service by informing him that right now, even in the Electoral Commission law, which we are going to amend, they are talking of technology. Technology must be known to all the users and stakeholders. Even at the time when we are looking at technology under the Electoral Commission, this is something we shall discuss. 

Secondly, we would have a mechanism for opening the information which you are sending as encrypted because the sender must tell the receiver that this message is coming encrypted and this is how you deal with it. Sending results electronically to everywhere in this world is now too easy. Kenya and Tanzania are here -(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. The information I would like to supply is that the National Information Technology Authority recently got money to implement the coverage of the entire country with the national backbone infrastructure. As we talk, West Nile and Karamoja have been completed. These were the remaining parts of the country that had not been covered. 

We would expect that this infrastructure will aid the ease with which the information will be transmitted, especially electoral related information, in the upcoming general elections. Therefore, there should be no excuse for us not to have the enabling infrastructure to have information transmitted to the Electoral Commission. Thank you.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, what we are proposing is that after the word, “commission” add “…and candidates, official agents and political parties the following documents electronically…” I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, clause 12 is amended by substituting for paragraph (b) the following:

“(b) Substitute subsection (3) with the following:

(2) The Supreme Court shall inquire into and determine the petition expeditiously and shall declare its findings and reasons not later than forty-five days from the date the petition is filed.” This is in an attempt to amend section 59.

The justification is: to capture the spirit in Article 104(3) of the Constitution, which requires the Supreme Court to declare its findings and reasons in a presidential election petition within 45 days. 

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I have no objection to this although I humbly pray that you protect me from my OBs. This is my maiden week. (Laughter)

The Chairperson: Honourable members, when our colleagues make their maiden speech, we kind of handle them nicely. So, let us protect the honourable minister for this week. (Laughter)

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13

Mr oboth: Madam Chairperson, we would like to insert a new clause immediately after clause 13. Maybe you put the question to clause 13 and immediately after that, we shall have an amendment.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Chairperson, clause 13 has an issue where it mentions the President giving donations in the ordinary course of his or her duties. Why should he give donations during that period? This should stop because this is another way of using public resources at that time. If you want free and fair elections, donations should be banned a year to an election. A donation means, “I have done it as a person.” This should be deleted. 

I would like to propose that clause 13 be deleted because this is a wrong period and that during a campaign, you should not give a donation of whatever nature.

Mr okupa: Madam Chairperson, I would like to also know from the chairperson, and possibly the Attorney-General, if we are importing this word “donation”, would it also apply across, even to parliamentary elections? If you put it here, are you planning it to also apply to the Members of Parliament and local councils V? That is what I would like to know before I either support or reject it. It cannot only apply to the President; if it does, then it should apply to all others.

The Chairperson: I thought the chairperson is deleting those words. 

Mr oboth: I need to give a background to that. 

The Chairperson: Let him tell us why they had no issues.

Mr oboth: Donations, brown envelopes - I actually thought that the Members from that side where I sit should be supporting this. This, as I said earlier, was also a forceful decision and a matter of litigation in the Supreme Court in the election petition I referred to above, with one of the counsels being present.

They complained about the presidential donations during the campaigns. So, this law is to regulate that. If we want it to also regulate parliamentary elections, we shall go and get it – He participated actively and he has quite a good memory.

Mr niwagaba: Members may not have the principal Act. I would like my friend, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, not to object. In the principal Act, subsection (9) states, “For the purpose of this section, fundraising shall not include the soliciting of funds for a candidate to organise for elections or donations given by the President…” 

If we delete the words, “all donations given by the President”, he will have no legal justification to give donations during campaigns. We only stop the amendment once to exclude him from giving donations whatsoever. Let us allow the amendment as proposed by the committee. 

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 13 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Mr oboth: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We propose to insert a new clause immediately after clause 13. The Bill is amended by inserting a new clause as follows:

“Insertion of section 79A in the principal Act

The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 79 the following:
79A. Involvement of public officers in political campaigns
(1) A public officer who –
(a) campaigns, solicits for votes or public support for a candidate; or
(b) uses or permits another person to use public resources for purposes of campaigning, soliciting for votes or support for a candidate;
Commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding five hundred currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years or both.”

The justification is: In compliance with the recommendation of the Supreme Court in the case of Amama Mbabazi vs Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General, Presidential Election Petition No. 1, wherein the Supreme Court directed the enactment of legislation to explicitly prohibit public servants from involvement in political campaigns.

You all remember it was a matter in the areas of Kanungu or western Uganda where the Executive Director of Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and Kampala – We are trying and we should thank Government for complying.

Mr nzoghu: Madam Chairperson, before the Attorney-General comes in –

The Chairperson: Let us hear whether the minister accepts or not.

Mr kafuuzi: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose a small amendment to 79A (1)(b) - “uses or permits another person to use public resources for purposes of campaigning, soliciting for votes or support for a candidate, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding…” Here, we want to propose 24 currency points instead of 500, or imprisonment for a period of one year or both instead of five years. The committee’s proposal would be overly punitive. The punishment would be too big. That is the justification. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I have heard the submission of the chairperson, for which I am happy. Hon. Oboth, today you are a good man. However, I would like us to deepen it because the chairperson only mentioned a public officer, but there is a distinct difference between a public officer and a civil servant. I would like us to broaden this to include a public officer and civil servants, so that then we can know that we are comprehensive and very clear in our submission. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Public service defines a civil servant. 

MR NIWAGABA: Let me give you information, honourable member. When you look at the Constitution, it only defines a public officer and public service, not civil service. When you read the definition of “public office” it means an office in the public service; and the “public officer” means a person holding or acting in any public office. Therefore, let us maintain the provision as proposed in the Bill. Your importation of “civil servant” is not appropriate. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, let us be realistic. The salary of the Executive Director of UNRA is about 20,000 dollars, which is Shs 75 million. If you say 500 currency points, that is Shs 10 million. If you do not make it punitive, these people will continue committing offences. Even the chairperson of the committee, a few minutes ago, said that the Attorney-General helped them. The 500 currency points is equal to two years. In years, you looked at it very well and said this person shall be penalised five years or both. That means you saw the gravity of the matter. 

Madam Chairperson, we should go with the gravity of five years and the currency points should be 2000. The justification is that if a man is sure of Shs 10 million, he will commit a crime. However, if he thinks of 2000 currency points, that is Shs 40 million, he will think twice. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you are thinking about these high earning officers, what about a CAO in Kyegegwa? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the law says, “Not exceeding…” If we get –(Interruption) 

MR CENTENARY: Madam Chairperson, we already have precedent in one of the laws that we passed in this House; the Uganda Wildlife Act, where people are required to pay fines in billions of shillings. Therefore, Shs 40 million is nothing. If a mere poacher, who is looking for a kilogramme of meat in the national park can be fined one billion or three billion shillings, what about an ED who earns Shs 70 million? 

I agree with hon. Nandala-Mafabi. In fact, it should even be made 4000 currency points because the law is supposed to be deterrent.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the committee and the chairperson have made a very good recommendation. I would like to appeal to colleagues to go by the proposals of the chairperson of the committee and reject the proposals brought by other colleagues, like the Attorney-General.

Madam Chair, I propose that the question be put on the amendment as put by the chairman of the committee and we proceed? 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, the reason I proposed to amend it from 500 currency to 24 and from five years to one year is to bring it in tandem with what is already provided for in Section 16(2) of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, 2005; Act 18 of 2005. This provision is already there. It talks of 24 currency points or imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year. 

MR OKUPA: Honourable Attorney-General, I would like you to have a flashback. You are our O.B. Remember the situation we went for in your case in Kyenjojo over such matters. I think we should go by the proposals – I do not want to go into details. I think this would be able to solve the issue. It is not so tyrant and so low. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, both these laws are alive. In one, they will give this person one year and in the other five years for the same offence. The Political Parties and Organisations Act says 24 currency points and imprisonment of one year. It has not been amended. Now, the same offence is five years.

MR ABALA: Madam Chairperson, I know there is a difference here. I think this is the time we should harmonise all our laws. Now that the gravity of the matter here is concerning an offence that has been created by someone or a law intentionally created, my opinion is that the chairperson was very clear in his proposals. He said that if you have committed this offence, it is 500 currency points or you go to prison for at least two or a maximum of five years, which is a bit fairer because we shall be tackling a problem. We shall be deterring some people from committing an offence.

However, for us to agree with 24 currency points, Madam Chairperson, what is going to happen is that – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the 24 currency points are already in the law; in the Political Parties and Organisations Act. Therefore, you are putting the judge in a difficult position. Should he give 24 currency points or 500?

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Section 16 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act, being referred to by the chairperson and the learned Attorney-General, is inapplicable. The reason I am saying so is because in application, it is restrictive because it says engage in canvassing in support of a political party or organisation or of a candidate standing for public election sponsored by a political party or organisation. This means that if you are not being sponsored by a political party or organisation then a public officer can canvass or give you support. So, if you are independent, you are free to seek support from public officers. That is why it is really very important for us to distinguish the two because the moment we seek refuge in the Political Parties and Organisations Act, we create one loophole and that is the independents who can easily exploit this loophole.

I think that it is really important for us to be very clear but the observation of creating harmony is very important. It is only that you cannot create harmony without specifically making provision that even independents must be covered by this law. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal? I wish you could give us proposals. Now, you are just debating so that we can all think and – what is your proposal to secure the situation?

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, the proposal is to maintain the position of the committee.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, in the committee provision, we were aware that the other agreed on  was to provide for the maximum not exceeding even the 24 currency points falls within that but we wanted to send a message that this is a serious offence and it is a no go area.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give to the House is that once you are charged with an offence before court, you are charged under as specific section. So, if you are charged under this section then you can be convicted up to five years or five hundred currency points. 

However, if you are charged under the other law, then the Judge will have the latitude to give you only that. So, we are proceeding well because under this law, if you are charged with this one then you are subject to that one. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced as proposed by the chair.

(Question put and greed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think clause 14 no longer applies.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, on clause 14, we already amended section 4, which dealt away with the issue of certifying documents. So, I am proposing that it should be deleted because it is now a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is on two issues. It is both on the certified copy but also on the certificate of discharge. So, they all go together.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Once we delete, it means that the old law will be applicable because the old law is about the national council. It will only be applicable for those with the equivalent so, you still have to go to National Council for Higher Education. However, this one is proposing both that you go with a certified copy of your A’level qualification plus also those ones in equivalence. So, if we delete it, the old law will be applicable and only those ones with equivalent will have to go.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, we are not dealing with that one. I was saying that in addition to the certified copy, there is a schedule here with the certificate of discharge. So, I am saying we dealt away with those and both of them are no longer applicable. For the reasons given, I put the question that clause 14 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, deleted.

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I had sent for the Constitution. The present Constitution after 2017 provides as follows: A person is qualified for elections if that person –
“
    a) is a citizen of Uganda by birth;
    b) is a registered voter; and
    c) has completed minimum formal education of advanced level standard or its equivalent.” So, what the chair was bringing is what is in the Constitution.

I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Minister, can you move the motion?

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, we wanted your guidance specifically on the interpretation and definition of “public officer”. I have been discussing with hon. Niwagaba and I wanted to invite him to give a definition of the “public officer” in light of what I submitted.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, when we were amending that clause prohibiting public officers, we had wanted to extend the definition of “public officers” not by way of definition but to extend it to members of the commission, councils and authorities because they are the ones they use specifically in political campaigns. Under the Constitution, the reference to a “public officer” excludes members of the commission, members of the authorities and councils. We had wanted that that particular clause provides for “public officers, members of the commission, authorities and councils” for purpose of this Act.
 
I intended to move a motion that on the third reading we recommit that particular clause to capture the spirit of that amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: To recommit what, we have not discussed it and it was not part of the decision we took.

MR NIWAGABA: It is under the new clause. The clause prohibiting public officers, we wanted to extend to “public officers, members of the commission, members of the authorities and councils” because the Constitution excludes them from being public officers, yet they are the ones who are normally used in campaigns.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this matter has a background and I don’t want to refer to the lawyer who lost the case. However, the issue is there was “public officers” and the petitioner is mentioned here in the case.  A lawyer never loses a case and I withdraw that matter in reference to the lawyer. 

“Public officer” as defined in the Constitution, we should resist the temptation to expand that beyond what is seen in the Constitution. The Act we are making has a message that will try to serve the purpose. 

PROF: KAMUNTU: Madam Chairperson, Clause 9A, which concerns the eligibility to stand as independent candidates – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you do not recommit at this stage. Please move the motion I have asked you to. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019” and passed the following clauses: 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 12 and 13 with amendments and deleted the following clauses: 4, 6, 8 and 14. A new clause has also been inserted. Madam Speaker, I beg to report. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.27
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

7.28
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I wish to recommit clause 9A on the eligibility to stand as an independent candidate. It is a very important clause.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you have to convince the House as to why you are recommitting this clause; it is not automatic. You must convince us that we need to recommit it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: I just want to convince the House. If you are not ready for multiparty political system, we better go back to the movement system of governance.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to try to recommit a clause that has been overwhelmingly supported by both sides of the House for deletion? And he is trying to intimidate members. 

THE SPEAKER: He has a right to try.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Speaker, in rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure, there is a procedure for recommital. Under sub rule (2), the motion for recommital must be agreed to. It means that it must be subjected to a vote and so, I implore you, Madam Speaker, to subject that to the vote so that members can pronounce themselves on it.

THE SPEAKER: Let him give his reasons before we can take a vote. 

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I regard his clause very important because - let us not pretend. For instance, hon. Mawanda is an independent Member of Parliament but NRM-leaning.

The issue is –(Interjections)– when you are speaking, I listen.

THE SPEAKER: We are dealing with the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. Address it in the context of the presidential elections.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. All I am putting to the members, those who are leaning, whether it is NRM or FDC is, how low must you lean for you to be independent? If you cannot define this, you are a member of the party but because of the weakness of your own party – all those leaning are not independents. That is why I wanted to convince members that only those – 

THE SPEAKER: Just speak to the motion or against it.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, hon. Prof. Kamuntu – my economics professor at Makerere University - has attempted once again to convince us on a clause that was agreed on unanimously by the House, that the status quo stays. I notice that he has failed to convince us. 

When we asked him during the start of the committee stage, and Madam Speaker, you also asked him to tell us how he ceased being a member of the UPC Party, he failed to explain. He also failed to lay on the Table, the discharge certificate from the UPC party. He felt embarrassed to disown UPC. That is why he did not answer the questions put to him regarding the issue of independents. 

Now he has come back threatening that we are not ready to nurture democracy. The Constitution is very clear and we have been operating under that Constitution. 

We were here - and we used to all sit on that side - when in 2005 we decided to move to the multiparty arrangement but we have not seen anything useful.

I would like to call upon members to reject it and I request you, Madam Speaker, to put the question for us to reject the attempt to recommit, so that we can pronounce ourselves instead of wasting our time to move to the next stage of the Bill. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, is there anyone who supports the minister’s position?

MR BABA: Madam Speaker, I am not supporting the minister’s proposal. (Laughter). I would like to inform the House and the country that after the elections of 1980, the current President was not satisfied with the results of that election. He took the freedom to go to the bush, which is the freedom we are enjoying today. If he was not allowed that independence to decide on his own, maybe we would still be wondering under the Lutwa’s and terrible regimes. Honourable minister, do not bar people from exercising their freedom to be what they want. (Applause). I do not support it. Thank you.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, I rise under rule 80, to move a motion that debate on this matter closes and the question be put on the motion by Prof. Kamuntu to recommit this particular close. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this clause be recommitted.

(Question put and negatived.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

7.36
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019 be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2020”

THE SPEAKER: Titled settled and Bill passes. Let us adjourn to Tuesday. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much. A lot of work has been done. I think we shall move faster with the next Bills because the principles are basically the same. I want to adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.37 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 3 March at 2.00 p.m.) 
