


Tuesday, 6 February 2018

Parliament met at 2.21 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I will begin by adjusting the Order Paper to permit item 3(II) to come in as item 3(I). 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work you did on the National Budget Framework Paper. I hope the Cabinet will work on the policy statements which, under rule 145 (2) of the Rules of Procedure, should include the following statutory items: 

    a) Achievements of the vote for the previous financial year;
    b) The annual and three months’ work plans and outcomes, objectives, outputs, targets and performance indicators of the work plans and outcomes;
    c) The annual procurement plan of the vote; 
    d) The annual recruitment plan of the vote; 
    e) A statement of actions taken by the vote to implement the recommendations of Parliament in respect to the report of the Auditor-General of the preceding year; 
    f) Cash flow projections of the vote; 
    g) A Certificate of Gender and Equity Responsiveness; 
    h) A vehicle utilisation report; 
    i) The asset register of the vote; 
    j) A report on the loan portfolio and utilisation; and 
    k) A statement on domestic arrears. 

I am reminding you about this because sometimes we see instances of copy and paste. Therefore, we would like you to address these issues according to the Rules of Procedure.

I also would like to remind the committees and the clerks that we need to include an evaluation of the compliance with the gender and equity certificate as well as checklist on human rights.

Honourable members, as we prepare for the policy statements, I would like to raise a concern which has been brought to me from the Judiciary about the rights of the citizens to access to justice. It is a very big challenge in many districts. There are some areas in the country where districts are sharing one chief magistrate. That means on Monday, he sits in Jinja; on Tuesday, he sits in Iganga; and on another day, he is in Pallisa. Therefore, work cannot be done. 

Therefore, I would like us to support the Judiciary and also the population. I would like to give you an example. Registrars are supposed to be 32 but only 12 have been appointed; there is a balance of 20. Chief magistrates are supposed to be 100 but only 43 have been appointed; the balance of 57 have not been recruited. There should be 386 magistrates Grade I but there are only 187; nearly 200 positions remain outstanding.

Honourable members, in our neighbouring jurisdiction in Kenya, the High Court judges are over 120. Ghana, which is smaller than our country, has more than 100 High Court judges. Therefore, I would like to urge ourselves to support the population. They get frustrated and it is possible that it could be the cause of lawlessness, mob justice, et cetera. Please, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, work with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to ensure that this issue is also addressed.

I also would like to draw the attention of the Members to the significance of today. It is an important day; it is not only Tarehe Sita but for the girls of the world, it is the International Day of Zero Tolerance to Female Genital Mutilation. Unfortunately, ever since 2009 when the President launched the campaign in Amudat, there has never been a national awareness campaign on this issue. The only campaigns that are there are organised by United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and the affected communities of Sebei and Pokot. We have never had a national awareness campaign. 

Therefore, I would like to ask the Government to take up this issue especially because we need to engage our colleagues in Kenya because of the cross-border incursions. I would like to ask the Government to rise up and support the girls of this country and also the neighbouring country. However, I will ask the Committee on East African Community Affairs to engage our counterparts on the other side of the border so that we work together and end this violence against our children. Thank you very much. 

There were a few Members who had matters of national concern to raise. Hon. Jovah Kamateeka, you have two minutes. She will be followed by hon. Luttamaguzi.

2.27
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance. On this day, when the country celebrates Tarehe Sita, which ushered in the people’s Parliament, this Parliament should ask for an explanation from the Executive, especially from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, about the aggressive manner in which a District Police Commander (DPC) Kirumira was arrested.

This is a man whose only artillery was his tongue. Cutting through his doors so as to extract him like a rat was not necessary. As a serving officer, there are disciplinary measures that could have been taken against him. We now know that Mr Kirumira was supposed to appear in court on that day. Really, the police could have waited and got him at the court premises or anywhere outside his house. 

Further concern is that the whole exercise was done in total disregard of other members of his family who must have been innocent. This exercise must have traumatised Kirumira’s wife and the children. We did not even see any of the police officers make an effort to explain to the wife and other members of the family as to why this arrest was done in such a manner. Every accused person has rights and the police know this, being the custodian of law and order. The issue traumatised not only Kirumira’s family but all well-meaning Ugandans who watched the arrest. 

I speak on behalf of the Committee on Human Rights of this Parliament. I would like to strongly condemn this action - (Applause) - and hope the commander who gave the order for the arrest to be done in this manner is identified and dealt with accordingly. Ugandans need an explanation, Madam Speaker.

The other issue of concern regards Ministry of Health. Two weeks ago, the country watched in horror, on national television, as a man cut the throat of a guinea pig, drained its blood in a cup, mixed it with some substance and gave it to a child who was about 4 years old to drink it. He purported this was a cure for malaria. The Ministry of Health is silent and the loud silence can only mean one thing to Ugandans, that this is an approved alternative method for treatment of malaria.

Ministry of Health needs to come out. Supposing this animal was sick, the kid would have picked the disease. The utensils used in the exercise tell a story. The man cut the throat of the guinea pig and put the knife down and made like he wanted to pick it and make a deeper cut but he could have realised that he was on national television.

Madam Speaker, the people of Uganda deserve better and deserve to be advised by the Government and those they have put their trust in. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I ask the minister to respond later. 

2.31
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke County South, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Two weeks ago, the Committee on Health visited Nakaseke South. They visited Semuto Health Centre IV and Nakaseke Hospital. We discovered that there are machines that were bought expensively by Government but they are redundant and not in use. In Semuto Health Centre IV, there is an aesthetic machine, which they said cost Shs 600 million, but it has not been functional for four years now. The supplier just dumped it there and they do not know how to use.

When we went to Nakaseke, we discovered an incinerator, which is worth Shs 650 million, also not working; it was just dumped there. We also discovered that there is an autoclave sterilizer machine, which cost a whooping Shs 1 billion, but it stays redundant.

Lastly, we got a report that in the whole country, there was one supplier who supplied aesthetic machines to all health centres IV in the country and they are all not working. Therefore, we wanted to get accountability from the Government. It may not only be Nakaseke but all other health centres IV in the country where the machines are not working. We wanted to get accountability and a report explaining why Government purchased such expensive machines and they are just dumped there. Thank you.

2.34
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance regarding the constant attacks, torture and theft of property of the people of Agago constantly by the Karimojong. The most recent attack was yesterday at 5.00 p.m. when about 10 armed Karimojong attacked the village of Anywangai in Lojim Parish, Omiya Pachwa Subcounty. 

When they attacked, they were armed with spears, bows and arrows, axes and many other instruments. After they attacked the village, they kidnapped the following people: Mr Walter Ochan, 29 years; Sadam Otto, 30 years; Ochaya Adios, over 40 years old; and David Oyo. What makes this worse is that these people I have named above where attacked, beaten and tortured until they were left dead, except one who was resuscitated and is at the moment being taken care of in Kalong Hospital, by the name of David Oyo. However, the first three I mentioned are dead.

Madam Speaker, these attacks have been constant. We have been raising the matter of attacks from the Karimojong every year around this time. However, the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs and Ministry of Internal Affairs have never come up with a statement to explain what takes place and why we are being disturbed. The communities of Kitgum, Agago, and Otuke are never at peace around this time. 

Now that my people have been killed, I would like the Minister of Internal Affairs to explain the people he sent to kill my people last night. At the moment, people are paralysed. We need an immediate statement that must include solutions to the problems, which should include stopping these people from entering the boundaries of Agago District. Each time they come in search of pasture and water for their animals, they destroy our property, uproot our cassava and at the end of the day, Government ends up again feeding them instead of giving assistance to those they are stealing food from.

Madam Speaker, I need an immediate statement from the Ministry of Internal Affairs on how they are dealing with this matter and with those one who launched an attack last night in Agago district. I want to know what the Ministry of Internal Affairs has done with them, whether they have already been arrested. This is because as I speak, the people at the moment are paralysed. The LC V chairperson and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) have camped there to try to calm people down but it is not very easy. Thank you very much.

2.38
MR PADDY KASUMBA (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to raise a matter of national importance concerning the effect of the importation of duty free sugar from Kenya into this country. 

Last year, the Kenyan Government unilaterally imported one million tonnes of sugar into this country. Since then, we have had sugar from Thailand and Brazil come in through the border districts of Busia and Malaba. That sugar is tax free and it has affected our local industry. Yesterday, I was at Kinyara Sugar Factory, which is found in my constituency, Bujenje. They have 11,000 tonnes of sugar in their stores. When we inquired from Kakira, they said they have 70,000 tonnes of sugar packed in their stores. The same applies to Lugazi and Kaliro sugar factories.

This sugar is not monitored-(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to add my voice to my colleague’s concern about imported sugar. Kamuli Sugar is now closed; they are not operating. Probably, they will open next week because of the stock that is very high in their store. That is why we are expressing this concern. Thank you.

MS BINTU: Madam Speaker, hardly a month ago, this Parliament discussed the issue of importation of sugar and sugar prices rising. The Minister of State for Trade had to withdraw the statement he made and he assured this House that he would come back with a detailed report.

Madam Speaker, I vividly remember that in our discussions, we asked Government not to import any sugar into the country because it would cause all these problems to our local manufactures and to the farmers. I am very surprised that Government allowed this sugar to get into this country.

Madam Speaker, the farmers who have been earning Shs 140,000 per tonne of cane from manufactures now earn Shs 100,000. They are reducing the prices, even in Busoga region and north, because they have plenty of sugar which cannot compete with this sugar that was imported tax free.

Madam Speaker, we need an explanation from the Government. If at all they are serious in helping the local people to grow, they should give us this explanation.

MR KASUMBA: I would like to protest the importation of this sugar. Uganda Sugar Manufacturers Association wrote an elaborate protest to the ministry. However, since last month, no action has been taken. The sugar industry continues to suffer. Our local industries have been suffocated and employees are almost being laid off. 

I am one of the farmers and I know that sugarcane prices have decreased. As a result, we are even now facing malicious bush fires. Most of the canes in Bunyoro get bush fires and we do not know the reason. However, I am made to believe that one of them is this massive importation of illicit sugar in this country. I pray that Government comes up to protect the local industries –(Member timed out)

2.43
MS ROBINAH SSENTONGO (DP, Woman Representative, Kyotera): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the shortage of Antiretrovirals (ARVs) in the health centres and hospital in Kyotera District.

As a Member of Parliament for Kyotera District, and having had the experience of working with people with HIV for over 30 years, I find it tormenting that people are suffering and slowly dropping to their death because of the shortage of ARVs. I have found it difficult to keep quiet and not talk about this. 

Last year, during my campaigns, because they knew that I supported and cared for people with HIV, I was told that there were no ARVs in the health facilities. I thought the issue would be dealt with. However, I have gone to all the facilities, including the health centre IV and Kalisizo Hospital, to ascertain if ARVs were really in shortage. I discovered that the ARVs were most of the time out of stock and clients were sometimes given ARVs for only two weeks. These people travel long distances and sometimes could easily miss out on ARVs. 

Yesterday, I was called by one of the clients of Kakuto Health Centre IV, around 8.30 a.m. I was informed that clients at Kakuto Health Centre IV had started demonstrating. Some were lamenting and some had given up because the situation was alarming. When I went there, I found the clients in a bitter state. Kakuto Health Centre IV has 2,344 clients active on ARVs; 2,142 are adults on first line drugs, 95 are adults on second line drugs and 107 are children. All these were suffering due to lack of the timely supply of ARVs in their facility.

I talked to the in-charge who confirmed that the ARVs were in shortage and the reason he gave was that when they order for ARVs, they are not given enough. They are given according to the order, which had been compromised in trying to address the issue of shortage. Instead of giving ARVs to 10 clients, for example, they would give to 20, to ensure that each client goes with medication. 

THE SPEAKER: What are your prayers?

MS SSENTONGO: I pray that the National Medical Stores, and especially the doctor who told the Committee on Health that ARVs are in plenty, should come here to give us a statement on what is happening and quickly provide ARVs to the clients in Kakuto Health Centre IV and to all clients in Kyotera District. Otherwise, they might slowly die because the repercussions on clients for non-compliance to ARVs are more severe than those who have not taken ARVs at all. I beg to submit.

2.47
MR ANDREW KALUYA (Independent, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a matter of national importance.

During the Parliamentary Week, I got the opportunity to visit most of the departments in this Parliament and I was very happy with the services offered. I would like to particularly thank the Department of Communication and Public Affairs because they are helping us to fight a serious vice in the constituencies. They have come up with an advert that is helping our voters understand the true roles of a Member of Parliament. This advert is very common especially on NTV and other TV stations and it usually comes during the 9.00 o’clock news, but it is only in English. 

Madam Speaker, our colleagues who come from urban areas are more advantaged than us who come from rural areas. We are suffering, and I would like to inform you that I am a victim. Last week, between 30 and 31 January, I was mentioned in the newspapers, especially the Daily Monitor and Red Pepper newspapers. The issue was that the voters were returning the Shs 100,000, which I had given as a contribution towards the extension of national water in one of the villages.

Madam Speaker, this is something that I did out of my own will. One of the reasons given by the people who returned the money is that after pocketing Shs 29 million to go and consult, I could not spare some little money to help them on this issue

Madam Speaker, as MPs we are at a very big disadvantage because our voters know how much we earn, when we are paid and even when our payment is delayed. We must devise a way of handling such issues. Also, when we extend these services, it is out of our own will.

I request the Department of Communication and Public Affairs to spread this message across the country. Bring out these adverts even in Lusoga so that my people there do not disturb me again. (Interruption)

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. As the colleague requests the parliamentary staff in charge of communication to have it in other languages, for us in Amudat District, we do not have any radios. (Laughter) As they plan to do that, let them devise other ways to make this message reach the people down there. Thank you very much. 

MR KALUYA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for the information. Madam Speaker, I also would like to bring it to your attention that people when this happened, it was very big news for our local radios in our constituency because it is very clear that they do not know about these issues. They even do not know the roles of the members of Parliament.  Therefore, if the Department of Communication and Public Affairs could explain - or probably offer some bit of training for these media houses - may be it would help.

Another issue is something that is coming up-(Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I am just adding a voice to what hon. Kaluya is saying. 

When I heard that advertisement, I tried to share with Mr Chris Obore and Ms Ranny Ismail. They were saying that there is a law that prohibits them from putting some of those advertisements in some languages. That is what they told me. I wanted to bring it out here so that it can be sorted out. Otherwise, as we request, we may imagine they are going to translate when they may not. They were saying something about PPDA, they have to go through the procedures; they have to do something to get permission, et cetera. It was related to that because I shared with both of them at length. 

Therefore, I request that the concerned department -  since the Clerk is also here -  should sort it out. Thank you.

MR KALUYA: Thank you, honourable colleague. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue I would like to raise, and if not watched by the Government will turn catastrophic, is about the Universal Apostles Fellowship Church of Righteousness. Whereas there is freedom of worship in this country, Government needs to watch some of these religions. They have started a very serious doctrine where they are even asking parents to expel children from their homes if the children do not abide by their principles. They also tell husbands that if your wife has deviated from your religion, expel her and do not have any connections with her again. 

My humble prayer is that the Government should try and check some of these religions before we get another Kanungu incident. We need to address this because children are saying, “This is the father and mother I know; if you are chasing me out of this home, I would rather have these parents dead”. However, the father says, “You will not come back into my home for as long as you do not believe in what I believe in”. 

Even when the children take the parent to the police and the parents are detained, there is a way the churches work and get the parent released without the children being helped. This situation has happened in my constituency and the youth are asking me to find a way to address this problem. Therefore, I appeal to Government to look into this and where necessary, let us prevail over some of these religions. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, starting with the last issue, I would like to invite the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development, who is in charge of the communities, to check what is happening in Kigulu with the Universal Apostles Fellowship Church of Righteousness. If that is what is happening, it should be addressed. People in Uganda have a right to worship. Whether your father or mother is different, everybody has their own rights. Therefore, let the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development examine that and give us an update.

On the issue of the advert, I do not believe there is a law in this country that says you only speak this language and not the other. We have the Access to Information Act and I want to believe that it is available for everybody. However, I want to ask the Clerk to check what the barrier is that stops Parliament from speaking Karimojong, Lukonzo or all those other languages so that we are able to advise the Members of the House.

On the issues of Kyotera, I ask the Ministry of Health to respond to the outcry of the people there on the shortage of ARVs, especially in particular areas, which have been mentioned by hon. Ssentongo.

On the sugar issue, this is extremely serious. You know in this country we had duty-free rice last year and rice flooded this country at the expense of our farmers. Now, we have duty-free sugar, again at the expense of our farmers. Therefore, I want to invite the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come and tell us about whether it is true that there is duty-free sugar from Kenya, Brazil and Thailand competing with our farmers in Kamuli, Kinyara and Lugazi. This is not fair. So, let us have an answer to that one. 

Hon. Luttamaguzi raised something very serious; he said that 150 health centres IV got anaesthetic machines that do not work and they were all supplied by one supplier in the whole country. They are all not working. I do not know whether this has not been captured in the Auditor-General’s report. 

Honourable chairperson, I do not know whether you know about this. However, let me direct that a value-for-money audit on this particular procurement be carried out. If it is true that all are not working yet the supplier is the same - Will you be able to say something about it, honourable minister? Okay, I will come to you.

Ministry of Internal Affairs is here; there is the issue of the Karimojong and the DPC for Buyende. The Minister of Health will then speak to us on the use of a guinea pig’s blood as treatment for malaria. I do not know whether you want to say something to us now or you will come back to us later.

2.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I apologise for coming in late. We had another stakeholders’ meeting on results based financing.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that some time back, I gave a report to this House on the state of equipment that we received and gave to various health facilities. I also did inform you that some of this equipment is not in use, partially because we lack anaesthetic officers. We have very few of this category of cadres in this country. Working with the Ministry of Education and Sports, we now have a three-year course in Bachelors of Anaesthesia and we have offered scholarships to about 30 students. 

Despite that, Madam Speaker, I think we shall still have to get more details and then follow it up. Allow me to come with a statement on this on Tuesday.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, regarding the blood shortage in the country-

THE SPEAKER: There was an advertisement on television where someone was treating a child for malaria using the blood of a guinea pig.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, there are contradictory statements. Some people are saying it was lack of blood that resulted into that treatment-

THE SPEAKER: No, no; check the Hansard. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, let me respond to that after getting -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kamateeka raised it. Hon. Kamateeka, please repeat it for the minister.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, two weeks ago, the country watched in a surprise as this man cut the throat of a guinea pig and drained blood in a cup, mixed it with some substance and gave it to a child of four years to drink. The child drank the blood while we were watching –(Interruption)

MR GAFABUSA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Kamateeka, for giving way. The story we are talking about is from my constituency in Bundibugyo. It happened in my constituency. I visited the family, talked to them and indeed they confirmed that they were using blood from guinea pigs to supplement the acute shortage of blood in the district. Because there is no blood in the hospital, there is no blood in Fort-portal blood bank, they have resorted to using animal blood to supplement the acute shortage. Thank you.

MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true we have been having blood shortage in the country partially due to two reasons. One is that most of the blood that we have in our health facilities is actually donated by the students and since they were on holiday, collection became a challenge.

Secondly, in January we lacked funds to procure the reagents that we use in screening the blood that we collect from different individuals. The blood that we give to patients must be safe and free from other diseases. Therefore, we have worked closely with the finance ministry and I would like to inform the House that Shs 5 billion has now been released to the National Medical Stores. This will be adequate to procure the necessary reagents and supplies to take us through up to June - (Interruption).

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, it is good for us to hear the progress and the measures that you are putting in place to ensure that the country has sufficient blood supply. However, our concern is that when we see this kind of thing happening and nobody comes out to say anything, the health ministry does not come out to advise Ugandans that it is dangerous to use blood from an animal and feed it directly to a child, we get concerned.

Feeding the public with the right kind of information and warning them as they wait for you to make sure that blood is available is important.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I do appreciate the point that hon. Kamateeka is making. I have been to several media houses speaking about the blood shortage and advising Ugandans on exactly what to do.  

However, I appeal to you as Members of Parliament to donate blood. We have had camps here. Even during the last camp two weeks ago, the response was very poor from Members of Parliament themselves. Therefore, it is important that we get into the culture of donating blood. At least every individual below the age of 50 years should donate blood three times a year - at least once every quarter is good enough.

Regarding the antiretroviral –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification. The critical thing is what we saw on television, which the honourable member has ably submitted and it indeed happened. I saw the medical doctor from Bundibugyo cautioning that it was very dangerous for human beings to take blood directly from animals because it might be infected. 

We need a critical follow up on that because they mixed blood with soda and the child consumed it. We do not know whether it is a habit that is being stopped or it is continuing and needs to be arrested.

Secondly, I have been a blood donor from childhood, and if there is a critical shortage of blood in this country I think we should lead by example. I am passionate about this because mothers are dying. We would request that we come back as Parliament and we lead by example. The children have also now gone back to school. Let us try to mobilise blood for this country; otherwise, children, mothers and even the men are dying.

Therefore, I would want the honourable minister to clarify this action so that we swing in action rather than remain lamenting.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to know how many of you gave blood during the Parliament Week. We brought them here for a whole week. Should I invite them again? Okay, I will arrange for it.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am glad that the Members are pledging to be available and I do thank those who managed to donate blood. On day one, we actually had about three pints, which was very unfortunate.

However, allow me to indicate that we do condemn that kind of action - (Interruption). 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, honourable minister. Madam Speaker, I personally donated blood three weeks ago. 

There was a radio programme that I was invited to by the blood bank with the purpose of mobilising the people. The phone callers on that radio programme said that they give blood for free but the blood is being sold in hospitals. If you go to hospitals, they say there is no blood and you need to pay Shs 1 million to get your blood.

Therefore, the mind-set of ordinary Ugandans, which we may have to think about seriously and probably even change the law, is that blood should be turned into a commodity so that those who donate are paid Shs 1 million or Shs 2 million. That way, we shall be overwhelmed with blood. Otherwise, people do not want to donate freely when others are selling it. That is the mind-set of the people down there. I thought of giving that useful information. If it is Shs 1 million per unit of blood, you will be overwhelmed with the blood you will get.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, I thought you had raised the issue of blood being sold to the patients. Now you want to be paid to give it to the doctor and the doctor sells it to the patient.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, what I am saying is controversial, but I am not a medical practitioner. The ordinary people down there say that they cannot give their blood when the doctors are selling it. I personally had the same challenge with my late dad. Every time we needed blood, they said they needed Shs 3 million because there was no blood and they had to buy it.

Therefore, since there is already selling of blood, the ordinary people should be mobilised but regulated by law so that for a specific unit of blood you donate, there is a cap which has been established by law. In that way, people can voluntarily come and donate blood. Even if it is at Shs 500,000 per unit, you will be overwhelmed. You will even collect trailers of blood, I can assure you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to do other work. Let us close this.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Blood in our health facilities is given free of charge. A few undisciplined cases may be selling it but we will investigate such cases, get details from the Members of Parliament who have this evidence, and take the necessary action. Otherwise, blood is supposed to be given free of charge in the health facilities.

My humble request, Madam Speaker, is for all Ugandans and not only Members of Parliament, to donate blood because we do not have any factory that makes blood. The factory is you and I.

Regarding the antiretrovirals, the shortage -

THE SPEAKER: I think you will bring a statement. Let us go the Minister of Internal Affairs.

MS OPENDI: Let me respond to the issue of antiretrovirals because I made a statement.

THE SPEAKER: Quickly.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, on the shortage of antiretrovirals, we do have adequate quantities of antiretroviral drugs. However, the challenge that we have been having is that now with the test and treat policy, some of the districts have not adjusted the quantities that they ask for from the National Medical Stores. We have now alerted all the District Health Officers (DHOs) that we have adequate quantities and that they should come up with the correct quantities and ask for these drugs from the National Medical Stores. 

We have received information that there are people collecting antiretroviral drugs and giving them to pigs and chicken. This is very unfortunate. This information is true and we would like to condemn it. 

I will bring a statement regarding the Bundibugyo case, Madam Speaker. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of State for Internal Affairs, do you anything to say or you will bring a statement?

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, on the two issues which were raised, I would like to state that I will make a comprehensive statement next week. However, the immediate reaction I have on the invasion of Agago District by the Karimojong is that it is a very unfortunate incident. However, I would like to assure hon. Franca Akello that we did not send people to kill Ugandans there. 

What is happening in that area, and we need to plan for it more seriously, is caused by the drought across the borders every year. This is why you have the pastoralists from either side crossing the border in search of pasture and water. The border is very large and the police who are at the border are very thin on the ground and many of them are not well motorised. Therefore, you find a police unit which is very far and by the time they respond to such an incursion, some damage could have already been done. 

However, this morning when we got that information about the possibility of what happened in Agago District and other related areas, we asked for a written report. By the time we get this report, I am sure that we shall be able to give you a detailed report next week detailing the various people who died, the survivors and what the security people said.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all the statements will be presented on Tuesday next week. Hon. Obiga Kania will tell us those who died, who killed them and whether the suspects are in prison and charged.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE ESCALATING FUEL PRICES

3.14
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At the 27th Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on 31 January 2018, hon. Muhammad Nsereko, Member of Parliament for Kampala Central, raised concern over the increasing prices of diesel and petrol in the country. It is against this background that I make this statement.

Uganda is a net importer of petroleum products in a liberalised downstream petroleum market and the prices in Uganda are determined by the forces of demand and supply. Uganda’s consumption of petroleum products has continued to grow at about seven per cent per annum on a daily basis. The country consumes an average of 2.7 million litres for each product of petrol and diesel. Of these, 91 per cent is imported through Mombasa and 9 per cent passes through the port of Dar es Salaam.

Madam Speaker, the strategies to keep the country well supplied, therefore, hinge on the effectiveness of the import routes and the in-country storage facilities. In this case, the Mombasa and Dar es Salaam ports together with other terminals in Kenya are all being utilised by the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) to import products into Uganda.

On the international scene, the monthly average crude oil prices per barrel started rising from about US$ 52.02 in August to US$ 55.74 in September, US$ 57.50 in October, US$ 62.49 in November, US$ 62.89 in December 2017 and recently in January, the prices have shot up to US$ 69.45, almost getting to US$70. These are the monthly average crude oil prices. As you may realise, if you google on a daily basis, you will see how the prices keep fluctuating. What I am reading is what was taken as the average over a month.   

The rise in the crude oil prices was due to the huge storm in United States that shut down many of the production sites and refineries in the US Gulf Coast. Oil prices continued to increase in November and December 2017, as the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) agreed on extending production cuts further to June 2018, showing their willingness to balance supply and demand.

Madam Speaker, Uganda being landlocked and a net importer of refined petroleum products, pump prices are a function of fixed logistical costs, which include port handling fees, transit handling charges, storage fees, transportation, taxes, clearing and marking fees. The combination of the logistical costs together with the cost of the imported products, which increased as a result of the increased refinery premiums in the Open Tender System (OTS) since September 2017, have resulted in the increased pump prices. 

We have given a graph showing the monthly average crude oil price movements and the corresponding movements on local pump prices over the last one year. We have also looked at the pump prices within the region and in the table, Annex 2, we have given a summary of the regional prices as at 5 February 2018.

On the supply side, we have had a stable import of petroleum products in the country irrespective of the current infrastructural developments of the Kenya Pipeline Company where the new Mombasa-Nairobi pipeline is undergoing wet testing. 

With the fair competition that has been built over the years in the liberalised downstream petroleum subsector and the measures put into place to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products, the pump prices will continue to respond to the forces of demand and supply in a free market economy.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the interplay of the rise in crude prices and refinery premiums, since we import refined products, is the major cause of the rise in pump prices since the rest of the parameters that I have highlighted like taxes, transport and handling costs have been constant. With the measures put into place to ensure a steady supply of petroleum products and fair competition in the downstream petroleum subsector, my ministry will continue to monitor the subsector and engage the oil marketing companies to ensure that the citizens continue to get value for money from the consumption of petroleum products. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

3.20
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for trying to carry out some research on what informs the figures of pump prices worldwide.

The tax payer of Uganda has entrusted this Government with the authority to manage reserves. Knowing that their earnings are not pegged to the rise in the prices of goods and commodities, it means that affects their real income. I will give you a simple example. Assuming someone is paid transport allowance at a pump price of Shs 3,000 and the price goes up from Shs 3,000 during that projection to Shs 4,000, this means that if that person is to continue covering the same kilometres they have been covering, their real income will definitely go down and their savings will be affected.

Why did the countrymen entrust Government with the ability to retain reserves? It is for only one reason, and that was the question. The issue is not why prices have gone up. Indeed, everyone knows the reasons that lead to the rise of prices. The issue is: What intervention did you make?

Recently, we were here and the Speaker laboured to ask not only you, hon. Irene Muloni and hon. David Bahati about the power tariffs when we were giving a tax waiver. You laboured to state that we can promise Ugandans that the power tariffs shall go down. Ugandans have trusted you not once, not twice, not ten times. 

I remember the same question was raised when the price of crude oil per barrel dropped from US$ 120 to US$ 33 and you said that you have no control; it is an issue of demand and supply. Why is it that when the prices of crude oil today have gone up, you are telling this Parliament that now we are shifting the gear, it is the issue of demand and supply and yet the price of crude oil per barrel has gone up? (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, when I was chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances, we informed your office that we were visiting the Government reserves and we physically went to three locations as a committee. 

In Nakasongola, we found nothing, not even one litre of oil. The reserve was totally dilapidated. We then went to Jinja and we found nothing. There was an attempt by Government to privatise the national oil reserve to an individual handler. 

This is the information I am giving you; as of now, we do not have a single active national oil reserve. That is the information we laid before the House that time. I thought I should give you that information.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, hon. Otto. We come here to Parliament to represent our countrymen, knowing that there are certain members of this society, be it doctors or those that practice privately as private entrepreneurs, that have paid people. Assuming, for example, that someone is being employed at a money exchange bureau, they live in Nansana and their daily fuel allowance is Shs 10,000. Let us assume this person struggles to make a saving of about Shs 3,000. When the cost of transport goes up, that means they will not only start at negative but they will also go into borrowing. This means they have no single solution to offer towards the livelihood of their children. 

We are all taking back our children to school today, and the reason that everyone is giving for the increase in school fees is that children have to be fed and the prices of food and other items they use have gone up. Why? It is because of the fuel inflation we are having. 

Different governments in different areas, after realising that a rise in fuel price shall bring about instability in the economy, come in by boosting supply in order to mitigate increase in prices of fuel at the pump. This is because the abnormal scarcity that shall be created will definitely drive up the prices of fuel and Ugandans shall be left to suffer. 

Ugandans would like to trust you, like I have said. However, on recent occasions, you have assured Ugandans that the prices of electricity, for example, will go down. It is six months or more since we entrusted you with this mandate and they have only increased. The same trend happened when we talked about sugar. It only came down by a little before the cartels went back and the prices are back to high. The question is: Who will Ugandans trust in times of scarcity if they cannot trust this gallant Government? Thank you very much.

3.26
MAJ. (RTD) DAVID GUMA: Madam Speaker, I do not know why we are roasting the energy minister, hon. Irene Muloni. All these are issues that oscillate around economic planning. A little while ago, we talked about sugar, the absence of ARVs, the absence of blood in Government health institutions and the escalating prices of electricity. 

Whenever I pay for Yaka, I get a receipt and I study it. I see very funny fixed charges on the receipt like forex adjustments, fuel adjustment and many others. The aggregate of these, in my view, seems to indicate that the planning function of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is absent because all these are about the economics. They are all oscillating around the economics. 

Madam Speaker, hon. David Bahati, the state minister for planning, suffices to give a binding statement on behalf of the ministry. However, I would like hon. Matia Kasaija, the senior minister at the Ministry of Finance, to tell us the aggregate state of the economy. This is because it seems to me that when people speak, there are lots of problems out there rotating around how the economy is managed, how resources are spent and how various sectors interrelate. 

I listened hon. Sarah opendi. To me, it is as if the Ministry of Health is not really being controlled, administratively speaking. How can you tell us that there is no blood in the country and yet you have not mobilised the Ugandans? It is your duty, administratively, to mobilise Ugandans. They are so many, including those who went to school who do not know the importance of blood donation. Therefore, you must write newspaper articles and engage in television discussion groups. You must also go region by region mobilising Ugandans to donate blood. 

I think these are issues of administration. They are issues that really touch on our economy. They are issues that revolve around planning.     

3.30
MR JACKSON KAFUUZI (NRM, Kyaka South County, Kyegegwa): Madam Speaker, while I appreciate the minister’s statement, I do understand the presentation made by hon. Guma. There are so many concerns in so many sectors. When hon. Franca Akello presented the issue in Agago District, you realise that it is something that happens periodically during the drought and yet we have heard nothing from the line ministry. 

Back to the matter of the increase in fuel prices, I am concerned that our minister is pegging our fuel prices on the international fuel prices. We are not an oil producing country yet. Therefore, we are expected to prepare for times when the prices rise and fall. 

I would like to re-echo what hon. Nsereko asked: what plans do you have for those reserves? If we had our own reserves, we would know the period in which they are supposed to cover us, pending the reduction in international prices. I would like to request the minister to give a clear answer regarding those reserves. I beg to submit.

3.32
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also re-echo the concerns raised by my colleagues because this is a trend we should prepare for. We know that OPEC reduced its production by 1.8 million barrels per day, and these are some of the things they agreed upon. 

While I can understand that a barrel has gone up from around US$ 40 to about US$ 70, my biggest concern is that whenever fuel prices reduce on the international scene, and sometimes drastically, we do not feel the impact here. Now that the price of fuel is at Shs 3,900, it will remain around there forever even when prices fall. That does not only happen with oil but it also happens with the dollar exchange rates and sugar among others. What is the problem?

When you go to major fuel stations like Shell and Total, the price of fuel there is Shs 3,900, but the price at other fuel stations is about Shs 3,800, and yet the source of the fuel is the same. No company imports fuel directly. All of them get fuel from Mombasa. So, who is cheating who? Are they selling us adulterated fuel? Is it on the market?

We also know that internationally, fuel has been left to the forces of demand and supply. However, countries have cushioned themselves with the reserves we are talking about. My question to the minister is: when are you going to intervene, using the reserves we have in the country? You are giving subsidies in the energy sector; when are you going to intervene so that our people do not rush for adulterated fuel? 

We know we have been giving money and you have the reserves. I remember during a meeting with the Committee on Natural Resources the other day, I told the minister that she was giving us her calculations of reserves in form of days but we also needed them in form of quantities. The minister told us seven days and I asked her how many litres we were keeping as a country for those seven days. She told us they are keeping fuel which is enough for seven days. I then said, “Okay, it is enough for seven days, but how many litres are they?” That is our concern as a country.

Therefore, honourable minister, when are you going to intervene in order to arrest the situation like other countries are doing?

3.35
MS HELLEN ADOA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Madam Speaker, as much as we are discussing increasing fuel prices in the country, different petrol stations have different fuel prices. The price of fuel has been increasing partly because of congestion in the city. Look at the fuel that we consume in the city. On Sunday afternoon, when children were being taken back to school, most people stayed in jam for over four hours in different parts of the city. The more congested we are in the city, the greater the demand for fuel and the more we are taken advantage of. 

Madam Speaker, I feel that as much as fuel prices have gone high, there is need for the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and the Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA) to come up with a solution to deal with congestion in the city. Otherwise, this congestion could bring insecurity. Therefore, I would like to request that as we discuss increasing fuel prices, let us not leave out the issue of congestion, which is causing an increase in fuel prices. Thank you.

3.37
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Even though the line minister is around, we would have been more comfortable if the Prime Minister was also present.

Everyone knows that any effect on fuel is collective and it will spill over to all the activities in the country. Time and again, we talk about the reserves and promising things every now and then. Much as Uganda is an open economy, we have opened our economy to other countries and these economies plan for us and determine what runs inside here.

What normally hurts us is that the Government of Uganda watches the price of fuel go up but they do not give any positive response that could be seen from these other activities. I will give an example. I come from a farming area and we cultivate maize. The price of maize from last year to date has been Shs 600. The price of sugarcane that the people have been cultivating has also gone down. Parents cannot take their children to school because the price has gone down and yet the price of fuel has greatly increased. 

Our worry is that when the prices of fuel increase, in some of these rural areas those who sell fuel from jerricans and bottles adulterate the fuel. These traders buy fuel from Kampala, Jinja or wherever, take it to the villages and mix it with paraffin or other products so that they can get money. What is the effect of that? Motor vehicles and motorcycles will become more expensive in terms of maintenance. (Interruption)

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The biggest challenge we have as a country is conflict of interest. As much as we crying here, who are the importers of this oil? They are the same people we are crying to. 

The Baganda have a saying, “Enkima tesala gwakibira”, meaning monkeys cannot preside over a case about the forest because they are direct beneficiaries. We shall continue lamenting because the same people we are crying to are the same people who are supposed to help the citizens of Uganda and yet they are the beneficiaries of the skyrocketing fuel prices. Thank you.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, I think it is high time that this Government feels for Ugandans. As we come here to discuss some of these things, something must be done by the people to whom we entrusted power. 

We cannot continue crying and selling products that we produce at low prices when the people who are importing fuel are reaping big, enjoying and benefitting. They can afford to take their kids to big schools while ours cannot go to big schools.

I think it is high time that whoever is in charge helps this country and does something good. They should provide a solution for this country instead of making Ugandans suffer. As prices of fuel go high, these people are enjoying because they know that they are going to make more money, benefit more and reap higher rewards as Ugandans suffer. Thank you.

3.42
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was doing my masters’ degree, one of my lecturers told me that the biggest problem in African countries and governments is forward planning. I can see a situation where the people who are in charge of planning are not planning for this nation but for themselves. 

There are two ways to solve this problem. Hon. Otto has just said that the buffer stocks that are supposed to solve this problem cannot be held. If they cannot be held, we need to create a stabilisation fund and it is very simple. When prices go low, as has been said here, people do not even bother. In fact, the people who are planning, in my opinion, benefit from that situation otherwise they would be able to control it. Prices going down cannot solve the problem because you cannot control prices going up again. 

What would happen is that they would definitely stock as much fuel as possible. In fact, we know all the cars that come into the country, we know their consumption so we definitely should be able to know the consumption of fuel for over a year. We should stock fuel when the prices are low. When the prices go high, we fix the prices at a certain level, sell the fuel that we have and make a profit. That profit constitutes a stabilisation fund that will fund the next high prices when they come and then we can control.

I do not believe that because the world is suffering, we must also suffer. We cannot! We have to plan for our people and that is the way forward. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR PAUL AKAMBA (Independent, Busiki County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue at hand is a very serious one as it affects every Ugandan. Whenever fuel prices go high, the price of every product on the market shoots up. It is bigger than this and it requires an overhaul of the whole economy.

Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee of National Economy. For the over one and a half years I have served on the committee, whereas it is also our role to oversee the economy of this nation, we have never done this. I do not think we should leave the minister with this responsibility solely. 

Madam Speaker, the rules are very clear but we have been reduced to a loans committee. We are acting as loans officers while leaving the economy to go astray. Ugandans are suffering. We are here roasting the minister –(Interruption)

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on National Economy and I normally do not want to take blame unless I have to take it. Hon. Akamba is a member of the same committee and we have presented two reports on the state of the economy to this House. We have made recommendations and Government has not responded; they have not listened. 

Therefore, is the Member in order to imply that it is actually the committee, which is not overseeing the economy, when indeed two reports have been brought on this Floor? Is the Member in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have ascertained that some reports on the state of the economy have been tabled. However, I think hon. Akamba was saying that you have worked on many loans. I think that is what he was saying. (Laughter)

MR AKAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. I conclude by imploring Government to immediately intervene and control fuel prices that are ever fluctuating. 

It could be a deliberate move by Government to have Ugandans cheated because any slight change in the price of fuel adversely affects the prices of other goods by far. I implore Government to intervene and ensure that fuel prices are reduced and controlled. Thank you.

3.47
MR ATKINS KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the effort.

Madam Speaker, we recognise that this is the same problem that the country is grappling with. We focus more on the product and less on the process. We focus more on the destination and less on the journey. However, it is the process that determines the product and it is the journey that determines the destination.

Madam Speaker, I ask that after my submission, we find it fit to ask or encourage the minister to go back for the following reasons: 

I was expecting the minister to probably point out the following: One, clearly identify the scale, the scope and the reach of the problem - the status. Two, the minister should be in a position to document the causes of the problem - the fuel crisis that is affecting other countries, we included. 

Three, Madam Minister, could you be in position to review the efforts that are being undertaken by your ministry and Government generally, in addressing the problem specifically? Four, what specifics are the Government and your ministry doing in order to avoid or diminish the level of growth in the escalation of the said problem? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.50
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I will begin by posing a question: what is the role of Government as far as fuel prices are concerned? Can Government also just come here and lament that because of international prices, a poor Ugandan must suffer? Must a poor Ugandan get fuel at the same price like the rest of the world because of the international market, because of prices elsewhere? A Government that cannot stabilise - (Interjections) – I need your protection, Madam Speaker. 

What is a government that cannot stabilise prices and is always lamenting about the free market economy and liberalisation still doing in power? If the prices of essential commodities, for example, are determined from elsewhere, why would we then continue with a government that laments the same way as the poor Ugandans?

Madam Speaker, as Parliament we have a duty to convince Ugandans that this is not an effect of the togikwatako campaign. This is because some Ugandans who lived during the campaigns of the so-called togikwatako could foresee the likes of this - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Kasibante must know that Ugandans chose to run a liberalised economy in which prices are determined by demand and supply - (Interjections)- Whether you like it or not, that is the policy. 

Madam Speaker, the minister has explained how prices are fluctuating on the international market and that Uganda is not yet producing her own oil. Is hon. Kasibante in order to say that this is an effect of the togikwatako campaign? What is togikwatako? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think the rules of supply and demand are clear and they are the ones operating. Please conclude, hon. Kasibante.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much for your wise ruling, Madam Speaker. 

Liberalisation, free market economy and protection can go together. When we talk of fuel, sugar and other commodities, we are talking of daily life. Government must protect Ugandans from being suffocated by prices elsewhere by stabilising the prices, by having a fund like somebody mentioned. This is an obligation of any Government.

Let me conclude by saying that I have relatives in Rwanda and friends in Kenya and I have just spoken to them. They also consume fuel but their prices are stable - (Interjections) - I seek your protection, Madam Speaker. 

The last time we interacted with the Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, he was lamenting about pressure from above to release money for things that are not vital to the economy of this country. I have just been reading through the supplementary budget and he actually said that whenever we approve a supplementary budget, we must expect budget cuts. Things like an increase in general price levels are a result of that. 

Honourable ministers, before you blackmail or intimidate me, you should be considerate and know that part of this –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, we are all Members of Parliament and on top of that, we were elected and trusted by our voters –(Interjections)– Well, you can say whatever you would like to say but I know very well that the shorter the monkey - I can stop there. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the honourable member, who I respect and hear is a lawyer, has just stated that according to the people he spoke to in Kenya and Rwanda, their fuel prices are stable. However, he did not lay the facts on the Table. An honourable Member of Parliament is not supposed to debate based on rumours or to present a false statement –(Interjections)– Our statistics are coming; the minister will give a response. 

Madam Speaker, is hon. Kasibante in order to confuse the public without substantiating his point that fuel in Kenya and Rwanda is stable and –(Interjections)– Ours are here and the honourable minister will give them. You can also go and google. Even in ICT, you are not compliant. Therefore, is he in order to confuse the public?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, can you substantiate your allegation?

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I mentioned my sources perfectly. I have friends in Rwanda and relatives in Kenya who actually use fuel. 

As I wind up, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the increase in the general price levels is biting Ugandans at a very critical moment in time when we have to pay school fees, which fees have also been hiked in some schools. We also have to pay transport charges -

THE SPEAKER: You made your point. We need to finish. 

3.59
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Madam Speaker, this matter that we are discussing is serious because it affects all Ugandans. 

Before I proceed, I would like to appeal to my honourable colleagues that when it comes to discussing a matter that affects the citizens of our country, let us try to put aside politics and go to the core of the problem. If it necessitates Government coming with an explanation, they should come with an explanation. 

We represent our electorate who are affected by this matter on a daily basis. We are asking the minister to make a statement about what happened with the reserves. Let Government come and explain how long our reserves have been - Let the minister explain that point and if she - (Interruption)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, I think it is important because colleagues keep mentioning the same - 

MR OCHEN: Can I conclude?

THE SPEAKER: Maybe she has technical information.

MS MULONI: Let me give you information so that you rest your hearts because you are bringing up the same matter of reserves. 

Madam Speaker, our reserves in Jinja were rehabilitated and they are operational. I would like to invite Members of Parliament who are saying that the Jinja storage tanks are not operational to go to Jinja tomorrow. Our reserves are operational - I(Interjections) - Let me give you information. The Jinja storage reserves are operational and they are for fuel supply security and not for stabilisation.

I have been taking note of the concerns that Members have been raising. We have put them there to ensure security of supply and, therefore, the issue of saying that Government does not care about Ugandans is not in order. Government cares about its people and has refurbished the storage tanks and they are operational.

The recent tests being carried out in Kenya required our intervention in the supply chain to ensure that we have a steady supply of fuel. However, those stocks are not for price stabilisation – (Interruption) 

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee on Public Accounts. The latest report of the Auditor-General on the fuel reserves in Jinja notes that the reserves were privatised but the private person running the reserves has reneged on the contract. 

First, he has just put a quarter of the litres that he was supposed to put in the reserves. Two, he has only partially rehabilitated the reserves. I hope the honourable minister consumed the contents of the report of the Auditor-General. Is the minister, therefore, in order to mislead Parliament by saying that these reserves were rehabilitated and fully stocked as per the agreement?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister has just been saying that the reserves are there but she has not told us about the quantities. You are saying they are there but you have not told us how much is there. Honourable minister, I suggest that we allow the Members to finish then you will answer comprehensively.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, we can clearly see where our problems lie as a country. We appear unwilling to give actual proof to the country when it comes to responding to matters that have been asked.

I would like to give an example so that I can respond to the minister here. When the issue of rice came up last year, you saw what happened here with the ministers. When the issue of sugar came up, you listened to what happened in this House. Now we are discussing the rise of fuel prices and again, we are rotating.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that if the owners of this country are not taking up the mantle to bring about disciplinary action against the people who are misleading this country, we may not come out of this problem. I would also like to tell the ministers that we understand your problems. However, when it comes to articulating issues that affect your ministries, most of you are unable to talk. This is what we have seen; you keep yourself below a certain degree and cannot talk. (Laughter) This is where the problem lies.

Madam Speaker, we are not going to save this country on the basis of fear. We must speak out the truth and deliver ourselves. Only then can we correct the errors here. How can the minister say to the House that the reserves are operational when the information released by the Auditor-General is to the contrary?

Madam Speaker, I call upon the Minister of Energy to restrain herself - (Interruption)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to insist that the Jinja storage tanks are not operational when they are actually operational? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, if they are operational, you should not say that they are not. However, honourable members, we shall solve that by sending a committee there to establish the quantity. We shall find out if they are as the minister says they are there.

4.07
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot is rotating around fuel prices and rightly so, because it affects almost everybody.

In the previous Parliament, I would like to confirm that I sat on the Committee on Natural Resources and as a committee, we travelled to Jinja. The Government rehabilitated the fuel reserves and sent us, as a committee, to witness its opening. One of my honourable colleagues, hon. Anywarach, was also there. What we do not know is whether they are fully stocked or not, but they were rehabilitated and are operational. 

That being the case, even if the fuel reserves are operating, the issue at hand is the price of fuel. How does it factor in right now? We are deviating a bit. My concern would be for the minister to come out today and let the country know what steps Government is taking to stabilise the cost of fuel in this country.

Fuel prices go up every so often internationally, but whenever they come down, you never see any reduction in the prices. Who is regulating the cost of fuel in this country? It will be sad if it is a free economy that is robbing Uganda. Whenever there is an increase in the world prices, prices here go up and nobody ensures that they come down when prices drop. That is cheating Ugandans. We have just talked about sugar, which some people hoard so that they reap when it is scarce. 

I would also like to appeal to the minister to let this country know whether it is a Government policy that much of the fuel sold along the roads upcountry is in bottles. This has killed people in families and we do not have a law regulating that. Is it a Government policy? If it is not, honourable minister, what are you doing about this? It is risky business but nobody is concerned. A colleague has already indicated that anything can happen with this bottled fuel. 

We are even putting the junk vehicles we have at stake because nobody is concerned about what goes on upcountry. You need to ensure that you explain clearly whether it is a Government policy that we have some outlets of fuel along the roadside in the whole country. 

In addition, what are you going to do to ensure that you stabilise prices whenever they go up or even ensure that they drop when world prices drop? Otherwise, we are just going to repeat ourselves about the reserves. As you rightly said, these reserves are supposed to come in when we have crises. 

I would like to be very specific on this and pray that Government ensures that as we prepare to be one of the oil producing countries - Are we still going to continue in such crises instead of seeing to it that we have stable prices in this country? How do we explain it to the Ugandans out there?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have said the same thing many times in different ways. You have talked about stabilisation from three different angles. Let us have something new.

4.12
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to say a few things. I would like to thank the minister for giving a report, although it is not concrete; it does not tell us the steps to be taken. When you talk about fuel prices, everybody is affected, including the dead. Somebody may wonder how a dead person can be affected; you have to transport a dead body from one point to another. 

Madam Speaker, I am very concerned about the high cost of fuel. I am also wondering because it appears that there are people behind all this - the so-called big shots. We must understand the dynamics involved in fuel prices in this country. This is because every four to five months, prices increase. It is worse in Teso, where I come from, because 74 per cent of the people there are poor. These fuel prices are now going to increase the level of poverty in such areas, including Kamuli. (Laughter)

That is why we should be concerned about how to address these matters comprehensively, for the good of this country. If we do not, there are going to be more problems. As we talk, I am sure that inflation is going to increase, and production and revenues are going to be affected. The few factories we have are going to close, whether we are happy or not. Madam Speaker, even this thing called tourism, that we are glorifying all the time, will be affected. 

That is why we are saying that the ministry must come out specifically and be clear on the steps to be taken as a way to address this menace. If somebody is talking about this jam in town, the issue is the Government must stabilise the price of fuel in this country. Short of that, we shall be having problems as we go. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish you well.

4.15
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to give real information because I am a fuel dealer. 

In December, Premium Motor Spirit (PMS) was Shs 3,500, kerosene was Shs 2,400 and diesel was Shs 3,000. In January, the price of petrol is Shs 3,900, which means it has increased by Shs 400, which is more than 10 per cent; kerosene has increased by Shs 200, which is less than 10 per cent; and diesel has increased by Shs 250, which is also less than 10 per cent.

That is why I would like to respond to the Member who asked why the prices are different. The only product they can mix is diesel and paraffin. The moment you get diesel very cheaply, be sure that the petrol station has mixed diesel with paraffin. When you get it cheaper, it may also be that somebody has tampered with the pump so that instead of delivering one litre, it delivers less than a litre.

Madam Speaker, Government is responsible for the cost of fuel prices that are going high. If I bought 100,000 litres at the pipeline, the pipeline would inform the Government of Uganda and Jinja would deliver to me 100,000 litres while waiting for the other 100,000 litres to come in. However, because Government does not have its own fuel - I know you could have something. 

Our reserves are in Nakasongola, Gulu, Kasese and Jinja. The biggest one is in Nakasongola, which you have not worked on. I can tell you that this country is in problems. If we close that side at any time, we shall shatter. This is because everybody is on the pipeline and as such, the demand on the pipeline is high and transport costs and handling charges have also gone up. If Government was managing these costs, I can tell you that the price of PMS would be about Shs 3,000. However, because Government has left everybody to be there, it has gone up.

You are only interested in Shs 1,000 tax, forgetting that when fuel prices go up, everything in the economy goes up, be it matooke or dead bodies because they are transported using fuel. Everything becomes expensive.

We would like a Government which is responsible, and that is why I would like to agree with hon. Guma. If we had planned in advance, these fuel prices would have gone up but not as high with a responsible Government. It is only in Uganda where people do not go on strike when you increase prices by more than 10 per cent. In America, even if prices had gone up by only one per cent, there would be a strike and yet theirs is a big economy. In Kenya, if fuel went up by only Shs 1, you would see hell. To show that prices are cheaper in Kenya, people in Malaba, Busia, Lwakhakha and Bukwo are now driving their cars across to fuel and then come back to Uganda. In the meantime, our Government is losing because that Shs 1,000 per litre is being consumed by Kenya. 

Madam Speaker, this Government needs to plan. Of course, when you were in the bush, you forgot about planning. However, I am sure that after 32 years, bush ideas are out and now you should be doing real planning. That is why we have the National Planning Authority and the Minister of Finance - I see my brother, hon. Bahati, who would be a good and intelligent man but I do not know what he is doing. He has left the people of Uganda at the mercy of –(Member timed out.)

4.20
MR SAM BITANGARO (NRM, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for presenting the paper. However, my special thanks go to hon. Nsereko for bringing this matter up. 

This matter is very serious and does not only stop at fuel but cuts across the board to all commodities. Ugandans are being ripped off by multinationals. This concept of liberalisation is being taken out of context. The fact that we have liberalised our economy does not mean the Government has got to abandon its responsibilities. You have questions coming up every day. The other day I read about this matter of Yaka, where 92 per cent of the Yaka metres are faulty and Ugandans are being ripped off. You will go to a shop to buy a kilogramme of bread only to find that it is 800 grams but no one cares. You will pay for a kilogramme yet you have taken 800 grams. Our water tariffs are the highest in the region. 

On fuel, I live by the border in Kisoro where people drive to Rwanda to fill their vehicles and come back –(Interjections)– This is factual. I think what we need is not only fuel stabilisation but the whole concept of planning. We need a national consumer protection agency. (Applause) Instead of having so many useless authorities, we should have an authority to govern consumer protection. 

We have the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) but it is inefficient and ill-equipped. It is not equipped to completely oversee consumer protection. I would have expected to see people being prosecuted for providing fake products. What happened to those people who procured fake Yaka metres, for instance? Nothing was done, apart from saying that we have seen 92 per cent of the gadgets and equipment faulty.

Therefore, I recommend, and I seek the support of this House, that we get a national consumer protection agency. Ugandans pay taxes but they do not get the protection they deserve. With those few remarks, Madam Speaker, I wish to thank hon. Nsereko for raising it.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Okupa comes, honourable members, I would like to say that there was a time when people were trying to come up with a consumer protection Bill but I do not know where it ended. I do not know why it died; someone should pick it up.

4.25
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I would like to thank the minister for responding to the question that was raised because there are very few of that kind who respond to the issues when they are raised, especially those that touch ordinary Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, you will recall that before we went on recess, I asked hon. Bahati a question regarding the price of electricity after he deceived us last year that the price would drop. You directed him to make a statement but he has not done so to date. I hope he will be instructed again and I hope he has heard. He should bring a statement to explain to the people why the price of energy has not come down.

When I heard the minister talk about the Jinja oil reserves, I got a bit disturbed. We formed the Uganda National Oil Company, how then do we go ahead to privatise these oil reserves – (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: But didn’t we sell the silos? Didn’t we also privatise the silos? (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: I have really failed to understand how we plan. We formed the Uganda National Oil Company to handle these matters but you are selling. 

However, on this matter that we are discussing, I remember before hon. Nsereko raised this issue of the escalation of fuel prices, I did so at the end of 2016 or early January 2017. I was looking at the prices of fuel at the respective petrol stations around Kampala in December 2016. That was the time when the price per barrel at the world market dropped from $110 to $28. I asked why the price had not come down in Uganda despite the drop of the price per barrel on the international market from $110 to $28 per barrel. At the time, the price was between Shs 2,900 and Shs 3,000 per litre of petrol in Uganda. We asked but no one answered. Slowly, the price kept rising.

Madam Speaker, at the close of yesterday, the price per barrel at the international market was $79.9. We started increasing from where we stopped because we did not come down when the price per barrel decreased. What happened? When the price per barrel at the international market increases, you see the price increasing yet no one is regulating. 

That is why I would like to agree with hon. Bitangaro that we need a consumer protection law to deal with these matters because it seems there are beneficiaries in this trade. There is no way the price at the international market drops by over 500 per cent and that of fuel per litre in Uganda does not come down - (Member timed out.)

4.28
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Nsereko for bringing this motion. I also thank the minister for responding. 

However, we need to get a few points clear. Last year, when Kenya was going for elections, we rushed to renovate the reserves and we said they were ready to be used. This is because we had stored 10 million litres of fuel then and in case anything happened in Kenya, then we were good to go. If you take stock of what happened when we put 10 million litres, have we added more litres or are the litres likely to reduce because probably some people are using it illegally?

Secondly, we are looking at a situation where we set a reserve. Looking at the history of reserves in all countries in the world, this started with the first oil crisis of 1973 when all OPEC Muslim countries that export fuel decided to put an embargo on countries like Canada, USA, Netherlands because they supplied arms to support Israel. That is the war where Egypt and Syria attacked Israel. It was a six-day war. That oil crisis of 1973 made so many countries rise up.

Madam Speaker, the USA has a reserve right now which harbours over 117 million barrels that has not been touched up to today. It is intended to work against any shock in case there will be another oil crisis. That is why during the oil crisis of 1979, the US did not even worry. However, for us, we put it in place as a remedy against supply fluctuation.

We need to ask the minister; if you are saying that our reserves are operational, does it serve the purpose of acting as a supply shock? We would see it from the end-point, that the end justifies the means. In other words, if we had used the reserves and seen that prices were going down, then we would say yes, the national oil reserves are operational. Short of that, the minister should be informed that the national oil reserves are not serving their purpose.

Finally, we have said that there is liberalisation of the economy. Actually, where there is liberalisation of the economy, you need a much stronger legal framework especially when it comes to essential commodities like oil. For a better definition, “essential” means something without which you cannot do. Therefore, when we play around with the essentiality of oil supply to the country and then we say we need a consumer protection law - That is very good. However, in light of fuel supply, we have already put in place reserves to protect consumers in the country, who include my grandmother and the grandmother of any other MP here, including your children, so that when they are going to the hospital, the ambulance should not be expensive, operation of hospitals –(Member timed out.)

4.32
MR YORKE ODRIA (Independent, Aringa South County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her presentation. However, I have a very serious concern. 

In West Nile, currently a litre of diesel is Shs 3,600 and petrol is Shs 3,900 and in some places it is at Shs 4,000. My biggest concern is that in West Nile, we have a tobacco factory – the Meridian Tobacco Company - which employs over 2,000 Ugandans and more than 15,000 farmers who are trained and employed. However, it uses one megawatt on a daily basis. On many occasions, this company is not operational and they are threatened with closure. What is the fate of these Ugandans who are employed by this company? Just last year alone, they spent over Shs 600 million on diesel. 

Madam Speaker, last year, we had a meeting with His Excellency the President. He called the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and I remember he put his phone on loud speaker; he asked the minister why West Nile does not have high voltage electricity. The minister told the President that West Nile is the number one priority before this year ends or early 2018. To my dismay, however, the other day Karuma was being worked on but instead of electricity poles fixed facing West Nile, they are turning back towards Kampala. As I talk, they are fixing poles facing Kampala. 

What is the fate of this factory, which is threatening to close? They have even written requesting for at least a subsidy or a tax waiver as they import diesel.

The other thing that I must make clear is that fuel goes hand in hand with electricity in the daily operations of a largescale factory like this one. I have raised their issues before especially with the state minister. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources. I told him that he is actually a disappointment because he comes from the West Nile region; I actually requested him to resign if possible. 

This is a largescale factory and at all peaks, they pay 40 per cent higher than any largescale industry operating in Kampala. This is a rural-based factory paying 40 per cent higher than any largescale industry paying to Umeme. These pay to West Nile Rural Electrification Company (WENRECO).

Madam Speaker, I request for an investigation into why they are paying extremely higher than any other centrally based factory. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Member for Ruhama. Please say your name and your constituency for the Hansard. Do not interrupt him, honourable members; he is making his maiden speech.

4.37
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In regard to the issue on the Floor, the minister has ably explained the factors that are affecting the oil prices. I would like to add my voice that we must appreciate that we are operating in a liberalised economy, and when operating in this type of economy, there are micro and macro factors that affect the economy.

In this respect, when it comes to fuel prices, she has brought out macro factors – the external factors where the Government has no control. My submission is that the National Planning Authority should be looking at adopting a mixed economy where the Government would have a hand when we are affected with such macro factors.

Members have also raised concerns that at times prices go down internationally but here, prices do not follow suit. From a business perspective, sometimes the business community purchases when prices are up and by the time prices go down, they still have stock of the previous higher prices. That is why normally when prices go down, we do not immediately cut the prices.

Therefore, we need to appreciate that there are factors beyond the Government’s control. However, I would like to implore the Government to also consider adopting a mixed economy where it would intervene when we are affected by such escalating prices. 

We could also introduce subsidies - make a trade-off between taxation and subsidies. When the prices are high, the Government can consider a reduction on the taxes such that prices are kept stable. Therefore, honourable Minister for Energy, you need to liaise with the planning authority and the minister for planning so that you save Ugandans from the escalating prices. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Kahima, for making your maiden speech. 

Honourable minister, this debate has reminded me about the Petroleum Supply Act, 2003. I would like to draw your attention to the objectives of that Act, which might help us to address this situation. This Act is of 2003 and the following are the main objectives: 

    a) It is an Act to provide for the supervision and monitoring of the importation, exportation, transportation, processing, supply, storage, distribution and marketing of petroleum products.
    b) To provide for the establishment of the ministry responsible for the petroleum sector and the regulatory authority.
    c) To provide for licensing and control of activities, etc. 
    d) To encourage and protect fair competition in the petroleum supply market. 

I would like to particularly look at section 6, which gives responsibilities to the minister.

Under section 6(2) the minister shall have the following functions in relation to this Act:
“(a) To initiate legislation and make the necessary regulations in order to support and promote a continuous, secure and adequate supply of petroleum products at competitive cost for all consumers and to create favourable conditions for the availability of adequate import, transport, storage and distribution facilities within or, if necessary, outside Uganda.”

Therefore, honourable minister, I think you are also expected to inform the country about the state of our oil reserves. This has not been done for some time. I would like to request you, as you make your response, to address those responsibilities under this Act. 

4.41
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Following up on what the Act states, you looked at the objectives and the one in reference to the national strategic stocks, which is section 3(h), says, “To ensure a steady supply of petroleum products by the development and maintenance of national strategic stocks.” I would like to state that the Jinja storage reserves were rehabilitated. 

On the issue which has been raised on the Floor of the House regarding the Auditor-General’s report on privatising, the contract with the operator who operated at that time was terminated. This facility is currently managed by our national oil company and as I said, Members are welcome to visit.

The Uganda National Oil Company has stocked these reserves to ensure that there is steady supply of petroleum products. I gave an example that as of now, Kenya is testing a new pipeline from Mombasa to Nairobi - what we call wet testing. As a result of that, it affected the flow of the products that we normally receive from Mombasa to Eldoret, where the trucks pick them from. Therefore, our Jinja storage tanks that had stocked 13 million litres were able to supply the market and offload 10 million litres. This is a continuous process. They keep stocking and should there be need to supply products in the country, petroleum products are released. 

However, I would like to emphasise that while the storage is to ensure security of supply, that storage does not cater for stabilisation of prices. I have clearly heard the concerns of Members and their request that Government should provide subsidies for petroleum products –(Interjection)– That is what I heard because that is what stabilisation is all about. 

It would mean that if we want to stabilise the prices, then the fuel that we have stocked - and remember this fuel that is stocked is also being procured through the open tendering system from the international market.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear that what Members are requesting, that these storage tanks provide price stabilisation, will not be achieved with the current arrangement. The storage tanks are specifically to ensure steady supply of petroleum products in the country. 

Members raised –(Interjections)– let me respond; the Speaker gave you a lot of time to bring out your issues, why don’t you allow me to respond. Many Members have spoken.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, allow the minister to respond.

MS MULONI: The facts are there and I even gave you copies of the price comparison within the region. As a region, we do joint open tenders. We buy the petroleum products in bulk. What makes a difference in the pricing is the logistical and other issues which I have clearly indicated from country to country. 

Look at the price of petroleum from Mombasa, if you refer to the table that I gave you, and look at the price of the petroleum products, let us take an example of petrol, in Tanzania. Because Dar es Salaam is a port and they receive imports from there, their price for petrol is equivalent to UShs 3,532. When you come to Mombasa at the coast, it is equivalent to UShs 3,287. When you move to Nairobi, it is equivalent to UShs 3,408 and in Eldoret, which is further, it is UShs 3,452. 

In the northern part of Kenya, because of the logistical costs that I have talked about, a litre of petrol is equivalent to UShs 3,898 in Kenya while in Uganda a litre of petrol in Kampala is Shs 3,860. In Kigali a litre of petrol is equivalent to UShs 4,702.

Let us move to diesel prices. In Tanzania, at Dar es Salaam, a litre of diesel is equivalent to UShs 3,289, in Mombasa it is at UShs 2,870, Nairobi it is UShs 2,990, in Eldoret it is UShs 3,066, in Mandera in northern Kenya a litre of diesel is at UShs 3,480, in Kampala it is Shs 3,250 and Kigali it costs UShs 4,635.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of reserves that were talked about in the United States, I would like to say that the US reserves are in form of crude oil. Our reserves here are from petroleum products and they need to be recycled so that they do not deteriorate. That is why as we keep building the stock, we must recycle it; we must get it out so that we get fresh stock into the reserves. 

Therefore, as Government, we have been able to achieve in that area by ensuring that there is a steady supply of petroleum products into the country. We are moving further to other areas like Nakasongola. The capacity in Jinja is 30 million litres - 20 of diesel and 10 of petrol. In Nakasongola, we are bound to have more than 40 million litres storage capacity. That is also being worked upon. 

With the refinery that is going to be constructed in Hoima, there are going to be reserves in Mpigi. We have secured land and we are going to construct storage terminals there and a product pipeline from Hoima will bring the product to that terminal so that we are able to distribute it to the country and even the neighbouring areas. 

Therefore, in terms of storage facilities, Government is on the move. The first thing was to rehabilitate what we had at hand and I am really proud that it is operational. If any of you is in doubt, please take off time and go visit them. Our national oil company is fully in charge; it is the one that is operating those reserves.

Madam Speaker, the other area that I wanted to clarify was to do with the Yaka which was relatedly brought on board because it is an area of metering. This matter was raised on the Floor of Parliament and I would like to assure Members that the Uganda National Bureau of Standards has a statutory instrument where it provides for electricity meters that are imported into this country. They are tested, certified and sealed by UNBS for conformity to accuracy prior to installation onto the network. 

What happened is that Government, through the Rural Electrification Agency (REA), imported pre-paid meters. When the meters underwent testing, they were found to be bi-directional. This is a smart modern meter which is already employed in the developed world where if you are connected onto the network, you can actually sell electricity to the network. However, since we have not reached that level of having homes consume electricity and maybe those who are generating their own electricity through solar are able to sell back to the network, UNBS rejected those meters. They were sent back to the manufacturers and indeed, they were only able to return them after they had made them unidirectional. That was the problem. 

Further, the law permits that if you have a Yaka meter and you doubt its accuracy, you can take it to UNBS and pay Shs 8,000 and they will check your meter. I would therefore like to assure colleagues and Ugandans here is that if there is any Yaka meter out on the network, which is suspected to be faulty, you are at liberty to take it to UNBS for testing so that you can be assured. However, before we even install it onto the network, it goes through thorough testing by the UNBS. 

Therefore, the 6,000 meters that were alleged to be faulty were actually bi-directional. That matter has been sorted out and I would like to assure our people that they are not cheated –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the issue of meters that the honourable minister has raised here is not a simple matter. This matter came up in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) though it was not concluded. It is not as light as the minister is putting it. It even caused the suspension of the Executive Director and the Deputy Executive Director of REA. 

Therefore, the minister should not just gloss over this matter. It is a matter that needs to be substantially brought and debated in this House. We got to know that these things had been down for the last five years because of the anomaly that happened in the contracts committee - the people who were procuring them. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to come out here to gloss over a matter that even caused the suspension of the executive director and the deputy director? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, now you are speculating on the report of your committee which has not yet come to this House. 

MR OKUPA: I was giving information -

THE SPEAKER: Then it should have been a point of information not order because we do not know about it; we do not know what you are going to bring. Please conclude.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. There was - 

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to respond. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Muloni has given a very rosy explanation that the oil reserves the Uganda Government is maintaining are not for price stabilisation but rather for supply stabilisation and yet the issue hon. Muhammad Nsereko raised, which all Members have been talking about, is the increase in prices at the pump. 

Is the honourable minister in order to come and paint a rosy picture that everything is okay yet people are crying that the salary is constant and the fuel is going higher? Is she in order? Can she give pragmatic solutions to Ugandans who are watching? 

As of now, what is the solution, other than bringing those semantics of engineering? What is going to happen, Madam Speaker? There is constant salary and an increase in fuel prices. Is she in order to come and speak to herself as if Ugandans are not paying attention? What are you talking about?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister is talking in a language which she understands best and she is explaining from her perspective. Therefore, just listen and then we can find a solution. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. Hon. Odonga Otto, I am actually responding to all these issues that you have raised on the Floor of this Parliament, in addition to the statement that I made. I am giving you the facts so that at the end of the day, we all get out of here well informed and we are able to assure and guide our people.

The price will go down when the international oil prices go down. The prices came down and now they are going up and I have given you the reasons why they are doing that. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue was raised by hon. Anywar, about people selling fuel in bottles; that is extremely dangerous. You know that fuel is actually a time bomb. It is illegal. Those people should be arrested immediately. Petrol station pumps are not supposed to sell fuel in bottles.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable minister, it is not the petrol stations; it is the people. They have their roadside petrol stations.

MS MULONI: Where do they get it from? It means that they must be stealing fuel from somewhere. Otherwise, what is their source of fuel? Those people should be arrested for selling fuel in bottles. It is totally illegal. I do not encourage it and I condemn it.  

Further, I would like to call upon ourselves that as leaders, we should guide our people. Let us advise them to refrain from that kind of trade. It is very dangerous –(Interruption)

MS ONGOM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was not ready to raise a point of order against the minister.

Madam Speaker, we live in this country and I would not think the minister only uses a plane for transport. She uses road transport just like us and she lives in a village called Bulambuli. If we went to Bulambuli, we would find people selling petrol and diesel in bottles. Therefore, is she in order to lie to this House, as if she has never seen and is not aware about petrol and diesel being sold in bottles along the roads and in homes?

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the minister sees when she is driving. However, I would like to confirm that I have seen them. When I was driving back from Arua, I saw them. I have seen them in many trading centres – In Kamuli, they are in one or two places, especially in the trading centres. Honourable minister, you better take action.

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a matter that we need to take up but needs joint effort. As leaders who are on ground, if you see that –(Interjections)– Yes, it should be discouraged because it is a time bomb. People should not be allowed to do that.

Madam Speaker, I condemn the act of selling fuel in bottles. It should be discouraged. I would like to implore each one of you that if it is taking place in your constituency or district, please we need joint effort in order to secure our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am going to make you laugh. I went to Benin and we were driving from the town to the Songhai agricultural model and I found many tins of oil. I thought it was cooking oil. I asked my colleagues, the Speakers, “Where do you grow this oil?” They said “No, it is not oil; it is petrol.” I asked, “Where does it come from?” They said, “It comes from Nigeria.” In Benin, it is openly sold on the road. (Laughter)

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, in the Eighth Parliament, we had a distinguished legislator called hon. Okullo Epak. He taught us that when you are on the Floor and you hit someone below the belt, ensure that you get out before he comes up to respond. I think hon. Guma Gumisiriza is a good student of hon. Okullo Epak. (Laughter) He attempted to hit Government but he had to run away before we could come up to respond.

Madam Speaker, this debate is coming up at a good time before we pass the next budget. I would like to implore you to give us some time, probably one or two weeks, to come here and debate the state of our economy properly. We can debate about what Government is trying to do to address the challenges that we are facing in the economy, so that we can listen to Members of Parliament on both sides and point out the problems, but also at the same time, you have a duty to suggest some solutions.

Of course, there are good plans. If they were not good, we would not be where we are. There are areas where we are doing well. Look at inflation; we have been able to control inflation for the last 15 years to levels that have not happened in the whole of Africa. There are also areas where we are not doing well, for example, the cost of capital, and there are plans that we are trying to come up with - (Interjection)- Well, you can talk about the exchange rates but we will be able to show you how they have been able to stabilise overtime compared to others. A few minutes ago, a Member said the fuel price in Rwanda is lower than the fuel price in Uganda and Kenya, which is not true.

It is important that you allow us to come back here. Actually, the Committee on National Economy has presented two reports in this House and we would like to beg that these reports be given time to be debated and we debate the state of the economy. Is the economy of Uganda better off or worse than it was 10 years ago? We need to answer that question.

Madam Speaker, I still think that the economy of Uganda is better off than it was 10 years ago. However, we need something better compared to where we are and we have plans to do that. I would like to request that in two weeks, we shall come and you give us two hours to debate the state of the economy, explain to you the areas where we are doing well and areas where we are facing challenges, and the plans we have to address these challenges. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as this debate was going on, I was discussing with the chairperson of the Committee on National Economy how ready they are to present a report on the state of the economy. He told me that they need a fortnight. I would like to appeal to the Government and the committee to bring that debate before we receive the policy statements, so that our debate can inform the output in the policy statements. Please, come back to us within a fortnight.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to add something small.  All the data we use in Parliament here comes from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and Government agencies. However, if you are coming out of a problem but you indicate that you are going back to the same problem, then there must be something wrong. You people in planning, why do you plan to come out of something and then you go back to it. Look at the poverty levels, why are you going backwards? From 50 per cent, you went to 19 per cent, but now you are going back.

Madam Speaker, the domestic revenue - Government was sponsoring it at 22 per cent but we are going back to 75 per cent. I think there must be a problem. I would like to implore Government to come up with a concrete solution. It is not a matter of saying, “We are doing well” when we are sliding backwards. The indicators are showing that we are going back where we came from.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am rising to propose the exact date. I know my brother, hon. Bahati, is very good at giving excuses because he knows he can get out of it. Could we be very specific on the date such that we can be able to give the whole afternoon? The issue of the state of the economy is a big problem in this country. We shall talk about issues of national debt, inflation, deficits, microeconomic aspects, among others. I would like to propose that we could have the afternoon of 28 February 2018. For now, Members should go and prepare. 

We also know that there are Members who are very good at massaging data. We are going to prepare and research and come back to this House, well equipped with all the information. We have heard what is happening. Even when hon. Bitangaro, who is a neighbour to Rwanda has told us how they cross from Kisoro to Rwanda to get fuel at a lower price, the minister comes here and says the honourable member is lying. So, where is he getting those facts yet you have a living example of a colleague who lives across the border? 

Madam Speaker, I would like to propose and agree with you that we have this in a fortnight, and I that we dedicate the afternoon of 28th of February for this purpose. 

THE SPEAKER: What day will it be?

MR OKUPA: It is a Wednesday. I think it is the last day of the month.

MR JACKSON KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. While hon. Bahati has requested for a day for us to debate the national economy, it is my humble prayer that we also set aside days to examine the performance of several ministries.

It is not enough for us to put the finance ministry to task alone. Issues of land are getting out of hand; we are about to go to war over land throughout the country. We need time to examine that. 

The Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees brings supplementary budgets when disaster strikes, even when they are supposed to be prepared for disaster. I think we need to examine the performance of each and every ministry.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether my colleague here is giving a vote of no confidence to the committees of this Parliament. This Parliament has got sessional and standing committees, specifically assigned to do those duties - to oversee the ministries and the performance of ministries even on a daily basis. 

I would like to know whether we are moving well when somebody stands and says that we need to look at all the ministries, be it lands, roads, in the plenary without reports from the committees which we assigned those duties.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in relation to the Committee on National Economy, it is their mandatory function to produce a report on the state of the economy. For the other oversight function, honourable members, you can do that through your committees. If you are ready, just bring the report and I will table it here and we will debate it. 

Committee on National Economy, let us have your reports and let the ministry be ready. Let us use that last day because I know in March we shall be engaged on the policy statements. So let us use that time. The Committee on National Economy, produce your report on 28th of February and we shall give you time. No other business shall be handled except that one.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INSECURITY AND CRIMINALITY OCCASIONED TO THE COMMUNITIES NEIGHBOURING THE KARAMOJA SUB-REGION

5.13
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I will seek your guidance on this before I present this report. The honourable member, hon. Franca Akello, raised the same issue with the Minister of Internal Affairs about the criminality of the Karimojong when they invade. I think in reality, it is not invasion. You cannot invade your own country. (Interjection) Yes, you cannot invade your own country. These are citizens of Uganda. If they have crossed, they have crossed, yes, but –(Interruption)

Can we wait and we bring a joint report on Tuesday? It is almost the same topic as that one which was put across by the honourable member from Agago.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if we do handle part of this today, it will inevitably bring in the issues which have been raised and which we are waiting for from the internal affairs minister.

I would like to propose, honourable members, that we leave it until Tuesday and we get both statements, because they are around the same issues - the Karimojong in Lango and Acholi.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: The issue I raised was about an invasion; an attack on my people last evening by these Karimojong, whether warriors or not – I do not know how to call them. When he talks about mere crossing – 

When he comes with a statement next week, I would like something which is going to be very comprehensive on why these people keep on attacking us, come and kill our people and eat our cassava. They actually eat the whole cassava plantation that is around the place they have invaded. The Government instead provides them with food instead of providing food for the people whose cassava and foodstuffs were stolen.

Those are the kind of things that will make people mad. What is happening today is not good. My LCV chairperson has just called now; they are trying to contain the situation. That is why I had requested a statement from the Minister of Internal Affairs on the immediate action that is being taken to contain the situation for today and nobody has given it. For next week’s statement, I agree with him, but let him explain the invasion and the issue of crossing as he says. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Madam Speaker, I believe on the 9th of January, I also did raise a matter of national importance here. The then presiding Speaker requested the ministers in charge of security, water and environment and Karamoja affairs to come and make a statement in the House addressing that very matter.

This is an ongoing matter which, when we raised then, we were expecting an answer. I remember the Government Chief Whip was standing in for the Leader of Government Business and she indicated that the ministers would come and make a statement on the Floor of Parliament. I have not seen that and this matter is ongoing. I think all that needs to be addressed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Internal Affairs, I think you should commit yourself to ensuring that the people of Acholi, Lango and Teso enjoy peaceful existence and livelihood on their land. It is their right and they have nowhere else to go. Undertake to come with the Minister of Karamoja Affairs to address the general issue of invasion, because she is saying that even now they are walking in.

Members, you know, this is one of the things that causes friction in this House - the Karimojong against the others - every year, and the Government knows it –Yes, and the Balaalo, you know.

5.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, when I made an earlier comment here, I said when we were verbally briefed on what was happening in that area this morning and we instructed the Police and other security agencies to take every measure to contain the situation.

Before I came to the House this afternoon, and I believe it is correct information at the moment, there were no attacks going on. This is action taken by the police to contain the situation. I also gave a reason as to why we were unable to prevent that action. This was because we are thin on the ground. 

I assure all the honourable members from that sub-region that from now on until we make this statement and even after that statement, it is our duty to ensure that we contain the situation with them. This is my undertaking and I stand by it. If there is anything that will go otherwise, we shall also explain here. 

THE SPEAKER: Do we get the report next week?

MR OBIGA KANIA: The statement will be ready on Tuesday and I am glad that my senior colleague for Karamoja has requested that we make a joint statement. I entirely agree because this movement is not only limited to small areas. It extends to the whole of that area, including even the Kenyan side of the border; the Turkana come and destabilise us in the area of Karamoja. 

Therefore, I would like the honourable members to understand and give us that opportunity so that by Tuesday, we come, make a statement, you debate it and give us advice which we shall take and we all move together to contain the situation. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE SUSPICIOUS TRANSPORTATION OF GOODS SUSPECTED TO BE CRUDE OIL IN THE ALBERTINE REGION

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, I must apologise that I do not have a statement right now. The reason is that I wanted to seek your guidance. What you are asking us to make a statement on is the suspicion that crude oil is being removed and exported from the oil wells in western Uganda, particularly Bunyoro sub-region. The problem with that investigation for my department is that the Minister of Internal Affairs is not responsible for the companies and the actual mining, if any, of the crude oil in those areas. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when we control traffic on the road, we do not have any executive orders to open a vehicle on mere suspicion. Therefore, I am in a quagmire as to how I can execute this order. I am not refusing further guidance on the matter if I will be able to do it. However, my suggestion would be that I should get an order, whether it is a court order or not, from whoever is directing me to do the investigation, then I can undertake it. 

In my view, since the committees of Parliament have powers of court, they would be the best to actually undertake this investigation. As I said, I am seeking guidance from you so that I do a good job.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I will give my ruling tomorrow; let me also study how best it can be done. 

MR OBIGA KANIA: Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you still want to say something?

5.24
THE MINISTER FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I just wanted to make a comment on the issue of ferrying crude oil from the Albertine Graben to other places for sale. To me, as the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, I know we are preparing the fields for production. We are expecting to go into production, at the earliest, before 2020 ends. Therefore, when I hear that crude oil is being sold from - (Interjections) - No, the crude oil which was for testing was stored in containers. Actually, right now, there is a tender running in the papers for selling that crude oil. It is stocked in containers and it has been put in papers for people to - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you expect the Members of Parliament to read the newspapers and find the information from there?

MS MULONI: No, Madam Speaker; I am just giving information that the crude oil that was produced during the testing of the wells is stored in containers. That is all.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the allegation was that for some time now, between the hours of 8.00 p.m. and 5.00 a.m., there are trucks which leave the oil region and go somewhere. What are they transporting every night?

MR ODRIA ALIONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Natural Resources. The information I am giving may help you in your decision-making tomorrow. 

I strongly suspect there is a problem in that sector. It is because as members of the Committee on Natural Resources, we have requested time and again to be given an opportunity to visit the oil fields but these people denied us that opportunity. They have never given us the opportunity to go and find out what is there. 

Madam Speaker, -(Interruption)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member really in order, if he is a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, to confuse and paint a picture that my ministry can stop the honourable members of the Committee on Natural Resources, who are in charge of my sector, from visiting the oil fields?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you should substantiate on when you applied and when your application got rejected.

MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, we have ever requested. I, personally, requested more than two times. They said we shall - 

THE SPEAKER: Verbally or? 

MR ALIONI: One time, the minister said they were going to organise and give us the opportunity. Since last year up to now -

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members! 

MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, I can also assure you that if you drive by the fields, you will see that the security deployed there is not normal. It is not even the police and you cannot access the place. Therefore, I believe this information is going to help you in decision-making.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you said there is something you are disposing of. When we had the old debate and made the law, you were expected to come here and report regularly. What are you disposing of that you cannot tell this House about and instead put it in the newspapers that Members will not read because they are busy in the committees?  

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, what we are disposing of is the tested crude oil that has been stored since the time of the testing of the wells. It is going to be disposed of openly and transparently.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I seek clarification from the minister. She said that there is nothing being ferried from the oil wells. However, Dr Baryomunsi can be a witness that the whole executive of Kanungu District came with him and we went to Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development because in 2013, Uganda International Mining Company was stopped from taking the iron ore in Butogota. You put in place soldiers to guard the refined iron ore and said that you were going to establish an industry to process that iron ore. 

Apparently, the reason we had come to the ministry to stop the vehicles which were taking the iron ore, and they were stopped on the basis that you were going to establish an industry in Uganda to process that iron ore. The iron ore is being ferried from Butogota, guarded by the soldiers and I came to your ministry over the same subject.

Now, therefore, wouldn’t it be proper for us to be honest with Ugandans over what is happening such that we look for a tangible solution other than dilly dallying with the problem? Tell us what exactly is going on. Iron ore is being ferried from Butogota. Oil is being ferried from Bunyoro. From Kabale it is moving. What is going on? Why don’t you be clear on what the policy is? Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, since my name has been cited, I beg that I make a comment. It is true that there are deposits of iron ore in Kanungu as hon. Kaberuka has said. There were some investors who had wanted to mine it and take it in raw form and they were stopped by Government.

The intention of Government is to establish a factory in Kanungu and Muko in Kabale because we require either coal or gas which at the moment can only be got from South Africa. Gas can alternatively be got from Lake Kivu or if we start mining the gas in the Albertine Graben.

It is not true that iron ore is being transported from Butogota in Kanungu –(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I stand to raise a point of order against my senior honourable colleague. He is the one who presented the paper to the permanent secretary, actually to hon. Lokeris, and we were with the commissioner and the LCV chairperson. 

Is it in order? Because he is on the Executive, has he ceased to be a Kanungu person? Has he ceased to be a representative of Kanungu? Is he in order to deny a statement he presented with a delegation from Kanungu executive? Should we continue being with you in delegations? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately, I did not attend the meeting at which this issue was raised. However, on a very serious note, we need to question the role of the military in these issues. For instance in Mubende, those square miles are guarded fully by police and civilians are evicted; for sand mining, soldiers are escorting; minerals in Busoga, our lands have been encircled by soldiers, including our ancestral hills and we, members of the royal family, are concerned. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: It is true we met hon. Lokeris and since I am the one who spoke on behalf of the leaders in English, which hon. Kaberuka understands, what we were asking as leaders of Kanungu is when Government is going to establish the factory. That is the point we were making with hon. Lokeris. I am sane, I do not take alcohol and I recall what we discussed with the minister. 

Therefore, I would like to put it on record, and I challenge you to bring that report which you presented on the Floor if it has that issue of carrying iron ore. It is important that we become honest when we are in this House. I thank you very much.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, let us not lose the point about the allegation that crude oil is being ferried from Bunyoro area. The minister has confirmed here that there is some crude oil and that is what Members have been asking about, because of our failure to bring a report regarding how much crude oil is there for auction.

If the minister could bring that information to the House, it would help the Members. How much is it and in what quantities? I see her laughing; I hope she is picking these things. We are requesting the minister to bring a report to this House, telling us the quantity and why they are blocking the committees of Parliament from accessing and visiting the sites. Even before the committee requested, they could have asked them to come and visit. 

This is the information we have, because these allegations have not come today. They are all over. We should not take these issues lightly. It is like the issue of gold; how can Uganda, which does not produce gold, export more than what other countries export? Check the records in Mombasa at the exit point. Where is it coming from? These are the questions we are asking. As long as they do not bring us information, these allegations will continue and the minister needs to bring that information and data about what is happening.

However, also now that it has come here, the committee should just write to the ministry that on such and such a date, we want to go and inspect, and see what they will say.

THE SPEAKER: In fact, give me a copy so that I know when you are going.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have said what I wanted to request for. There are suspicions and what we call suspicions go hand in hand with investigation. Therefore, to clear the air, for everybody to be on board and understand what is going on, let us investigate.

I make this humble request so that you give a directive that investigations be carried out, so that pushing one another ends. Let us investigate and come out with a clear picture on what is going on. Even what hon. Baryomunsi is denying will be clarified when investigations are done.

5.37
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been following this oil and gas issues from the time I was still in the media. I did some training in the oil and gas sector. 

Madam Speaker, we need information. This whole issue depends on a process and not just an event and we need to interest ourselves in learning before we say things that derail our people.

I come from West Nile and there was oil being discovered in the Panyimur area in the Albertine Graben. I was an Albertine oil reporter personally, for those people who really still remember. As we came for the training, there were complaints that even the people who were doing the work were only men and were not gender responsive. However, when we went to Entebbe, we found out that the people who were doing the work there included even women. We also saw the proceeds and the crude oil and we asked a lot of questions. In asking a lot of questions and going to the grassroots, we would find out the truth. 

I normally say that we should not always see issues at the surface but we should address the root cause. Even my own people, because they would hear rumours from people, they would say, “Let us scoop the oil before it goes”. However, how do we scoop the oil before it is refined? Each person would think that maybe they would have to have a cup and then they scoop before it went through the other process. 

As parliamentarians, we are representatives of our own people; we should not mislead our people into thinking that the Government has already sold the oil and you are here unaware of what is going on. We should be the ones to be educated and when there is training, now as parliamentarians, we should be involved. The Ninth Parliament was involved but most of them are not here. 

Personally, at least we have been there and we should go back. We should not just address these other things that come. I would like to tell the truth and not deceive our people. Thank you so much.

5.41
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Natural Resources, which my colleague, hon. Guma, alluded to and he is indeed a member. 

The truth is that the activities and whatever is going on in the Albertine Graben are held in suspicion. Even this committee that is mandated to provide oversight over this Albertine Graben has made incessant requests to the ministry to at least schedule a visit. However, it is very unfortunate that the minister, with all due respect, could not be honest. She raised a point of order against the Member claiming that he was confusing the House. However, what the Member was saying was factual.

One and a half years down the road, even when the committee has gone on bended knee to request that we at least visit, they have made it very difficult for us to go there.

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, is my brother in order to insinuate that indeed the Committee on Natural Resources has written to my ministry asking to visit the Albertine Graben and they have been denied?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to see a written letter that was either rejected or not answered. 

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, the question of substantiating on what I have just mentioned will be availed to you at an appropriate moment. I may not say tomorrow because members of this committee, including its leadership, are out on a trip to the east.

I know that she is aware of what she is talking about. We have approached that ministry several times and they have made it very difficult for us to visit the Albertine Graben – (Interruption)

MS MULONI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to insist even when you have directed him to substantiate? He has continued insisting and wants to mislead this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all this is coming because of the silence around the whole operation. I would like to call upon the minister to invite us and we shall send our committee. You officially invite us now. (Applause)

MR NAMBESHE: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for your wise ruling. However, what is of grave concern includes what was raised by the Member, which required a response from the minister. It was about the trucks that are ferrying whatever they are ferrying from the graben; why must they move under the umbrella of darkness?

She has just said that the crude oil is being auctioned but why must they move at night? That justifies the suspicion that we have that there is more to it than meets the eye.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. We shall substantiate and the minister should just be patient and exercise restraint.

THE SPEAKER: She has already agreed to invite us and we do the needful. Thank you. I will wait for the minister’s invitation and we shall send it to the relevant committee.

PERSONAL STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, HON. MATIA KASAIJA ON ALLEGATIONS MADE AGAINST HIM AS A PERSON IN THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ACQUISITION AND UTILIZATION OF USD 200 MILLION LOAN FROM THE PTA BANK

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this afternoon the minister came to me and said that he is still preparing his statement and that it would not be ready today but later in the week.

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you for the update. However, I am rising on a point of procedure. I do not know what precedent we are setting. I would like your guidance. A committee of this House will prepare a report and table it before the House. It has not been debated and the House has not come up with a conclusion and then a minister brings a personal statement. Personally, depending on your guidance, I think it is prejudicial to the report we have not debated. 

I would think that probably, the minister will come and give his personal statement, if it is necessary, after we have debated the report and adopted whatever we will have adopted. If he comes before the report, I do not think we shall get the results. 

Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure prohibit us from anticipating. He does not know what the House will resolve on that matter; why wouldn’t he wait until we debate the report and I pray you rule that way?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you presented the report I was not here; I just saw this on the Order Paper. I thought you had discussed it and agreed on how to move. Let us then go to item No. 5 and debate the report.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, when they were tabling the report, we debated and the minister requested to make a personal statement. I think that it was in the same vein that it was put on the Order Paper. Parliament also gave an order to the Auditor-General to audit that particular loan particularly on the treasury account, so that we get a professional view before the minister gives a personal statement. 

I do not know whether it would be procedurally right for the minister to give a personal statement, pending the professional view from the Auditor-General as Parliament directed. This is because it will give us conclusive evidence about what happened on that treasury account.

THE SPEAKER: How did you direct the Auditor-General without debating the report? 

MR KAKOOZA: When the report came up here it was very important that -

THE SPEAKER: I understand that it was presented but not debated.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General appeared before the finance committee last week and this same issue came up. This is the issue of the PTA loan of USD 200 million being diverted by the minister for a purpose, which it was not sourced for, because Parliament wanted it to empower National Medical Stores.

The Auditor-General told the committee that by the end of February, their report would be ready to be presented. In the circumstances and since the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, I do not know what you would advise given this new development. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Which committee did the Auditor-General interact with?

MR ODONGA OTTO: The Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I think there is some clarification that needs to be made because if the chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts has a report and if that is what we are expecting hon. Kasaija to respond to, then –(Interjections)- Can you hold on, hon. Kakooza, because now hon. Otto has brought in another perspective, that it was in the Committee on Finance. That seems like a different case because the Auditor-General’s case is handled by the Committee on Public Accounts. 

However, what you are talking about seems to me a different case. Does that matter appear in the Auditor-General’s report, which was presented here, or not? If it appeared in the Auditor-General’s report, then there was no need for the Committee on Finance to again look into it. Therefore, can this be clarified? 

What are we talking about? Unless we want to divert the attention from the Auditor-General’s report, which was presented, by taking it again to the Committee on Finance and then asking for another report on it - Can we get clarification? The chairperson may be in a better position to clarify to us that matter and also give us highlights of the report.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not want to impute bad motive, but with the intention of giving a service to Ugandans and as a House, I think that if one committee of this House is handling a subject matter, unless directed by this House at a certain level, I do not see how another committee of Parliament would pick it up without any express instruction before we have made a decision on the same matter. I would therefore propose that we go ahead and debate this report and adopt it. 

If this House deems it fit, they can give further instruction either to the Auditor-General or another committee-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the committee, which we instructed to do this work, is the Committee on Public Accounts. So, you can give us highlights in five minutes and debate commences.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ACQUISITION AND UTILISATION OF USD 200 MILLION FROM PTA BANK

5.54
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Ms Osegge Angeline): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To give a background to this report, the committee of Parliament was instructed by your office to investigate these allegations as appeared in the newspapers and because of the situation that was occurring at the time.

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development came to this House asking for a loan of USD 200 million with a different reason the first time and the House rejected it. When the minister went, he came back with a different reason that they wanted this money to rescue a situation in the health sector where there was a shortage of drugs. He said that that was a noble cause and this Parliament should expeditiously grant this loan, and that National Medical Stores (NMS) could be given the capacity to avail the necessary drugs that the country needed.

Madam Speaker, we went ahead, as you gave us the instruction, and we processed it. This loan was approved given the plea of the minister. To our amazement, this loan was for a different purpose as we discovered as a committee. The health sector was used just to be able to access the money but later, the minister and his team said this was for general budget support.

In the processing of the loan, they also cited three agencies: Ministry Of Works, Transport and Communications, Ministry of Health, and the Rural Electrification Agency. They said these were the agencies they were going to finance. In our interaction with these agencies, none of them received that money. 

When the minister came to answer to the committee, he said it was for general budget support. However, the reason for which we gave the money in Parliament was for drugs for NMS, which had complained of underfunding. They were operating with a shortage of Shs 68 billion for the financial year. 

Madam Speaker, this can give a background to this report. Our concern as a committee was that the minister obtained that money fraudulently. He should have been open to this House and told us the reason as to why they wanted this money.

In our investigations, we also realised that the technical offices of this country, including the central bank and the Accountant-General, gave contrary advice to the ministry not to procure this loan for the reasons, which are given in this report. They ignored all that advice and went ahead to procure the loan and used it for a different purpose that was not approved by this House. Thank you –

THE SPEAKER: What are your recommendations?

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, one of our recommendations was that the Minister of Finance should be censured for lying to this House. 

The other recommendation was that the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury (PS/ST) should also be relieved of his duties because of encouraging lies to this House.

Madam Speaker, maybe I could read through our recommendations:

1. 	For misleading the House to believe that the most critical funding objective was medical supplies, lying to Parliament in writing that NMS had never provided the needed supply contracts to enable disbursement of funds, and further duping Parliament by repackaging the same loan thus obtaining money by false pretence, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the hon. Matia Kasaija, should be censured.

2. 	The committee on National Economy should adopt, as part of their procedure, a requirement to interface with the Governor, Bank of Uganda, while considering loan proposals from Government.

3. 	For lying to Parliament and for superimposing his authority, portrayed by insisting on the loan acquisition against strong advice in writing by the Governor of Bank of Uganda, the Accountant-General, the Director of Economic Affairs of Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and superintending the gross diversion of public funds, Mr Keith Muhakanizi, the PS/ST, should be relieved of his office. 

4. 	The Inspector General of Government (IGG) should further investigate the PS/ST for possible conflict of interest, collusion and connivance, considering that he aggressively insisted on acquiring the loan with prior knowledge that he was a former board chairman of the PTA bank. A report on the findings should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the date of the adoption of this report.

5. 	We recommend that Parliament directs that the USD 200 million be recovered, reconsolidated and applied for the sole and full purpose for which Parliament approved the loan. A report to this effect should be submitted to Parliament within 60 days from the day of adoption of this report.

6. 	The Executive should be more systematic while processing the presentation of loan requests to Parliament to avoid an embarrassing recall of some of them as Parliament witnessed on Tuesday, 11 July 2017.

7. 	The committee further recommends an amendment of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 to include, “The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give quarterly reports to Parliament on the financial and fiscal performance of public debt.” Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members.

6.01
MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Madam Speaker, I gave a minority report. I would like to inform the House - (Interjections) - Hon. Okupa, my copy was laid here on the Table in this Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, give only highlights.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the Public Accounts Committee, where am a member. We did the work together. The committee came up with a report but some members and I wrote a dissenting opinion. I wrote the minority report and I laid it on the Table - (Mr Karuhanga rose_) - Hon. Karuhanga, let me just complete this.

THE SPEAKER: What is the order, hon. Karuhanga?

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I certainly should have waited for the honourable member to finish. However, when he tells such a huge lie, it makes it difficult for anybody to sit back and let him continue.

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member, who singularly, out of a committee of over 30 members, wrote a report, to come here and say that there are other dissenting members of the committee? Madam Speaker, his minority report is clear. It was tabled and it is a one-member report. No other members dissented. That he is claiming to have supported his position, is he in order to lie to this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, who are the other members who were part of your minority report? Who agreed and signed your report? That is what I want to know.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Other members did not agree and sign the report because at the time I wrote the report, Parliament was on recess and Members could not easily be accessed to sign the report.

THE SPEAKER: Present your position.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will just highlight the key recommendations that I came up with and a few facts. My dissent from the rest of the committee report was on grounds that the facts were misrepresented and some issues were under looked.

Madam Speaker, I went ahead and looked at the Hansard that showed what was happening at that time when Parliament was passing this loan, because I was not in the Ninth Parliament. It was very clear that the money was for stabilisation of the Uganda shilling at that time –(Interjections)– I am going to present all this and it is very clear in the Hansard. 

The committee recommends on four issues, and I would like to talk about their recommendations and what I came up with in the report to bring the House on board. One recommendation says, “For misleading the House to believe that the most critical funding objective was for medical supplies, lying to Parliament in writing that National Medical Stores (NMS) had never provided the needed supply contract to enable disbursement of funds, and further duping Parliament by repackaging the same loan, thus obtaining money by false pretence, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, should be censured.”

Madam Speaker, my dissent is that the minister did not obtain money by false pretence because all the documentation concerning the PTA loan was provided to this Parliament before passing it. Therefore, he cannot be censured because this time, the economy was doing very badly.

When you read the discussion that took place in the Hansard, this loan was badly needed to stabilise the exchange rate and that was the purpose of the loan. When you look at National Medical Stores and Rural Electrification Agency (REA), they were just part of the loan and they were given money as per the appropriation of this Parliament, when you look at this document, Madam Speaker.

The other issue that was said was, “For lying to Parliament and misrepresenting, superimposing his authority and insisting on the loan against strong advice by the Governor Bank of Uganda, the Accountant-General and the Director of Economic Affairs, Mr Keith Muhakanizi should be relieved of his duties.” 

It is clear that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the one who runs the Consolidated Fund and he is the head of finance in this country. It is okay for everybody to advise, but the minister takes the final decision. Advising me does not mean that I will go according to your advice. 

Things do not operate that way. The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury and the Accountant-General provided all the necessary documents used. They provided the loan proceeds and the way they were appropriated by this Parliament. These people should instead be thanked by this Parliament for doing that work and for saving the economy from further deterioration at that time.

The committee also talked about conflict of interest of the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, Mr Keith Muhakanizi. They said that he was the chairman board of the at PTA Bank some time back, so he had interest in ensuring that we get a loan from the same bank for the bank to make interest. 

Madam Speaker, at the time of acquiring this loan, Keith Muhakanizi was a civil servant in Uganda. He had left that job and he was not serving the interests of PTA Bank but those of the Republic of Uganda because. He was no longer a board chair of the PTA Bank. This is clear and it is on record. He was just the former board chairman and just like being a former employee of an organisation, it does not mean that you keep serving their interests, moreover after taking oath on the steps of Parliament to serve this country diligently.

Madam Speaker, recommendation five was that Parliament directs the USD 200 million be recovered, reconsolidated and applied for the sole purpose for which Parliament approved it. Madam Speaker, the documents were clear; Rural Electrification Agency and NMS sent invoices and money was transferred to these people. I have this evidence and all the documents that we are going to present to this Parliament. One of the honourable members has gone to bring more documents and we are going to present them to this Parliament during broad day light today.

Madam Speaker, there is another recommendation that the finance minister should give quarterly reports to Parliament on the financial and fiscal performance of the public debt. I agree with this one because it should be a good practice by the finance minister. That one is okay, but I dissent on the rest of these issues, Madam Speaker. 

I know many other members of the committee who did not sign for record purposes have the same belief because not all members signed the main report. The report was signed by about only 15 members.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, those were the areas of dissent that I presented to this Parliament. I beg this Parliament to adopt the minority report for the good of this country, for work to continue. Furthermore, let us encourage these ministers because they go through a lot of pressure; for example, during that time, there was pressure on the exchange rate stabilisation and there was inflation, as we had just concluded with the elections and this loan was very vital.    

Madam Speaker, we should encourage people and not hang them when they have done well. We should reward good and punish bad acts. When someone has done something good, you cannot punish that person. I, therefore, request the House to adopt the minority report. I beg to move. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Before the debate starts, honourable member, I am glad you said that you were not in the Ninth Parliament because I was presiding when that loan first came and it was rejected. Since you read the Hansard, I would like you to look for the contribution of Dr Elioda Tumwesigye on that issue. (Applause) What did Dr Tumwesigye say about that loan?

Honourable members, if you made a mistake, and indeed you did, do not try to dress it and carry us in the dressing. The loan was rejected and came back in a different dress.

MS OSEGGE: I do not know if it would help the House, if we went through the observations of the committee again? I went straight to the recommendations but the observations give details of our interaction with all the Members. Madam Speaker, it is about two pages.

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: The report was read and I was in this House at that time. The minority report was also read. The Speaker by then requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Mr Matia Kasaija, to say something about the report. Hon. Kasaija said that he was not prepared but would like to give his personal statement. 

At that time, someone raised a question and when the Minister of State for Finance, Mr David Bahati, came with the Budget Framework Paper which was brought before the Committee on Finance, and there was an argument. We said, “You people, we are tired of you coming here to tell us lies”. I remember even at the last moment, hon. Kivumbi said, “This man is holding the treasury operations of Shs 8.8 trillion; we need to know what is happening with the money, even if it was budget support. We need to audit the account and get information so that Parliament is aware when making decisions on those two reports”, as you stated. 

I was here in the Ninth Parliament, Madam Speaker, and you were in the Chair. We rejected the first loan request but hon. Bahati came on 16 April 2016 dressing it in another way. That is why, in order for this Parliament to get to the gist of the matter, treasury operations must be audited by the Auditor-General before we come to a conclusion. This will help Members to make an informed decision on what happened to that money before hon. Kasaija makes his statement.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity. Honourable Chair of the Public Accounts Committee, we really appreciate the recommendations of the committee report and you do not have to labour on the observations. However, I would like this House to address their mind to the point which hon. Kakooza has just mentioned. 

In the Committee on Finance, we are not conflicting but complementing each other. We are asking whether there was a Treasury warrant on this USD 200 million, because my understanding is that before money is released from the Treasury, the Auditor-General must issue a warrant. Therefore, in this particular case, the Auditor-General could not say “yes” or “no”, which means the money was got out of the coffers without a warrant. The Auditor-General requested that they be given up to end of February 2018 to produce an audit as to how money could leave the Treasury without a warrant. 

The guidance I am seeking for now, with all these good recommendations and the mood that Parliament is in to debate this report, is: Given the fact that the Auditor-General is an officer of Parliament, what happens if we pass these recommendations, including the one to censure the minister, and then the Auditor-General comes out to give a statement that may not be in line with what we would have decided? Otherwise, I am not afraid of the Minister of Finance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I told you earlier that the committee to which we gave this responsibility is the Committee on Public Accounts and we must first deal with their report. In any event, even if we make recommendations, they will not be effected in a day. They are treated as treasury memoranda and the Government will come back and tell us what they think. This is similar to the one of finance and it will also be reported on.

6.18
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, some of us get disturbed at certain times when we are elected to speak on behalf of Ugandans and serve the interest of this country. It would be right if we were here and accepted that mistakes were made. This can be done and we solve the problem. Otherwise, this country is suffering because of impunity. People are running away from the truth while some want to please others. 

Madam Speaker, we were not all here in the Ninth Parliament but we have heard, read and we know. We came in the Tenth Parliament to begin from where the Ninth Parliament ended. This loan request was passed in the Ninth Parliament and the information concerning this loan is in black and white. We read, saw and got to know. 

We also read from the report that this loan was brought back after being rejected the first in the line of the health sector - National Medical Stores. I wonder which laws in Uganda allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to just divert money without going back to the authority that gave the money - before you divert it from one sector to another, one account to another and one use to another.

Madam Speaker, it is now time for this House to come to its senses and serve the interests of this country and know right from wrong, know what is supposed to be done and what is not supposed to be done. The last ministry I would expect to dupe Ugandans and to make a mistake is the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, and it should be the last ministry for Ugandans to lose interest in. 

If the finance ministry can begin channelling money from one area to another - We are not bothered whether hon. Matia Kasaija took the money and put it in his pocket or used the money in another section to help this country. We are not bothered whether hon. David Bahati helped to move money from one ministry to another to stabilise the economy or stabilise the shilling. That is not our concern. We have been here quarrelling over oil and people importing sugar with impunity. Everybody has been grumbling, suffering and quarrelling because some people are untouchable. 

If you want to talk about the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury, they say that you are treading on dangerous ground. If you want to touch the other area, they say you are touching the wrong button. Some of us are immune; we always tell these people off. We are ready to touch those wrong buttons and we shall reach where we are supposed to go. 

Madam Speaker, we cannot continue with this type of work; enough is enough. The report is very clear and so are the recommendations. With due respect to hon. Solomon Silwany, he must be ashamed of coming to present such a minority report. It is very embarrassing to have such a minority report. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we must see justice done. We must go to the root of this to see where the money went. Where did that money go? Before we think of saving the minister, the PS and others, where did the money go?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I recall one colleague of ours presented a minority report. He was seated somewhere around here but now I have seen him crossing over. Is it procedurally right for somebody who is not a member of Cabinet to cross and go to speak to members of Cabinet whom we are talking about? In fact, he is talking to the Minister of State for Finance and there are legal issues there? There is another one from Bukooli; of course, he was removed from the position of District Internal Security Officer (DISO) and you know why. Is it procedurally right for people having a case to sit with their prosecutors?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he has already presented his report; I think he cannot amend it. However in this House we are friends and I am sure that he was just consulting.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are dealing with a matter that I consider to be of national importance - a very important matter that concerns one of the members of the Executive. The procedural issue I am raising is that the House is almost empty; is it procedurally right for us to proceed with less than 50 Members in this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are just debating. I am sure our ears can hear even if we are not all here.

6.23
MR JAMES KABERUKA (Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, on 7 April 2016, this Parliament received the application for this loan and rejected it. On 26 April 2016, hon. David Bahati came here to raise the same loan request for budget support. This request was sent to the Committee on National Economy. The committee adopted all the prayers in the report and brought it to Parliament for adoption. 

Madam Speaker, I am getting confused on whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development forced this loan onto Parliament when a committee of Parliament processed and presented the report, which we adopted. What honourable members are concerned about is, where did the money go? This is my prayer to you, Madam Speaker. 

That is why we are saying that we should get an audited report from the Auditor-General such that we can trace where this money ended up. Otherwise, on the concerns about the processes, we adopted it because through a committee of Parliament, the loan was duly processed. It is here in the Hansard of the Parliament. 

If you allow us to go with these recommendations, the Auditor-General may recommend otherwise and it would be unfortunate –(Interjections)– Wait, honourable member. My prayer is: can we allow the Auditor-General, who is supposed to inform this House on contradictions in financial matters, so that we can get informed about what to do –(Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am rarely seen trying to make an interjection. However, you have already ruled on this and said that we can proceed, after all                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     his matter is not going to be concluded today. Therefore, I really wonder whether my honourable brother is in order to overturn the Speaker’s clear ruling. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should respect our committees because they are ours. If we allow this, it will mean that one committee will go and look for help somewhere and say, “We are looking on the other side; you hold on.” When the Auditor-General’s report comes, we shall deal with it. 

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I am not disputing and I really appreciate your ruling. I also recognise and appreciate the report of the committee. However, we are saying, if we could get - (Interruption) 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way.  Madam Speaker, looking at our report, particularly on page 15, under observation No.2, it says that, “At the time of requesting for approval of the USD 200 million loan from Parliament, Government, through Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, provided contract documents of the beneficiaries as conditioned by the lender, hence drugs and medical equipment, transport, road and earth moving equipment and then Rural Electrification Government counterpart contribution”.

On page 16, the committee observed that despite several demands, the committee was never availed with specifics on how the disbursed amount was spent by the end of financial year 2016/2017. 

First of all, this House should be informed that the committee interfaced with the Auditor-General, the Governor Bank of Uganda and twice with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. All that they could give was given. All the defence they could present to Parliament was availed. All that we could see was that money, close to Shs 700 billion, was received from PTA Bank, with a narrative on the statement from Bank of Uganda, indicating the purpose for each tranche. 

If the first tranche of $30 million was received, all the bank statements from Bank of Uganda indicated what the money was supposed to do. Therefore, the $30 million would indicate “for National Medical Stores”, about $2 million to Rural Electrification Agency. When we asked these agencies, “Did you receive this money?” They said, “No.” What more do we need? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information to my brother, hon. Kaberuka. If you are talking of April 2016, the financial year ended in June 2016. That means the audited report of 2016 was submitted in March 2017. This would have shown two things: that we either have a balance of $200 million in the accounts or what was spent would have already been accounted for. I am sure some of the tranches they are mentioning were audited in financial year 2016/2017.

The information I am giving is that the report might be there but what we are asking is: Did you look at the Auditor-General’s report of 2016?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, one of the annexure of the report of the Committee on Public Accounts is a resolution by Parliament. It says, “A resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $200 million” and it was passed by this Parliament. The Clerk then wrote.

I cannot defend anyone who colludes to take government money. It cannot happen because this is public money. This money was appropriated and it went into the Treasury. Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi had a point. Last time, some of us did not get the opportunity to speak. Who holds this money that goes on the Treasury account? Who transfers it? He holds Shs 8.8 trillion, and it is not audited. If it is audited, the information should be given. 

Further, if this PTA loan was meant for budget support, it must have gone to the treasury operation’s account. Why then don’t we have a report? The Auditor-General must have an interest in this. I am sure if this money went into the pockets of hon. Kasaija, the report would have shown the particular date. The report does not actually indicate that money was transferred to hon. Kasaija or transferred from here to there. We knew that this money went onto the treasury operations account. Where did that money go?

MR KABERUKA: Thank you.  Madam Speaker, I was providing the cure and the cure is to make sure we identify who actually got the money. This money was meant for budget support. Where did this money go? That is my problem. This is the reason we are saying if we have an institution mandated to audit and trace monies, we would automatically get where the money was utilised. Thank you. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I would like to suggest a way forward because I see an impasse. Kindly, listen to me. We came together and we have been here together and I think we have done a beautiful job.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say, first of all, that the loan was approved by Parliament in April, when we were left with only one and half months to end the financial year. I am sure the Auditor-General that time never had time to audit all the accounts within one and a half months.

We know very well money came to the consolidated account and it was used. I think if it is the wish of this Parliament, we can task the Auditor-General, within one week, to audit this particular money and tell us where this money went. From the Consolidated Fund, where did the money go? What purpose did it serve? What did it purchase and who removed that money from the account?

I think that would be fair to the ministers who are doing their job diligently. If they are to kill the ministers, they should kill them fully for misappropriating this money. That is my suggestion.

MR MWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I am one of the last people to rise on a point of order. However, if I heard the presentation of the chairperson well, I would like to know what the issue is. It is not the presence or absence of an audited report. The issue is that someone came to this Parliament to borrow money for a particular purpose, Parliament approved the borrowing for a particular purpose, but money was diverted from the purpose for which it was borrowed. 

I would like to use the words of my good friends – Parliament was duped. First of all, they came to Parliament for a particular purpose and Parliament, in its wisdom, rejected the first attempt of the loan request. Later, they came back under another scheme and Parliament, with due respect, especially when they raised the alarm of health and other sectors, approved the loan request. Therefore, is my good friend, engineer Byabagambi, in order to divert this Parliament intentionally, especially having discovered that the issues in the minority report were wrong, both in fact and substance? 

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister therefore in order to run away from the issue at hand? The issue at hand is the diversion of money from the purpose for which it was borrowed. It is not whether there are audited reports or not. That is why even hon. Kakooza is quoting facts wrong. My position on treasury operations is different and it is for another day. Therefore, is the honourable minister in order to purposely mislead this Parliament as if you want to have an audited report? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I have not concluded, Madam Speaker. It was a point of order.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker –(Interjections)– He has allowed me to give him information.  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Byabagambi was still on the Floor and he has yielded so that I give information.

When this loan request was processed by this Parliament, I was a minister of state in the Ministry of Health. I do recall that we had a challenge because of the exchange rate fluctuations. The money which had been allocated to National Medical Stores had become less because of the exchange rate fluctuation. If I recall, I think their money had reduced by Shs 68 billion. 

I have a copy of the report of the committee which processed this loan. This is the report of the committee of National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow up to $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rate. That is the title of the report.

When you read the objective of the borrowing – this was a committee report which we considered in the House - it says, “In view of the temporary balance of payment challenges that the economy is facing at the moment, there is need for a temporary foreign exchange facility to finance Government foreign currency denominated requirement. The proposed borrowing will substitute for domestic borrowing, which has been constrained by unfavourable conditions in the domestic debt market due to low demand and very high interest rates.” 

What is very clear from this is that the purpose of this loan was to stabilise the exchange rate. However, like I have said –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, how did the National Medical Stores come into that report?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Yes, I am coming to that. National Medical Stores came into this because it was one of the agencies which had been affected by the exchange rate fluctuations. Therefore, it was expected to be supported through this.

This was for stabilisation of the exchange rate, but there were some agencies which were supposed to benefit from this loan. The question which has to be looked at is: Did Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development fail to remit money to those agencies? The institution which can tell us is the office of the Auditor-General. We cannot tell whether money went to those institutions or not while seated here. 

I would agree with hon. Kaberuka, my brother, that we should give time to the Auditor-General to tell us whether actually the finance ministry failed to remit the money to the agencies which should have benefitted from these funds for stabilising the exchange rate. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You know, honourable members, I may not talk much, but I was engaged in discussions to remind the finance minister that that money was boarded partially for National Medical Stores and it had not gone there. I had meetings in my office over that money.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to appeal to Members to be honest to one another and to be honest to this country on this matter here. 

Madam Speaker, I will be forced to say that in the last five days, people have approached me over this matter and I was wondering why they were approaching me. I did not know. I am not surprised by the way I see colleagues behave, because I do not think it was only me who was approached. Some other people must have been approached also over the last three days. That is why I feel that I need Ugandans and colleagues to be honest to this country. 

Like we have stated, if there was a mistake, whether intentionally or unintentionally, whether by commission or omission, admit and we seek a way forward. I have seen colleagues make diversionary statements that we let the Auditor-General look at this. The Auditor-General has already produced audit accounts for 2015/2016. Have they not captured this? The leaders will tell us if this has not been captured. It defeats one’s understanding to come now in 2018 to ask the Auditor-General to look at something that they should have looked at earlier. If they did look at it, the leadership here will tell us when they are responding.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like the Government to know that we are not saying that you are wrong to spend the money. Our issue is that you told us you are spending on A, B, C and the money went to something else. That is the issue. If you wanted to change the user, you should have come back to us and said we want now to do A, B, C, D. You did not do that.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude –(Mr Nandala-Mafabi rose_)- You will give me information later; just hold on. 

Madam Speaker, you have heard from here that - I was in the Ninth Parliament - it was brought and we rejected it. They went and re-designed it and then Parliament, in its wisdom, accepted it. Even when that was done, that money was not used for that purpose for which we approved it; it was used for a different purpose.

The committee here has told us that the agencies that the honourable members claim got this money appeared before the committee and stated that they never received the money. That is where the problem is. They never received the money and yet the money had been disbursed.

I am even shocked that my colleague, hon. Solomon Silwany, is coming here with a minority report. Madam Speaker, I do not know whether we should even regard that minority report because you have corrected him. What he was claiming to be facts were not. I do not know whether we should go ahead and consider that so-called minority report. It is an individual report, not a minority report.

I am also told, and I stand to be corrected, that he never attended any meetings. So, how does he come to write a minority report if he never attended the meetings? I beg to be corrected, but that is information that is going around. There is a report and an attendance list; I do not know whether we should regard such as a minority report, when we have been told that it is not factual. You have corrected him that what he said here was wrong. The other issue is: How does money leave the Treasury without a warrant? That should be clarified. How does money –(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. With all due respect to my elder, he is standing on the Floor of this House and stating that I did not attend the committee meetings. Madam Speaker, I attended the committee meetings on several occasions and in the committee we sign whenever we attend. That evidence can be provided here. 

Is it in order for the honourable member, who is not even a member of the committee, to stand on the Floor of this House and make a false allegation against a member who honestly attended the committee meetings several times and came up with a minority report?

THE SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I was not here when the report came. I did not see the minutes. Therefore, I do not know who attended. However, I will check when the Clerk gives me the record.

6.51
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is by the grace of God that I am here in the Tenth Parliament. At least, I was in the Ninth Parliament when this loan request was brought and I was in the House –(Interjections)– Yes, not all of us. Some of us like hon. Silwany were not here. 

Madam Speaker, I also sit on the budget committee. This issue arose as a result of a committee meeting in which the Executive Director of National Medical Stores appeared before us. Hon. Kakooza, hon. Kabaziguruka and I think even hon. Kivumbi were there. The Executive Director of NMS said they were not going to provide health services for the next two quarters simply because they did not have funds. It was in the newspapers. We asked why they were not going to give supplies and he said the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not release money. 

For that reason, Madam Speaker, this issue was brought on the Floor of Parliament by hon. Cecilia Ogwal because she is a member of the Committee on Budget. She was the one who reminded the House of the loan request this House made in relation to the issue of health. Where is that money? That is our issue. Many people died as a result of lack of supplies that the National Medical Stores could not provide for two quarters.

We were asking about this when we were analysing the budget for financial year 2017/2018 and you are aware of that. Therefore, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you know - (Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, if you would like to go to the bottom of this issue - who took the money - it was an issue in the Committee on Budget and we would like to get that person. It is because this report does not tell us where the money went. We would like to know who took that money of the medical supplies. 

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you. Madam Speaker, we respect Public Accounts Committee (PAC) so much and you have ruled on this one thrice. You tasked PAC to go and find out because hon. Cecilia Ogwal had raised the issue on the Floor of Parliament. They have investigated and found out. 

Certain things have happened and people have died as a result of mismanagement or diversion of funds. My concern is that as a House, we have debated several times where Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does things behind Parliament’s back. Sometimes, they bring us figures retrospectively and we have always talked about this.

In fact, our surprise was when the Minister of Health, Dr Aceng, did not want the House to debate this matter moreover it affected her ministry. At one moment, the House approved Shs 11 billion for hepatitis B and Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released only Shs 3 billion and they said the Ministry of Health had not raised accountability. Of recent, again, the House approved money for Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development but the finance ministry knows for sure that only Shs 3 billion was released for women. 

Therefore, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development know what they are doing. We would like real accountability to this House. My proposal is: now that they have raised the money, and because the finance ministry knows that money was diverted, and this report was presented about two weeks back, I wonder why Minister Kasaija cannot have his report ready by tomorrow. Can you tell us where the money went and why you diverted it so that we come up with a conclusion as a House? 

If this House would like the Auditor-General to get us facts, then we give it to the Auditor-General. However, for this time, we would like the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us what happened to this money. Why did you dupe Parliament? Thank you. 

6.56
MR GORDON BAFAKI (NRM, Kazo County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I see this as part of accountability. It is true the money was received and put in the Consolidated Fund and it was used by the same Government. It is very difficult when you are spending money from a pool to apportion it appropriately. 

I, therefore, urge the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, as earlier stated on the Order Paper, to make a statement. From his statement, we can decide whether to send this matter to the Auditor-General to specifically look at how that money was spent or not. As and when it was allocated to specific sectors and if it was not spent there, we may not know that. 

Please, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, you received money in a pool. It could have been spent somewhere else. Therefore, there is a need for - I do not think this is a diversion. Money was spent and if you may go to National Medical Stores, you may find they have received the money. Therefore, we need accountability and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is in the right position to clear the air. Otherwise, we are going to be speculating. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.58
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Gabriel Ajedra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For those of you who know me, I do not lie. I stand by the facts. 

Madam Speaker, I have been in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for six years now; first, as the minister of state in charge of investment and then now as the minister of state for general duties. In the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, there is what is called treasury operations. We have the Consolidated Fund, which is a basket where we put all the money that Parliament must appropriate. 

Once Parliament has appropriated the money, there is what we call a treasury requisition that must be signed by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. It is through that treasury requisition that the Accountant-General pays. Those who come from departments, agencies and ministries base their requisition on that and it is the basis on which money will be released.

The question then is: How was the $200 million spent? The money was received by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on behalf of the Government of Uganda. Was the money spent? Yes, it was spent. How was it spent? That question can only be answered by the Auditor-General because he audits all accounts and his report is submitted to this very Parliament, not any other institution. The office of the Auditor-General is under Parliament.

My colleagues have been pleading here, and if the money went to somebody’s account, it is very easy to track it. Madam Speaker, I did not –(Interruption) 

MR ALIONI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I must say I am very disappointed. I sit on the committee and when we invited the finance ministry, we invited the Executive Director of National Medical Stores as well. When we asked him - and the Hansard can prove that – whether he had received the money, on a sad note, the man was shedding tears. He almost failed to speak until when he said, “No, I did not receive money.” 

We called Rural Electrification Agency and asked them whether they received the money? They said they had never received the money, and this was in the presence of the minister. Madam Speaker, we went on to ask the minister, since all those people had testified that they had not received money, where was the money? The minister told us they had put the money in a common basket.

Therefore, is the minister in order to come and tell this Parliament that the money was received and it was used? Is he in order to tell us that, when other entities said they did not receive that money? The minister said they received the money and put it in a common basket but that money was not spent and so, that money is not accounted for. Therefore, is the minister in order to tell us that money was received and spent, when it is not true?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am trying to think. I have some documents indicating when the money arrived in this country and it is very early in the financial year, but it did not reach the agencies. By the time they were coming here to complain -

MR AJEDRA: Mr Speaker, on page 14 of the committee report, you see the drawdown very clearly indicated. I believe that information came from Bank of Uganda. On page 14, it gives you the drawdown on that account as supplied by - I believe this information must have come from Bank of Uganda because we have it as it is here at the finance ministry.

Let me give you just one example. When there is a drawdown of say, $30 million from Bank of Uganda, it is very easy to trace where that money has gone; quite very easy. As I said, I did what is called rudimentary accounts when I was in senior four. When there is an entry, in book keeping, a debit or when you receive money, - that is principles of accounts - it is credited to your account and when payments are made, they are debited. That means such money can be easily be traced by the experts.

Hence, as I said before, if you want to know where a particular amount of money has gone –(Mr Odonga Otto rose_) – Allow me to finish –(Interjections)– Okay, I will take it –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you very much, honourable colleague. The information I am seeking from you is two-fold. One is about the purpose. These things of commerce and accounts you are explaining, we know them and they are not related to the question we are asking. The question we are asking is: Was the money used for the purpose for which it was sourced? That is the million-dollar question.

Secondly, since you are now good at accounts, the condition precedent set by law - condition precedent means the condition you must meet before - is that you get a warrant before you drawdown that account. Therefore, the question I put to you is: Can you present us a copy of the warrant so that we cut this long story short? Forget about those issues of commerce, drawdowns; we know those ones.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are not required to be accountants in this House but we have common sense. Tell us when you received the money and when it went to the agencies for which it was borrowed. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, I know that the submissions of my colleague and friend are always very sensible, and I understand that we have common sense in this House. I do not doubt anybody’s ability to do that. 

I had said before that I have been at the finance ministry for six years. I do not know of any incidence where money was taken out of the Consolidated Fund without a warrant –(Interjections)– These are going to be provided –(Interjections)– No, I am I am saying I, as Ajedra, have not known of any instance where money has been taken out of the Consolidated Fund without a warrant. 

The point I am trying to stress here is - Hon. Odonga Otto asked a fundamental question: Was the money used for purpose for which it was requested? An audit can provide that information. Two -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, you people should stop insulting this House. You work in the Ministry of Finance and you know about this matter. You should be in possession of the information on when you sent the money to National Medical Stores and Rural Electrification Agency. You should know it and so do not insult us. You can get this from your ministry. 

MR AJEDRA: Madam Speaker, much obliged. That is why I was saying –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, I would like to make an additional comment on what you said. We all know, and hon. Ajedra knows very well, that the issue before this House is that money was given and received, and the money that was received was not used for the purpose for which it was meant. That is the issue.

However, you are telling us that the audit will provide the answers yet the Committee on Public Accounts handles audit reports. This was an issue of audit. That is why it was brought before this House - (Interjections)– Yes, an audit is an investigation, if you did not know, honourable member. Finally, the directive of the Speaker was to the effect that the Committee on Public Accounts handles this matter. Thank you.

MS ADOA: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  This issue is very clear. The committee has presented the facts that they have. My appeal to the minister is for them to tell this House whether when the money was given for this issue, it was diverted to this or it was not diverted. Let us speak the truth and save time. Even the Bible says, “When you speak the truth, the truth shall set you free.” It is not a crime; we can apologise. Where did the money go? If it did not go to the right agency, it is not a crime.

7.11
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker and colleagues, let us go back to the basics. When we came here for the first time – and I should use this opportunity to clarify a few things - the issue was basically to support the shilling but you rejected it and then we went back – 

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to speak, please.

MR KASAIJA: No, we did not forge. There had been expenditure pressures that had been building in the areas of transport, National Medical Stores, water. We came back to this House because that window for borrowing was still available and presented the request afresh.

I would like that you look at my brief, which I gave to Parliament. Madam Speaker, as you know, I did not know that this matter would arise, otherwise I would have come with all my documents. However, what I remember very well –(Interjections)– Yes, but I had had a word with the Speaker about the problem I had. We said that the needs for this money now included the following, among others: agriculture, transport, health, water and so on. There were many pressures. We receive many pressures, including from here in Parliament. You put pressure on us –(Interjections)- Yes, the commission does -

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to speak. 

MR KASAIJA: I am the man who authorises this money and telling you this; why don’t you want to believe me? 

Madam Speaker, when we were debating the report, my colleague, the Minister of Health, emphasised the question of health and NMS in particular; there was no question about that –(Interjections)– Can I be protected, Madam Speaker? I have been keeping quiet for a long time so please give me a chance to speak. There were also other spending pressures that had built up. Almost on a daily basis, there are spending pressures; for example, now there is money for the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), which you all know about. 

When the loan was passed, we went back and signed the agreement before money began to flow into the reserve account in Bank of Uganda, but in the dollar currency. However, we could not spend money in dollars without going through appropriation. How do we do this? Money is converted from foreign currency into Ugandan shillings and then the Uganda shillings are kept in the national consolidated account. Later, we begin to release money in accordance with what we in Parliament here have authorised, and that is exactly what was done. Yes, there was a delay in giving them the money, I must admit that, and yet they wanted it. 

Madam Speaker, you will even recall that we even raised a supplementary for NMS –(Interjections)– Yes, and we have all that information; we will bring it. Therefore, my prayer, Madam Speaker and colleagues, if the issue - I will even answer the accusation that we got this money by false pretence. This is because the committee has definitely recommended that we may have got this money by false pretence. We did not get this money by false pretence and we shall prove the case.

Madam Speaker, I have asked the Auditor-General to audit -(Interjections) – Yes, anyone of you can ask the Auditor-General to do that. You want me to account for the money because there is an issue about where the money went. I am not the best person to give you an answer to that question because supposing I go back and I do not give you the correct information. I suggest that we have an independent Government authority that should be able to prepare a report for us, come here and say this is how the money was spent. 

I would like to assure this House because I have heard insinuations that money might have disappeared. I want to give this House full assurance that no money was diverted and/or stolen from – (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving way. You got communication from the Bank of Uganda and in fact from the Governor himself who said thus: “I would strongly recommend that you do not proceed with this proposed borrowing for the reasons explained below” and he gave a number of reasons. One of the major reasons was that Bank of Uganda had more than sufficient foreign exchange resources to support those interventions you were talking about.

He said thus: “…our reserves currently amount to $2.8 billion and we do not require additional sources mobilised from the PTA Bank loan for this purpose.” That is one of the reasons he gave.

MR KASAIJA: Thank you very much, honourable member. In fact, you have helped me to bring out an issue. Parliament acted in accordance with that recommendation when it rejected the loan the first time – (Interjections) - Please give me a chance to speak. I have given all of you the chance to speak. 

When we came back here the second time, my brief to you was about budget support. You can please check the records because you have them; it was not projects. My reply to the letter written by the Governor, Bank of Uganda at that time was about the question of supporting the shilling – (Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very difficult when a senior Member of this House outrightly lies even when there is documentary evidence. Listen to what the Governor said in the first sentence of his letter, dated 2 February 2016: “I understand that you are intending to re-submit to Parliament…” - to re-submit, meaning that he was talking about the second submission to Parliament - “…the request for authorisation to contract a revolving loan facility of $200 million from the PTA Bank. I would strongly recommend that you do not proceed with this proposed borrowing” and he listed the reasons why. 

Madam Speaker, is it honestly procedurally right for the honourable Minister of Finance to come to the Floor of this House and openly lie that the Governor of the Bank of Uganda - By the way, it was not only the Governor of the Bank of Uganda but also the Director for Economic Affairs also put his objection in writing as well as the Accountant-General. This was after they had had a meeting and disagreed with the minister and his permanent secretary on the reasons they wanted to borrow. 

The Governor further said, “You qualify for a loan from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at zero interest rate for a gross period of five and a half years.” However, the minister and the permanent secretary still insisted on repackaging this loan. They came to Parliament and realised that the normal currency they had given the loan would not work and so they gave Parliament an impression that indeed this money was intended for the medical supplies, among others. All of a sudden, they got this money and used it for purposes, which up to now, they are yet to tell Ugandans. 

Therefore, is it in order for the honourable minister to lie that the Governor of Bank of Uganda was referring to the initial loan but not the second one, when documentary evidence is saying to the contrary?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I have to go back to the Hansard to study the language used in the first loan request and in the second loan request. Therefore, I will give my ruling on that one tomorrow, if you do not mind. Let me go back to the Hansard and refresh myself on the matter. I know the highlights but I need to deal with the nitty-gritty so that we can conclude it tomorrow. Therefore this matter is now deferred. I will give my ruling tomorrow. Let us go to item 6; it is just a small petition.

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY THE PHARMACISTS IN UGANDA THROUGH THE UGANDA PHARMACY OWNERS ASSOCIATION (UPOA) ON THE VARIOUS ISSUES AGAINST THE NATIONAL DRUG AUTHORITY (NDA) 

THE SPEAKER: This is a petition from the pharmacists. I talked about it last week. I said that I had received a petition from the pharmacists and I said it would be presented today. He is just going to give the highlights.

7.25
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, this petition of the Uganda Pharmacy Owners’ Association on the various issues against National Drug Authority (NDA) is presented under rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda. 

The humble petition, as presented by I, is as follows: “The Uganda Pharmacy Owners’ Association is a registered body that comprises pharmacy owners drawn from various parts of the country involved in…” -

THE SPEAKER: Name the body and the prayers.

MR ONZIMA: Okay, I think there are only four prayers; can I read all those?

THE SPEAKER: Read only the prayers.

MR ONZIMA: “Therefore your petitioner’s pray that:

(a) 	Parliament investigates the leadership and management of National Drug Authority (NDA); 
(b) 	Parliament investigates the plight of the petitioners as presented;
(c) 	Parliament halts all illegal and unlawful closure of pharmacies until the said investigations are completed; and
(d) 	Parliament expedites the investigations and offers a viable response to the petitioners.

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.” 

The humble petitioners have appended their signatures. I beg to present, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Onzima. Just for the record, hon. Tumusiime, the Member of Parliament for Entebbe Municipality, last Wednesday raised the issue to do with the drug shop owners - this is about pharmacies - who were also complaining that they have been given a notice of one year to close all the drug shops in the municipalities, which they think is unfair. They are saying that this will cut down on employment opportunities for the people of Uganda. 

They are also praying that Government and public hospitals should be adequately stocked with drugs so that there is no need for these small shops here and there. They say that the ban on drug shops should be stayed since the pharmacies, which are being promoted, are mostly owned by foreigners thereby pushing Ugandans out of employment. Further, they also prayed that the National Drug Authority should carry out the duty of stopping non-compliant owners instead of attacking everybody. 

Therefore, since the problem is big, I want to ask the Committee on Health to handle that petition together with these issues from the drug shop operators so that we get a solution. I would like to ask that they meet the pharmacists, drug shop owners, NDA and any other relevant authority on this issue. Please report back quickly because, I think, they are constrained; they are not working. If the Committee on Health could handle this expeditiously, we would appreciate it. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is good you have raised the issue of drug shops because that is where I was getting more worried. 

Regarding the pharmacists who are complaining, I would like to move an amendment on that. I got a list here from the NDA showing the coverage of pharmacies in Uganda -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, are you bringing evidence to the plenary?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, that is not what I am trying to say. I would like to also pray that we check on these so-called pharmacies in Uganda to see who the owners are. The reason I am raising this is because you may find a pharmacist in front but the owner may be an Indian or a Chinese yet these people are working to close small drug shops owned by local investors. Therefore, my prayer is that the committee further investigates who runs the pharmacies in Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: The committee should lift the veil and check who is underneath? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us add that prayer to the prayers in the petition so that it is addressed by the Committee on Health. 

MS OSEGGE: I do not know whether this will be corrected by opening the veil because my experience is that many people who are running drug shops have licences of pharmacists. Many pharmacists are using their licences to make money from whoever wants to operate a drug shop. Therefore, they hung their licences whereas the person who is selling the drugs has never been to even primary one. Therefore, we either prevent them from selling their licences or something has to be done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is important information for the Committee on Health. Please, also examine that area and find out who is really behind it. 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I had expected the honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi to have responded to some of these issues. I happen to have worked as a marketing officer with a pharmaceutical company, having trained for about six months in marketing those things. What I recall is that while any person can open up or register a pharmacy, the condition is that that person must employ a pharmacist. I just wanted to make that clear. Therefore, it is not true that it is only the pharmacist who can operate a pharmacy. 

Secondly, there is another issue which I think is being abused; if you are dealing in wholesale as a pharmacy, you should do wholesale. However, what is happening today is that they are doing everything. The investor will be the manufacturer, he owns a pharmacy, he does wholesale and retail. Therefore, he kills the small-scale sellers operating drug shops or pharmacies. I think those are some of the things the committee should investigate and clarify such that the public knows. I thought that I should give that information. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think the Hansard should be studied to pick up all those issues.

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, my concern is that while the honourable member has raised the issue of pharmacists selling their licences, the same is happening even with medical doctors. There are so many mushrooming clinics operating in the name of doctors but the people operating them are not medical practitioners. I would pray that perhaps we stretch this investigation to include those medical outlets known as clinics.

THE SPEAKER: I think we should ask our Committee on Heath to handle that one separately because it is a bit different; it might be swallowed-up if we mix them. However, the committee should take interest in that.

Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work done. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.35 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 7 February 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 

