

Tuesday, 13 February 2018

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to amend the Order Paper to allow the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to table a motion. 

There is a delegation from Zombo. Are they here? I will announce them when they come in. 

Honourable members, the Vision Group is organising an expo called Harvest Money from 16 to 19 February 2018 at the Nelson Mandela National Stadium in Namboole. I had the opportunity to attend it last year and found it very informative. I would like to encourage Members to attend and see how they can improve agriculture both for themselves and their constituents. It is a meeting point for all agriculture stakeholders and it will attract farmers, agriculture service providers, agro processors and researchers.

The aim of the expo is to showcase successful farmers, including those who have won the Best Farmers Award. It will inspire those in attendance and impart modern farming skills as well as offer valuable advice on how to turn farming into a revenue-making venture and a paying job.

Secondly, honourable members, I was in Lamwo District yesterday and I would like to express my grave concern on the issue of environmental degradation. The number of lorries from that side ferrying charcoal to Kampala and the number of charcoal sacks at the roadside is worrying. I do not understand how we will continue passing those roads and seeing the sacks of charcoal by the roadside and doing nothing about it. 

I drove through many areas with schools and there was no single new tree. There are only old trees of between 50 to 70 years. This is serious and I do not know how more we can emphasise this. We need money for reforestation and we needed it yesterday. Last year, I told the Minister of Finance that this year we would like to see money for the tree fund in the budget and I hope that you will do it. Otherwise, we are endangered and watching.

I also observed in Lamwo District that as a result of the war and being near the Sudan border, there are many things which they still need, especially schools. There are six subcounties that have no secondary schools and yet our policy is to have a Government secondary school in every subcounty. After the war and the insecurity over many years, I think they need attention. I do not know if the Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) is still operational. If it is, they should come to the assistance of the people of Lamwo because the children in this area need education and training.

In addition, Lamwo District does not have a Government technical institute yet it is part of our manifesto. I, therefore, call upon the Office of the Prime Minister and the Ministry of Education and Sports to take up that issue so that they can provide the necessary services.

2.50
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance regarding a tragic accident that occurred in Kaberamaido District on Wednesday, 7 February 2018. The accident involved 49 prisoners and three prison warders who were on their way to work. They were on a Forward tipper lorry. The vehicle veered off the road and overturned, killing four people. A number of them were critically injured with multiple fractures. They were rushed to a health centre IV and later on, some were referred to Soroti Referral Hospital. I was informed that two severe cases were referred to Mulago Hospital.

My concern is that whereas the policy of prisons allows hiring out of labour as part of rehabilitation and skilling of prisoners, transportation of these prisoners to go out and work should be done in a dignified manner. This was a tipper lorry and we all know that tipper lorries are not meant for human transport but for ferrying materials. About 60 people were aboard this tipper; it was over loaded. We were also told that the tipper lorry was in bad mechanical condition.

Secondly, the district prison’s office does not have any vehicle. The Officer in Charge (OC) of the prison did not have any means of transport; he would use boda bodas. When this occurred, the victims had to be rushed to hospital but there was a challenge of transportation of the victims because Kaberamaido District does not have an ambulance. 

Madam Speaker, my prayer is that the ministry in charge of prisons services streamlines the policy on how prisoners are handled and transported. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should come out with an explanation on what will be done for the families of the dead and the survivors. Some of the survivors will end up using crutches and wheelchairs and thus will become non-productive. These families need compensation since they met their fate in custody of a Government institution –(Interruption)                                   

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, in the incident of Kaberamaido, inmates convicted by court were taken, according to Government policy, to provide labour, which comes at a cost as a way of Government making revenue to support the ministry. 

In the event that Government, with or without a policy in place, has not been in a position to provide the necessary facilities to make the operations of the inmates much more free as they serve their sentences, I would like to inform my sister that Government should take responsibility for the inmates who died in the accident and their children. The Government should brief this Parliament to what extent –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are smuggling in a contribution. She was giving her prayers and now you are improving on them on her behalf. (Laughter)

MS AJILO: Thank you for the information. Finally, I implore the Minister of Health to consider providing not just an ambulance or ambulances to Kaberamaido District but to also come out with a policy on ambulance maintenance. I know that some of these ambulances, which should have been in good condition, are now standing on stones because of lack of proper maintenance.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to update us on the issues raised by the honourable members and give us a way forward.

2.55
MS FLORENCE NAMBOZO (NRM, Woman Representative, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the instruction material at the lower level in Bugisu region, which has become a dilemma to us. The instruction material for the lower level favours one part of Bugisu region as opposed to the other. 

In Bugisu, we have two fundamental blocks –the dialects. We have the north and the south and unfortunately, we have different alphabets. The children from the north are forced to use the southern dialect in their thematic system at the lower level and this has become a very big challenge. When I looked at the Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) results, I realised that our children are affected at the foundation. They are forced to learn a dialect that is so different from their mother tongue; for example, in the northern part of Bugisu, we have “z” yet the same letter in the south is “ts”. Therefore, our children are forced to learn the other dialect instead of what they are supposed to speak.

Recently, our teachers were supposed to go and learn the other dialect so that they could come and train our children in the thematic system. This foundation is affecting the performance of children, especially in Sironko. I seek the intervention of the minister in charge of primary education to come up with a policy that caters for both. Thank you.      

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether we do not need to have an evaluation of thematic education. A child in Kidera studies in one of the local dialects up to primary four before starting English, competing with someone in Nakasero Primary School who studies in English from primary one up to primary seven and yet they are doing the same examination. We need to evaluate this thematic education. 

This type of education was never brought to Parliament before being introduced. We never debated it. Honourable minister, I have never agreed with that thematic education. I hope you will be able to give us some way forward.

Honourable members, I have a lot of pleasure in drawing your attention to the distinguished strangers’ gallery, where we have a delegation from the National Assembly of Zambia. We have the First Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, Rt Hon. Catherine Namugala; the Deputy Chief Whip, Mr Stephen Chungu; and Mr Charles Haambote, a Senior Journals Clerk. You are welcome. They are here for the whole week. Please find time to interact with them. You are welcome, Madam Speaker.

Minister, could you talk about the issue of thematic education.

2.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a ministry, we will come up with a statement to explain it further. 

However, for the purpose of giving assurance to my sister, this issue has come to the ministry and we are working with the National Curriculum Development Centre and language experts from that region. We are also going to work with the cultural leaders to ensure that we correct this problem since it has already come to us. 

I would also like to put it clearly to this House that a language board was launched and it is this board, working with the experts, that came up this autography, which we use to produce the books that we use. However, since it has come to us, we are going to find a solution to this problem.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think it is not just about that. We need to evaluate the impact of thematic education. Do you still have vernacular teachers who teach these languages? To me, we are creating a class of Ugandans who can hardly speak English to compete with those who speak English from primary one. We need an evaluation, honourable minister.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, I agree with you because whatever comes up should be evaluated at one point. However, as we look at the issue of the thematic curriculum, there are other issues that we are looking at such as quality. Therefore, we when talk about quality of education, all these issues come up. I promise that we shall definitely come and explain to this House. Thank you.

3.01
MS VERONICA ERAGU (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning our pensioners - the retired senior citizens.

These people worked in various ministries and departments but they are not getting their full and rightful payments. These senior citizens spend a lot of their hard earned money moving from the Ministry of Public Service to many departments and other ministries, now that payment of pension was decentralised.  However, many are not getting their gratuity and pension payments on time. Some are not even getting their payments at all despite the fact that Government says that pensions were verified, validated and approved.

This matter is a problem all over my region in the east, and it is also rampant in the western region. It covers the whole of Uganda – (Interruption)

MR MUYANJA MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, this problem of pension is not only in those regions. I come from the greater Masaka region, particularly Lwengo District. I have got files piled up on pension claims. It is high time something is done to handle pensioners’ funds. I rest my case.

MS ERAGU: Madam Speaker, I pray that these citizens are treated with respect so as not to tarnish the name and face of Government. Not only are they senior citizens but some of them are now unable to travel to Kampala or to the nearest towns. 

I pray that the relevant ministry takes up this matter seriously and these monies are paid on time and in full, and there should also be zero complaints from these senior citizens. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether you have some names because these are a bit general. I wonder how the Ministry of Public Service will handle such a general issue. Do you have some names?

MS ERAGU: Madam Speaker, I have some names, which I can bring tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Bring some names so that we may have a starting point. The Minister of Public Service will have to explain to us what he is doing. 

3.05
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning rampant security threats - killings and lootings in Ik County. 

The Turkana pastoralists from Kenya terrorise the people of Karamoja. The Karamoja borders are very porous and stretch to about 350 kilometres along the north-western borders of Kenya and South Sudan. Seventeen years down the road after the disarmament programme, the Government promised to protect the people and their property. However, the number of security personnel is inadequate compared to the length along the borders and the complicated geographical terrain. 

My county covers an area with a radius of about 70 kilometres across and there are only five army detaches with only a few police posts in the middle. Each detach has got about five to seven security personnel and they have to patrol both night and day. 

Between June and November, Karamoja lost about 3,175 cattle to the Turkana and 2,327 cattle were recovered by the UPDF; 946 heads of cattle have not been recovered. On 3 February 2018, two people were killed in my constituency. Last week on Friday, 9 February 2018, in Tultul village, there was looting of both –(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Take half a minute to conclude.

MR HILLARY LOKWANG: On 10 February 2018, a woman was killed near my home. On 11 February 2018 at 8.00 p.m., a boy was shot and he sustained serious injuries. He was rushed to Kaabong Hospital using a UPDF vehicle. 

Ik County faces a number of problems, the biggest problem being the lack of security roads across and within the border. We also have few security personnel. There is also a water problem; we have no network and a complicated geographical terrain.

My prayer to you is that the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs goes there for a fact finding mission so that they can bring back a report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Of course, we shall want the Minister of Defence to come and tell us what measures he is taking to protect the Ugandans along the Kenya-Uganda border. We also invite the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to visit Ik and assess the security situation and other resources in that place.

Hon. Nsaba Buturo, you have two minutes. You will only address the issue of street children; do not raise the other one.

3.08
MR JAMES NSABA BUTURO (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do recall that last year, this House discussed the issue of street children and you gave instructions that the minister concerned should, within two weeks, come back and inform the House exactly what Government intends to do regarding this issue.

It is a sad picture that is painted concerning our country, Uganda. We have young people who are roaming about unsupported, and presumably unaided by anybody, begging and becoming a nuisance to all who are going about their work. May I know why the minister has not given instructions that this nation should be supported by way of our young people being given the support required? 

Madam Speaker, I desire that this House compels the minister to come and give us a clear statement on what they intend to do concerning street children. The integrity of our nation is suffering because we do not seem to care about those who are young and are possibly underprivileged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that statement has been long overdue. The minister is directed to come on Thursday with a statement on street children.

3.10
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Buhweju was a very powerful kingdom in western Uganda and when the kingdoms were phased out, the people of Buhweju took over the land that belonged to the kings. Of course, you know that the kings had taken over all the good areas in the district.

Sometime back, the then area Member of Parliament, the late hon. Francis Bantariza, interested Government in compensating the absentee landlords because he foresaw a situation that would come when people would be evicted. These landlords have been compensated in a phased manner and I think Government now owes them about Shs 144 million. 

The reason Government compensates or pays such people is because Government is aware that the people of Uganda are staying on such land. What is happening in Buhweju currently is that the absentee landlords are working with the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and the police officers in the district to evict the people on this land. About 4,000 people are going to be evicted. 

Three days ago, the RDC wrote to them that he had information from the landlords - who are absentee landlords staying here in Kampala - that they are going to send security to ask the people on that land to go away. The people are worried that they are going to be evicted and they do not have where to go. Some of them have stayed on this land for a long time - about 40 or 50 years –

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to tell us whether they have compensated the absentee landlords and therefore whether the people should move or not. The minister should come and tell us.

MR MWIJUKYE: Madam Speaker, even in the current Budget Framework Paper, the last payment of Shs 144 million is being considered. However, the challenge we have now as we wait for the last payment is: what happens to the people who are being evicted in the meantime? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister should come and tell us what to do because she is the one who has the money. She will tell us whether they have paid or they have not yet paid. Only then will we know how to proceed.

3.13
MR HASSAN KAPS FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance pertaining to education and the future of our children in refugee hosting areas, Obongi being one of them. The recently released PLE and Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) results are very disappointing for the people of Obongi. The education of both citizens and children of refugees is affected. 

There is a problem of overcrowding in classrooms. The teachers that have been hired by the United Nations (UN) and other Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) that support education live in Moyo. They are transported daily to Obongi, to the schools where they teach. They travel a distance of over 50 kilometres to and from Moyo and arrive at 11.00 a.m. and depart at 04.00 p.m. Therefore, the time they have to teach is very limited.

We have a problem concerning the role of the local community and the local government in supervision and monitoring of the activities in the settlements, particularly education. The Office of the Prime Minister does not want local leaders to interface with the NGOs and people like us; even the District Education Officer and the Inspector of Schools are not allowed to go to the camps to see the schools without the permission of the Office of the Prime Minister.

My question and prayer is: can the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and the Minister of Education and Sports come here to give us the framework for the implementation of education in the camps and the refugee hosting areas, because we share the same schools? A school like Itula Primary School has thousands of pupils with only 15 teachers. How can 15 teachers teach 3,000 pupils in the same school? In addition, some of these teachers also stay in Moyo. You have been there, Madam Speaker, and you know the distance and the problem.

Secondly, there is a problem of corruption even at the local level. Madam Speaker, you are aware about the cases reported in mass media. The Daily Monitor newspaper of 6th and 10th February, for example, reported about refugees’ scandals in the Office of the Prime Minister and four officials were suspended. This is in Kampala, but if you go down there – 

I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the country should not focus only at the headquarters of the Office of the Prime Minister because there is a big racket. We need the following:
1. 	A system overhaul to help the people of Obongi to have a decent education; 
2. 	To improve the system of checks and balances in the entire West Nile; 
3. 	To address the question of the role of the local communities and the local governments in the planning process; and
4. 	Audit as well as monitor and evaluate. 

Those are my prayers, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you remember when we had the refugees’ summit here, we had just spent some time in West Nile as the Parliamentary Commission. The host communities raised many issues about the pressures they were having about their roads, water, health and so on. We had asked Government to discuss with the United Nations and see how they can continue supporting us. However, we have not had feedback on what they agreed to do. Of course, he has raised the same issues.

Yesterday, I was in Lamwo and they told me that there are refugees there but they have refused to go to the camp. You can imagine refugees refusing to go to a camp saying, “We are staying in your village.” They have insisted on staying in the villages and are putting pressure on the communities. All these things require interventions. I do not know what can be done in the circumstances. 

The Prime Minister is here; when can we get an update? Actually, we need a debate on the issue of the refugee situation in Uganda so that we can agree on some policy changes. (Applause)

3.17
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you. Madam Speaker, I do not know who to thank because I have come on time for this question. I think I should thank myself because nobody would have come in my place. 

Madam Speaker, this issue of refugees, as everybody is aware, has taken two sides. The first is that internationally, Uganda is shining. Everybody is praising Uganda’s policy of welcoming these people, putting them in camps, giving them pieces of land and allowing them to do all that our people are doing. They are saying there is nothing second to it.  

However, nobody is talking about the pressure on the host communities’ meagre resources. We have said many times that as we host these people, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) should start planting trees; it must go side by side. This is because we do not know when the refugees are going back and for as long as they are staying here, they are going to cut our trees because they need them for everything. However, they need to replace them and they are not doing that.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I will cause the minister responsible to come here and give a comprehensive report on refugees as you directed. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay a request by Government to authorise domestic borrowing of Shs 736 billion to finance a supplementary expenditure and revenue shortfall for the financial year 2017/2018.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the committee for perusal and reporting back.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE INSECURITY AND CRIMINALITY OCCASIONED TO THE COMMUNITIES NEIGHBORING THE KARAMOJA SUB-REGION

3.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, this matter was raised last week. At the same time, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs was due to present a statement and with your guidance, we agreed that we would make a joint statement today. Accordingly, the joint statement has been signed. Colleagues, you will see it on your iPads. It has been signed by my senior, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs. I am presenting it but as a ministry, we own the statement jointly - [Mr Okupa: “Countersign it if you own it jointly.”] - Well, by reading it here, I am already countersigning it.

Madam Speaker, at the Ninth Sitting of the Second Meeting of the Second Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda held on Tuesday, 6 February 2018, hon. Judith Franca Akello, the Woman MP for Agago, raised concerns over the loss of lives and destruction of property of some communities in Agago District by Karimojong warriors. The ministers responsible for Karamoja affairs and internal affairs undertook to provide this statement, and this is a joint statement.

Loss of Lives in Agago District

On 30th January, two young Jie boys – Jie is a tribe in Karamoja – who were looking after animals, were apprehended by three male hunters speaking Acholi and from the Agago side, near Longo Dam. The hunters also had hunting nets, three dogs, spears and knives. This is an area used by communities from Kotido, Kaabong, Agago and Kitgum districts for fishing, grazing animals and hunting.

The hunters from Acholi apprehended the two boys. One was called Apei, who is 2l years old and a son to Lopanga and the other a 17-year-old called Irar, son of Lokiritak. The hunters stabbed Irar on his chest, next to his heart. The other boy, Apei, managed to disentangle himself though he was cut by a knife on his head and stabbed in his ribs. He managed to run to his parents and narrated what had happened to him and his colleague. He is now hospitalised in a health centre in Kacheri Sub-county, Kotido District.

This case was reported to the RDC of Kotido by the LC III Chairman of Kacheri. Unfortunately, the RDC did not respond immediately nor did he inform the police, who could have probably rushed to the scene of crime. This incident created tension at the border between the two districts of Kotido and Agago, in Kacheri Subcounty in Kotido and Paimol Subcounty in Agago.

On the 5th of February, the relatives of the slain boy went to recover the body of the boy who had been killed on 30 January 2018. They found four men, all from Agago, whom they apprehended immediately and demanded from them an explanation as to who killed their son. These were Ochaya, Ochan Walter, Otto Bosco and Oyo David. However, these captives expressed ignorance about the matter.

The captors then tied up their captives and started beating them up. Two of them, Ochaya and Ochan, were killed on the site using pangas and axes. As they started beating up the third person, Oyo David, the fourth person, Otto Bosco, tried to escape. They chased him, threw spears at him but he has never been found. 

Oyo David on the other hand took advantage of the situation and escaped with serious injuries. He was able to hide from the people who were tracking him and he managed to get home where he narrated what had happened to his friends. He was then taken to Kalongo Hospital in Agago, where he is recovering steadily. This statement was written yesterday. By the time we wrote it, Oyo David, one of the escapees who saw what happened, had been discharged from the hospital. 
	
It is further reported that on 7th of February, a group of people from Agago attacked six hunters in Kacheri in retaliation of which, five of them were able to escape but one was killed.

It is significant to note that all these activities and killings have taken place in Kotido District, in a place called Kacheri. They are not in any way connected to the regular movements of the Karimojong herdsmen in search of water and pasture. They are acts of lawlessness and criminality which are being investigated by security agencies. The scene of crime is a very massive area, with hardly any roads, and this has made the investigation process longer than it could have been, given the sensitivity of the matter.

Fortunately, the clan and kraal leaders have taken the lead in this matter. They are working with security agencies to identify the perpetrators of these crimes on both sides.

The Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs held separate meetings on 9 February 2018, with the leaders of the two districts and then a joint meeting at Abim on 11 February 2018. The joint meeting was attended by Members of Parliament from both districts, district leaders, elders, kraal leaders, LC III chairpersons of border subcounties, the UPDF division commanders, Uganda Police Force, and Internal Security Organisation (ISO) personnel. All these efforts are aimed at apprehending the perpetrators of the crime and they will be brought to book.

Destruction of Property by Karimojong Warriors

Like the practice has been, it is true that Karimojong herdsmen, not warriors, have moved to neighbouring districts of Agago, Pader, Kitgum, Otuke, Alebtong, Amuria and Katakwi, especially at this time of drought. They are not warriors anymore because Government has disarmed them and their conduct has significantly changed.

The prolonged drought in western Kenya has piled pressure on the resources available in Karamoja, forcing the herdsmen to move west into Acholi and Lango. The movements are mainly by people from Kotido District, where Government is yet to construct a big water reservoir like it has done in the districts of Moroto, Napak and Kaabong.

Prior to these movements, Government has always encouraged district leaders to engage the host districts and agree on some basic principles. We have advised that the security agencies should be involved before movements and that a census should also be conducted before the movements, as well as at the time when they are returning to Karamoja when the rains commence.

Government has also encouraged the veterinary departments in the moving and host districts to collaborate and ensure that there is control of diseases. Government further demanded that kraal leaders should deal directly with chairpersons LC III in the host subcounties, to be able to sort out issues like food destruction and stealing, local fights, and livestock thefts. This food destruction happens when animals stray into people’s gardens.

The reality on the ground is that the herdsmen move even before their district leaders know. The new tendency is also that kraal leaders stay back home and leave the kraals to young men aged between 12 and 16 to manage. They then control the kraals using mobile phones. These cannot restrain others from entering people's gardens and at times taking away some food. The herdsmen also move without any food stocks and so they pick food from other people's gardens. These elements of criminality are detectable and the security agencies have always tried to prevent them.

Even where they still have some water, the herdsmen are sometimes tempted to move, probably in search of food. As Government plans to provide more water for production in Karamoja, it is important to provide similar facilities to host districts. 

Equally, plans for food for the Karamoja area are being worked out. As we make this statement, the Minister of State for Karamoja Affairs, hon. Moses Kizige, has been deployed in the area to visit the district, hold meetings with security agencies and with clan leaders, and familiarise himself with the challenges they have while hosting the herdsmen.

While we request you for more continued support and understanding of the situation, we want to assure the nation of the commitment of Government to settle these herdsmen and provide security to all Ugandans and their property. Meanwhile, Government regrets the deaths and attacks on those that have occurred. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. The issue of water for the Karimojong has been there from time immemorial. I understand some time back in this House, there was money that was put aside for Government to construct valley dams. 

We know that the weather patterns change every year and the Karimojong will move around looking for grass for their animals. In this country, we have rains. Why don’t we harvest the storm water for the dry season? What happened to the valley dams that were allocated a lot of money that would stop the Karimojong from moving from one area to another, looking for grass? Now, it is not only the Karimojong; cows have been shifted from some areas to others. What has Government done about it? 

You come here, Mister Minister, and tell us that Government is going to look at it and maybe they will get water for the Karimojong. This issue has been there. Can you tell us why it has taken very long for the Government to make sure that the Karimojong have water and they remain in their own districts?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the first issue is under investigation, so I think we may not go very deeply into it. So, comment briefly on the second part, about the movement of the animals and people. Comment just briefly because it is also being handled by the minister of state, I understand.

3.38 
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is a fact that this conflict situation has been on for quite a long time between the Karimojong and their neighbours. However, we are grateful to the NRM government for having taken some drastic steps to disarm the Karimojong in the first place, and this also now gives our neighbours some hope.

However, currently, the conflict situation is becoming intermittent - the conflicts are on and off. Every year at this time, there is a problem between the Karimojong and their neighbours; why? This is because during this time, it is very dry in Karamoja. The months of December, January, February and March are terrible for Karamoja. 

If we are very intelligent, we would be able to discover what should be done in order to address the immediate problems and also the root causes. These are very important. Let us look at the root cause, and as we have said, the root cause is lack of water in Karamoja. We have really talked about this for quite a long time. I am also happy –(Interruption)

MR LOKII: Thank you, honourable Sodium, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue we are discussing in this Parliament now is really very bad because it involves death, not only of Karamoja’s neighbours but also within Karamoja itself.

The problems of migration of animals in Karamoja are well documented. The reasons are known even by NGOs and the Government. However, when it comes to addressing that problem of prolonged drought that dictates the seasonal movement of these animals, nothing is done. 

In some countries, they have pastoralists’ policies, which help governments plan for pastoralists and livestock communities. The information I want to give my brother is that in countries where people keep animals, they have pastoralist policies and yet we do not have one in Uganda. I think that is where the problem is. That is why planning for livestock keeping communities in Uganda is very hard. 

THE SPEAKER: Just to complement what the honourable members have said; honourable minister, there is something you wrote here on page 3. You said that the reality on the ground is that the herdsmen move even before their district leaders know. Are you suggesting that Government knows that they are going to move? If they know, do they say, “You in Lango, these people are on their way?” If they know, what do they do?

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Well, as we look at realities of this problem, it is also advisable that Government gets a pastoral policy. This policy would really address a lot of these issues which have always given us headache. Right now, we are discussing this matter here during this time of the year, but next time we shall continue discussing this matter here, as if we forget that the dry season will come.

It is really my honest appeal that as we look at the strategic problems, we should take water as a priority, first of all for the Jie community which has more cows than their other brothers. They do not really have enough water and they move from place to place. 

For those ones who cause problems there, surely we do not condone that. We do not really like that. As leaders of Karamoja, we do not side with such kind of characters who misbehave. Once they misbehave, they are wrong characters. Even the Jie people who go there do not also like their behaviour.

I really appeal to you my brothers - This is one country, so we should totally desist from that. When we find one person who has done wrong, we do not have to generalise and say, “It is the Karimojong.” It is not good. Let us get the wrong characters and deal with them specifically. That is very important.

Finally, I thank the Members of Parliament from our neighbouring districts. They have really been very helpful; for instance, hon. Ogwang, whom I could also speak highly of. When he goes there, he speaks to them in a peaceful manner. All ordinary people from Amuria and all the others from Lango and other places, are helping us also in a way. Whereas they are advising Government to act on the immediate problems, they are also advising Government to give us water. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Madam Speaker, as a Member of Parliament from Karamoja, - I am an Acholi Labwor - we too have been suffering somehow from this same problem of the Karimojong even when we are in Karamoja. (Laughter) As a Member of Parliament from Karamoja, I would like to apologise to our people, the Langi, Acholi, Iteso and Bagisu. I would like to apologise for especially the incident that happened recently. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not clap. 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the leaders because they have also understood this properly. I would like to appeal to all the leaders of Karamoja that we should never condone the people who cause these problems. (Applause) Let us not condone anybody in Karamoja who would like to cause confusion between our people and our neighbours.

I would like to ask the minister, since he said the Government is trying to put up a big dam in Karamoja: What is the timeframe of this dam? This might be a long-term solution to this problem. Sometime last year, the same problem happened. It always happens around this time, if you study the trend, when the people move in search of pastures. However, they get problems with their neighbours there. 

It is true that when they go there, they disturb the people. Now, what is the short-term solution to this problem? If we had a short-term solution, by now we would not be hearing this confusion - (Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances, we travelled to Karamoja and we found a very big dam constructed by the Minister of Karamoja Affairs at a place called Arachek. The dam was massive, like a man-made lake. The committee established that and presented the report to this House. What has happened to the dam? 

MR AYEPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Dams like Arachek, which hon. Odonga Otto mentioned, are almost like man-made lakes and they will help us stop Karimojong from moving to the neighbours. I am happy that Government is trying to construct that dam in Kotido but what is the short-term solution to this problem, honourable minister?

Last year, there was a problem. You heard the Member of Parliament for Otuke complaining. This time again, it is still the same thing. This means we do not have a short-term solution for this problem.

The clan leaders who are supposed to move with their teams must be arrested if they are the ones allowing their teams to go and cause confusion. This business of “ngao” - Ngao in Karamoja means, “I do not know”. This business of protecting wrong-doers is not good. If you have allocated clan leaders to move with every team, like soldiers do where each commander is in charge of a group - A commander who fails at his work should be arrested and imprisoned. 

As leaders of Karamoja, we really reject this kind of incidents. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

3.48
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a comment on Karamoja because I am a niece there. 

The challenge we have is Government planning. The problems of Karamoja are very well known. When it is really dry, it is dry and these people will have to move somewhere else. Government makes promises like the dams and never fulfils them. These people would get water from the dams for their animals. 

You may be surprised when the minister said the people move even without their leaders knowing. The Karimojong love their animals like the way - I do not what to compare it with –(Interjections)– No, I do not want to borrow your words. (Laughter) Therefore, if the elders see that the animals do not have anything to drink, they will be forced to move to another area. 

Madam Speaker, when it is raining, we do not get these complaints. It is only in the dry season when these things come out. I would like to call upon the Government to put in place structures that will help our people from Karamoja to support themselves –(Interjections)- Yes, I have stayed in Karamoja for over eight years, so I know what I am talking about. 

I would like to say that even within Karamoja, there are issues. I think hon. Lokii John Baptist said it - the Matheniko, Bokora, Pokot and all these other challenges. However, I think we need to get these other people to understand. The guns have been removed from the people but you have not removed their mind-set. The mind-set has to be worked on. If you do not do that, the practice will continue. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.50
MS MARGARET ALEPER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Internal Affairs for the response he has given us on the issue between the Karimojong and the neighbouring districts. I also would like to regret the unfortunate acts that took place especially in the first scenario where a Jie young boy and later a second person were killed by the hunters from Acholi.

Indeed, these incidents took place at the border between Kotido and Agago. As people of Uganda and people of God, we all need to take responsibility for our actions. It is with great pain that we lost our two boys just as much as when our people also revenged and killed the three people from Agago.

This scenario is not a common practice. It is a scenario that was stopped that time. It has nothing to do with the movement of our people to the neighbouring districts as mentioned in the statement of the Minister of Internal Affairs. 

However, I would like to say that the practice of the Jie moving to neighbouring districts in search of water and grass is a practice that has gone on for some time. We know that it is caused by the harsh climate in Kotido. In Kotido, we have large herds of cattle but we do not have any water reservoir to contain these animals. That is why this movement of the herdsmen from Kotido to the neighbouring districts cannot be stopped. It is a challenge we must really appreciate because there is no way we can allow these animals to stay in Kotido when there is no water –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I represent Kitgum Municipality, which is part of northern Uganda where, as I speak, it is extremely hot. The issue of our brothers and sisters of Karamoja who - I do not want to use a bad word - just walk looking for pasture and water during dry season while they cause havoc is being justified in this House by our honourable colleagues who are saying it is because of the dry season. 

Is the honourable member in order to keep justifying the wrong practice while some of us are from dry areas and have never gone to our neighbours? We also have cattle but we are peaceful. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you know this is a very painful issue. Unfortunately, every year there is tension between the Karimojong and their neighbours over this issue. Therefore, do not gloss over it and do not take it lightly. We should condemn the acts which are unlawful. However, let us ask the Government to provide water. Nevertheless, do not justify.

MS ALEPER: Madam Speaker, I was only building my point because even in Kotido, we do not condone this criminality. That is why the UPDF and the police are handling the case as we talk. 

Madam Speaker, the movement of our people, as I said, is due to harsh climate. It is my prayer that the Government expeditiously constructs a mega dam in Kotido because it is the only lasting solution that will contain the herdsmen. There will be no reason for the Jie people or herdsmen to move to the neighbouring districts if there is water in Kotido.

Madam Speaker, I would like to say that the security minister should ensure that the presence of the UPDF is increased on the ground. In Kotido, we have a battalion of the UPDF and this small number of the UPDF is not able to curtail the movement of some of these people in the district.

I would like to say that the disaster minister could also avail some food to the young herdsmen in the kraals. Back at home, there isn’t enough food for our people. That is why sometimes there is - (Member timed out.)

3.56
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the report. I am from Amudat District and it has a hostile climate. It is almost a desert; it is actually semi-arid, where during the dry season, we cannot have water for animals. 

The Pokot have more animals than the Karimojong. We have very many animals. However, what we have done as a community is that, when our cows move from Amudat District during the dry season to our neighbouring districts of Sebei, Sironko or Bulambuli, we sensitise our people that when you graze your animals, you should be careful not to destroy anything. You have not heard anything from our neighbours like Sebei complaining about the Pokot because we sensitise our people.

We cannot also condemn these pastoralists because animals are their way of life. It is our economy and you cannot keep animals in one place. Even if there is water and there is no grass, you cannot keep them there. You take animals where there is water and pasture. That is why they move from one place to another.

Therefore, I would like to give a piece of advice to our brothers, the Karimojong, that please - (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. First of all, I want to thank my colleagues, especially those from Karamoja, my uncles, who have elaborated very well the importance of being open in terms of guiding our communities. However, the information I would like us to take and give to Members present is in regard to planning.

We know that year in, year out, Karamoja experiences drought. We also know that the Karimojong are pastoralists, and we know that this is their major activity. If we know all this, Government should put in place a mechanism whereby these Karimojong can look after their cows to avoid antagonising the neighbours. 

As an Atesot, I grew up knowing - My grandfather had a lot of cows but we lost them because then, there was disorganisation in the community. However, I expect that the government I serve now should be having a direct solution to the challenges of the Karimojong so that they do not cross to Teso, Acholi, Lango because basically if they do not -

THE SPEAKER: What is the information? (Laughter)

MS AMONGIN: That is the information I wanted to give.

MR KIPTERIT: Thank you, honourable, for that information. Madam Speaker, I do not like to blame our brothers, the Karimojong, very much. This is because these brothers from Kenya, the Turkana, have moved to their place because Turkana is totally dry. The only thing we are supposed to advise our friends about is that when you migrate to the neighbouring districts, teach our people to be careful and respect other peoples’ properties so that we do not have these problems. 

Another issue is that the Government is aware of the pattern and they know that next year in January, the Karimojong will move. What is the solution? What have you done to deal with this? The Government has done nothing.

When we move to Bulambuli and Kween, for example, we also meet the Ankole people living there. I call them Banyankole. I do not know whether they are. Therefore, the Government should have a policy to address these problems like they have in Botswana. 

4.00
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. I come from Bulambuli and neighbour Karamoja. 

I thank the Government for coming up with the disarmament policy in 2007. However, we now have harsh conditions in Uganda which are affecting the pastoralists in Karamoja. There is also a report that came out in early December on NTV. It was about the Topotha of South Sudan and the Turkana of Kenya, who are still armed and are causing insecurity in Karamoja. That has now brought back rearmament of the Karimojong. 

Therefore, as we look at the dry season now, we are coming to the other season where the Karimojong are still going to move on with rearming themselves just because of the people from the neighbouring countries that are attacking them. I call upon the East African Community countries to come on board and intervene in this process so that we settle with our neighbours comfortably.

There is going to be still under-development in that region because of insecurity. I will give an example. The European Union Ambassador has visited that area and they are willing to invest over Shs 80 million. However, that will not be possible because of the insecurity in the region. Thank you.

4.02
MR ABACACON GUTOMOI (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of the Karimojong and her neighbours has been discussed here for a long time. I stand up to blame Government. If we are talking about votes in Karamoja, the NRM Government should take action immediately. 

The report that the minister has given us is good but it is not different from the reports we have been getting in this House. Can I challenge the minister to tell us what achievement Government has made in respect of water, pasture and controlling pastoralism since the last dry season? There is nothing to show. Anyway, we are going to take the apologies that have been given to us to the people of Lango and wait for the results - if they will accept them or not. 

Policies have been made year in, year out but with no change. Our people have been killed, their property damaged and nothing has been done to address this. Therefore, another area of blame is the leadership - Members of Parliament from Karamoja. When do these people meet to challenge Government over this? They wait until today then they will speak and then try to say we are going to handle this one. However, they have never met to address the issue with Government. When are they going to do that so that we have confidence in them?

It is not only cows that are moving out of Karamoja. We have even children and women on Kampala streets. Are these from Karamoja or not? What is the minister doing about this, because these are citizens who are suffering? Are they getting education by sitting along the road and begging?

Now, if the cows are begging for grass then the Government must come in and address this. We thought the Minister of Karamoja Affairs was going to address this but up to date, we have not seen any address. Therefore, what we are suggesting is that maybe to protect the Karimojong and their cows, Government should come up, with our assistance, and build a big wall across the border so that they are protected. This is because it is very important for them to be protected.  

4.05
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of the Karimojong attacking their neighbours has been going on. At my first job with the Justice and Peace Commission, one of my tasks was to handle the cross border conflict between the Acholi and the Karimojong. During the dry season, you would get on average a minimum of two deaths daily and also women raped, children defiled, crops destroyed. Today we are in 2018 but it is still the same thing. 

Is Government taking this issue very seriously? I know for sure that there are specialised police that are in charge of the border issues in Karamoja; what are they doing? If these people can cross from one district to another without the knowledge of the district officials, what is the role of the police in all this? - (Interruption)

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, I represent Oyam District and the issue that hon. Lucy Akello was raising is true. When these Karimojong come to the neighbouring districts of Otuke and Alebtong, most of the people from Otuke cross to Oyam, because they have second homes in Oyam, to avoid the destruction of the Karimojong. They rape women and steal food. 

MS LUCY AKELLO: As I conclude, this is not a matter that we can just apologise for here. The people who need that apology are the ones who have been hurt - the women who have been raped and those who have lost their dear ones. The onus is on us leaders who are here from Acholi, Lango and Karamoja, to sit down and forge a way forward. We need to sensitise our people so that even as they move, they learn how to co-exist.

However, co-existence must not mean that you play with my good intentions. It does not mean I receive you in my home and you begin to defile my daughters because the next time I will not receive you well. Thank you.

4.08
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, on 20 January 2018, together with the district woman representative of Alebtong, I wrote to the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, informing him about the presence of herdsmen from Karamoja in Ajuri County, Alebtong District. When we moved to the ground to have a joint meeting, we realised that the team in Ajuri are Jie from Kotido District. I equally came to you, Madam Speaker, and you gave me an opportunity to raise this on the Floor of Parliament.

I will start by thanking the Minster for Karamoja Affairs. Many a time, Members of Parliament write to ministries and most of the ministers do not respond. However, I would like to thank the Minister for Karamoja Affairs for responding to the joint letter I wrote together with the district woman representative of Alebtong. 

For purposes of this Parliament, just allow me to read one paragraph of the minster’s response. This is because as communities that are affected directly and indirectly by the presence of these herdsmen, we need nothing but solutions to the perennial arrival of herdsmen from any part of Karamoja. 

In the second last paragraph, the minister says, “As a long term solution, Government has secured funds from the German Government to construct a big dam in Kotido, and it is my prayer that this dam is expeditiously done to serve the Jie community and hopefully, curb the movement of herdsmen in search of water.” This letter was signed by hon. John Byabagambi, who is equally present in this House. He will either affirm - 

THE SPEAKER: When was it written?

MR OBUA: The letter was written on 8 February 2018 as a reply.

THE SPEAKER: Can we know whether that has been included in the Budget Framework Paper, which we have just discussed?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, the issues I want to generate from this commitment are: One, is this a grant or a loan? Two, when will Parliament be privy to the details of this loan or grant? Three, what safety nets have we put in place to ensure that these funds, once secured from the German Government, will not be abused and we end up with a story where there were no valley dams constructed in Karamoja? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a few Members have contributed and we have other items on the Order Paper. However, we shall want the minster to respond to that issue specifically. 

However, in general, the pastoralists’ policy is long overdue. There are all these armed Balalo and Members always come here to complain about them walking with guns, but no one wants to acknowledge or own them. Also, the Karimojong and the neighbours come here to quarrel every year about the movement of cattle and destruction of food and property.

There is insufficient attention to the cattle corridor of Uganda and poor planning. The cattle corridor of Kamuli, Buyende, Kaliro, Luuka is known to none. We are demanding for a pastoralists’ policy as soon as yesterday.

4.13
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Madam Speaker, you will recall that before the disarmament programme was implemented, Government came to this House to sanction that operation. As part of the operation, there was a programme known as the Karamoja Integrated Development Programme, which was supposed to cater for the all these concerns that people have been raising here. These included restoration of law and order and enough deployment to restrict movement outside Karamoja region in order to stop all these problems.

Madam Speaker, whereas sanctioning of disarmament was done by this House, it appears that there has never been feedback on the conclusion of this programme and yet there was a lot of commitment of donor funds. It would be prudent that Government, especially the ministry concerned, comes to this House and briefs us on how much has been done in terms of disarmament, whether it has been wound up and what has been accomplished. This is because we are talking about insecurity within but there is also aggression from outside the Karamoja region, which is watering down the achievements that we seem to have acquired during the disarmament. 

4.14
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for giving the joint statement. I did not know - I also thank my colleagues for contributing their views and suggestions. 

I want to thank hon. Aleper for being frank and sincere to the whole nation that grazing in other areas of Ugandans is permitted. Nobody can stop Ugandans from moving from one area to another area. However, when you go there, behave. I would like to thank him for being candid and saying, “Yes we apologise because we cannot continue like this.”

We now have dams in Karamoja for the people of Kaabong, Amudat – actually, the people of Amudat do not have a dam, but they are very peaceful people - Napak, Moroto. We have three dams so far completed. There is Arachek, which hon. Otto mentioned. It is a lake and water is there throughout. That is why you do not see the people of Napak moving. We have Kobebe Dam in Moroto, which is full of water. There is also Longoromit Dam, which is in Kaabong. In Kotido, we do not have water.  

However, let me give you a little background. We have got different tribes in Karamoja; we have got the Jie, the Matheniko and the Dodoth. These three groups do not see eye to eye amongst themselves. Therefore, when a dam is in Arachek in Napak, that is strictly for them; nobody else will go there. The one in Matheniko, which is Moroto, is for the Matheniko. It is surprising that pastoralists can move from Turkana and come and water their cows in Kobebe in Moroto and they are welcomed. However, the moment the Jie step there, war erupts. 

That notwithstanding, the Government has done a lot to have water everywhere. As we speak today, we have got 82 small dams –(Interjection)– Let me first finish. These small dams contain water only during the rainy season. They actually help the pastoralists during the rainy season and they do not move from one area to another. That is why you see that during the rainy seasons, we no longer see movement. The Government is continuing to dig more of these, so that we have at least 260, that is, one in every parish. That money is in the budget; we are going to dig five of them this financial year.

Bigger dams sustain the community during the drought period. That is the way to go. The money that we have obtained is just a grant from KfW Development Bank; it is not a loan. Because of the law, when you look at the Ministry of Water, you will see that dam –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you for giving me this opportunity. Hon. Minister, thank you for the good work you are doing. There is a good example from my colleague over there about the role of the community in promoting harmony. As the Minister of Karamoja Affairs, have you ever asked the Members of Parliament who are here, one, whether they own cattle; two, whether they are involved in looking after their cattle; three, if they are involved in looking after their cattle, whether they experience these same problems here like cattle raiding and fighting.

Why don’t you give an example of these Members of Parliament going to look after the cows, taking the cows to the neighbouring districts, giving the good example that they have referred to here, and we see whether there will be a fight? When an MP looking after his own cows goes to a neighbouring area without causing a problem, I will come back without fighting. What is our role as MPs when we look after our own cows?

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I have conducted several meetings between these tribes. I have already conducted more than five meetings between all these tribes –(Interruption)

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report. I wish to inform the minister that for us and the people from Pokot, in the Eighth Parliament, we sat down with the Members of Parliament. There was no bridge. We got a bridge and we talked to our people. 

However, the problem with the Jie is this: when they come to get water, they rape women, steal cows and steal food. If somebody comes and does all that and then they go back, there will be conflict. The only issue is that the mind-set of the Jie must be changed. They need a lot of sensitisation so that they get the right mind-set. 

Karamoja needs only three things: One, the mind-set. First of all, there was disarmament which was done and we must appreciate Government for doing that. For us in Kapchorwa and Kween, we are living with those people very well. Two, the moment there is water for irrigation, I think Karamoja will settle. Three, dams must be added. That is the information. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let the minister conclude

MR BYABAGAMBI: Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. It is true I have sat with all these Members of Parliament and they will give a testimony. We have had several meetings in my boardroom, trying to resolve these conflicts, and we have really done a good job. 

I agree with the myths of the Karimojong. Yes, we need to change the mind-set of the Karimojong and that is what the Government is doing. However, changing the mind-set of people, especially people who have come from far, does not take a day or a week; it takes time. 

I have to praise the Karimojong because they have changed a lot. When you go to Moroto, you will see business booming, you will be able to travel at night in Moroto, and you can see that really, these people have changed. However, this does not exonerate the bad behaviour, especially of the Jie. 

I have to tell you the truth. During the internal raids from October to date, which were carried out with guns acquired from South Sudan, the UPDF has put 31 people out of action. Out of the 31 people, 29 were from Jie. I am happy to note that I am working with these Members of Parliament from Kotido. As I speak now, hon. Moses Adome must be there to see how we can sensitise the Jie to also behave like the other Karimojong. 

By moving westwards into Acholi, yes I know there is shortage of water and they may be searching for water but to some extent that is not the issue. As I talk now, Karamoja is not as dry as it was last year. The Turkana have moved westwards, but the problem is when they go there, instead of living with these people harmoniously, they uproot their cassava and steal all their food. Sometimes they even do some things that I do not want to say here. I am happy I am open to them and tell them these things. I told them if they are –(Interruption)-

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the issue of insecurity or security in Karamoja has been talked about over and over. I remember one of the lengthy debates we had about Karamoja was when there was severe famine. The Government was tasked to explain to the House what sustainable mechanism they had to stop severe famine and insecurity. 

Today, the minister is talking of successes. However, I would like the minister to explain and convince me, because I have been listening to him but I am not convinced. If you are saying that all these districts that you are mentioning have got water and dams, why then are they moving? You have to explain. 

Secondly, I would like you to always read backwards before you come here because when we last discussed Karamoja, the issue of dams, which were not de-silted, was the main topic. Can you, therefore, convince the House that since you last talked about this issue, so many dams have been maintained or de-silted and now there is water? We can then be convinced that Government is taking action.  

Otherwise, you are always lamenting and talking about the same thing. Next time, read the same text that you have been reading to us; it is the same thing. You say that Government has done this and that yet these people continue to move. Why are they moving if the water is there in the dams? 

I wish you could read your letter. In the letter you wrote on 6 February 2018, - about two weeks ago - which was signed by you, engineer Byabagambi, you said, “It is true the Karimojong herdsmen from Karamoja region have moved to the neighbouring districts of Lango and Acholi due to the harsh climatic conditions in Karamoja now. However, we have alerted our security forces, law and order enforcement organs to ensure peaceful co-existence. Rt. Honourable Speaker, I have not received so far any complaint of criminality…”

Are you really telling the Speaker the truth? You are not telling the Speaker the truth in this letter. Again, you say that because of these people moving, you are alerting security agencies. What do you want security agencies to do? Should the people who are being raided remain static while these people continue to move? Is that what you are saying? If the security forces are there, then they should ensure that these people do not move across the borders because they have water and guns, according to the story you are telling us.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Minister answer and we conclude.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I would like to ask this to Parliament, and the minister should be able to clarify. If Karamoja’s problem has been found to be drought, which results into lack of water and pasture, which is to a large extent contributed by the effects of climate change, as a country we are supposed to address this problem. However, for the last 50 years, we have not got a solution to this problem. 

Madam Speaker, how can a minister continue making a presentation, which is not fully backed by data from the last 30 years? At this time, I would have expected the minister to give us a report detailing the Government’s intervention for that period of time. Madam Speaker, I conclude-  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you want would come in the policy statement. The question hon. Obua asked is what the minister is answering. For the other one, you have to wait for the policy statement.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I will come to that. However, I would like to –

THE SPEAKER: No, no, honourable.

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, I lost 42 cows in my district last week. Allow me so that the minister clarifies.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please conclude. Hon. Ochen, please sit.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Hon. Ogwal, what I stated in my letter are facts because this criminality took place in Kotido and it is not really related to the movement of the Karimojong into Lango. The security forces have done a good job to contain the situation, but as human beings, sometimes these things slip through.  

Madam Speaker, the honourable member from Bulambuli is again spot-on. We have just concluded a meeting with all the ambassadors from the European Union (EU). The discussion was about how they can help the East African Community on this issue and prevail over the surrounding communities to also disarm. They are seeing success in Uganda. They visited Karamoja in December and they were very impressed with what is going on there. They asked why it cannot be extended to other regions. They are ready to support the East African Community on this so that other countries surrounding us can also do disarmament. 

Hon. Gutomoi, there are many achievements. We have got water. To tell you the truth, it is mainly the Jie who are moving. The rest of the Karimojong are settled and looking after their cows. The people from Amudat have far more cattle than the Jie. Madam Speaker, the word “Jie” means “People who like fighting all the time”. Therefore, it is within their nature, but we have to change their mind-set. That is the most import thing.

I would like to thank hon. Obua for appreciating, and that is my method of work. Even when I was in the Ministry of Works and Transport, I used to respond expeditiously. However, as I said, it is a grant, and you will get the details because they are also contained in the policy statement. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that we all work under the Karamoja Integrated Development Programme. All these programmes on disarmament, provision of water, roads, etcetera, are affirmative projects for Karamoja. They are under the umbrella of Karamoja Integrated Development Programme and on the apex is Karamoja Policy Coordination Committee. 

Regarding the policy on pastoralists, that is under the Ministry of Agriculture. The Leader of Government Business may have to relay the message so that they bring the policy. Thank you.     

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPORTATION OF DUTY FREE SUGAR FROM KENYA INTO UGANDA

4.34
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I would like respond to hon. Kasumba’s concern over the alleged imported sugar from Kenya. I hope the response is uploaded on your tablets. 

Madam Speaker, currently, there are 30 licensed sugar mills in the country although only 11 are in operation while the rest are at different stages of development. Over the last 10 years,  sugar  production  has  been  increasing  by  nearly  12 per cent  annually,   making  Uganda  the  only   sugar  surplus  producing country  in  East  Africa.  

Kenya produced 327,000 metric tonnes against demand of over 800,000 metric tonnes in 2017; Tanzania had a shortage of over 200,000 metric tonnes and Rwanda had a shortage of 70,000 metric tonnes. They were authorized by the East African Community (EAC) to import -

THE SPEAKER: I am sorry, honourable minister, could you hold on a bit. I am checking to see whether Members have the statement. Has it arrived? Alright, they have received it.

MS KYAMBADDE: Kenya and Rwanda imported with the authority of the East African Community. 

Madam   Speaker,   early   last   year,   sugar   prices   hit   a maximum of Shs 8,500 per kilo in some parts of the country. This was due to –

    i) prolonged drought that stretched for a period of nine months, from early 2016;
    ii) increased  regional  demand  of  Uganda’s  sugar especially in Kenya and Rwanda;
    iii) increased cost of sugarcane from Shs 85,000 in 2016 to Shs 175,000 in 2017.

This has however changed. Prices were at Shs 190,000 per 50kg bag, that is, about Shs 3,800 per kilo, in October to December 2017. Currently, it is Shs 138,000 per 50kg bag, which is about Shs 2,760 per kilo as of yesterday, 12 February 2018. Of course, the reasons for that are the controlled exports to the region but also cane is available due to the rains that we had in the last quarter of 2017.

Madam Speaker, we had a meeting with Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and the following issues emerged:
    1. There is no direct importation of duty-free sugar;
    2. There is no dumping of sugar in transit within the country;
    3. There is smuggling done by boda bodas through our porous  borders  and  then  the sugar is re-bagged  in  branded  bags  of Kakira,  Kinyara  and  Lugazi,  making  it  difficult for URA to seize. We are carrying out more investigations about that. However, URA operations seized over 55 metric tonnes of illicit sugar from July to December 2017.

Sugar millers have stock piled over 50,000 metric tonnes of sugar as shown below in the matrix, which you will be able to read in the document.

We have currently met with officials from Uganda Revenue Authority to bring the current situation under control and Government has agreed to do the following:
1. 	Undertake operations to curtail smuggling of sugar across our borders, commencing this week.

2. 	Allow controlled export of sugar to the regional market. I am contacting my colleague from Tanzania to have 25,000 metric tonnes of sugar exported to Tanzania.

3. 	I am also formally contacting my colleague from the Kenyan Government to express our concern about the flow of sugar from across our common borders.

4. 	We are also clamping down on illegal jaggeries, which are poaching sugarcane especially in Bunyoro where over 20 are currently operating.

Madam Speaker, to minimize the volatility in the sugar subsector, as a ministry we are working with this honourable House to improve the Sugar Bill with a view to fast track its enactment. When this Bill is enacted and implemented, most of the concerns of the public will be addressed and this will further improve stability in the sugar sector. I wish to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I just want to get clarification from you. Under No.1, you say that you are going to curtail smuggling of sugar across our borders. With whom will you work? Is it your officials - whom you do not have? You do not have people at many of the borders; I do not know how you are going to do it. Will you team up with URA, or is it the Ministry of Internal Affairs going to assist you? 

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, we are going to officially inform the Ministry of Internal Affairs. We have informed police across the borders. We are going to be working with Uganda Revenue Authority, the police manning the borders and security bodies like ISO, not only police.

4.41
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have attentively listened to the honourable minister presenting her statement, which is about the importation of one million tonnes of duty free sugar from Kenya.

I have not heard the minister refuting or accepting this, but the fact remains that Kenya imported sugar during campaigns. Actually, the deficit Kenya usually gets, which she was talking about, is 3,000 tonnes but it exceeded what they imported. When they imported, they were still producing, therefore they could not consume even what they were producing. So, the excess sugar, plus what they would call the deficit which Uganda has been exporting, all found its way to the market here.

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is not accepting but we know this sugar is in the country. Even when we were raising the issues of a sugar crisis here, we noted that sugar was being imported. We said that the ministry should go ahead and curtail the importation of sugar because it was hindering the local manufacturers and even the farmers. 

It is so sad to note that as we speak now, all these manufacturers - the sugar millers within the country - have piles of stock in their stores and they cannot compete with this sugar, which has gotten its way into the country: Kinyara, Kakira, Lugazi, Hoima, Kaliro, Kamuli, Atiak and Mayuge have sugar which is stuck there in their stores. They cannot compete with this sugar which has been brought in to masquerade as if the prices of sugar are going down. This is so artificial. 

The sugar which is being produced within the country is being stocked in the stores and our millers are stuck. Now they have decided to go ahead to reduce the price per tonne of sugarcane. This means the farmers are being pushed out of the whole process of farming, and even the millers are being pushed out of the industry. 

I would like the minister to tell us what is happening. I do not think it is beyond Uganda because URA has to make sure – 

4.45
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving this statement. I had engaged her in another platform on the same issue.

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay some documents on the Table. However, before I do that, I would like to say that six months ago, I brought a motion to the Office of the Clerk to investigate the sugar industry. No one acknowledged receipt of my motion and up to today, it has not been put on the Order Paper. That is when I came to realise that the people we are dealing with are very influential. Their influence even entered the Office of the Clerk and they removed my motion from the systems of Parliament. (Laughter) I am formally reporting to you now, that my motion has never seen the light of day. 

Notwithstanding that, Madam Speaker, I have documents I got from Mombasa Inland Port, which show the sugar destined for Uganda in the months of January 2016 to October 2016 and the tonnage - 

THE SPEAKER: 2016 or 2018?

MR ODONGA OTTO: 2016. They just sampled for a period of one year. The challenge with the sugar industry, Madam Speaker, is that sugar is imported in Uganda for home use and for industrial use - Coca-Cola, Pepsi and for making medicinal drugs like the cough syrups for children. When the sugar reaches the country, it is diverted, after successfully evading taxes, for the actual purpose of open sale in the market. In that financial year alone, we lost Shs 328 billion in tax evasion.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, this Parliament should pick interest in finding out - actually, this issue may have to end with a select committee – as to why sugar is not kept in bonds by Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). This sugar goes into private bonds, and I have a list of all the companies, over 40, that have sugar imported in their private bonds. When there is no semblance of Government and URA, this sugar ends up in the open market and they sell it after evading taxes.

Madam Speaker, even the sugar imported into Uganda for re-export to Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Central African Republic, South Sudan – I have the documents here – ends up in the local market. People are evading taxes. 

Therefore, this is a very serious sensitive matter. I do not know how much justice we can do to it in this small time. I brought it to the attention of the minister. It is a big cartel – (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MR ODONGA OTTO: I lay the following documents on the Table:

i) 	A list of all the bonds and warehouses holding sugar in their private places for re-export.

ii) 	A document showing the tonnage and quantities of sugar imported for home use and industrial use that has been diverted for sale in the open market. Some of this sugar is from Brazil for making animal medicine but here it ends up in the open market in the name of brown sugar.

iii) 	A document that shows the amount of sugar that was destined for South Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Central African Republic, Kenya and Burundi but ends up in the open market. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay and I pray that now that you are in the Chair, you will help us have a forensic and comprehensive investigation of the scandal in the sugar industry. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Otto. Let us have hon. Ochen, Kibalya and Onzima.

4.49
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is good this matter is appearing here today when you are chairing the House. 

Madam Speaker, when the minister was making her presentation, a revelation came out that as Government we have shown very clearly that we have capacity problems in checking our borders. Because of that, it drives us as a country to abandon the policy we adopted about supporting our internal industries. We have talked about the Buy Uganda, Build Uganda policy. We see very clearly that we in Government seem not to be standing to that test if we cannot protect our borders.

Madam Speaker, that is why we can only eradicate this problem if we go and tackle it vigorously. I pray that a select committee is constituted, as my brother, Odonga Otto, mentioned, to investigate this matter deeper and furnish this House with a report. That is when we shall know the extent of the actual problem that our country is facing. (Member timed out)

4.51
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I need to thank the minister for the statement. However, before this House, I also need the minister to be honest to the Members and say in her response that she clearly does not have any information about the people who are importing duty-free sugar into this country. She said there could be some pockets of smuggling here and there and that the sugar that could be destabilising the market could just be through smuggling, not through direct importation by some people.

A colleague has requested for a select committee, which I believe if given space will unveil issues and give clear information. However, as I was saying, we shall request the minister, as she is responding, to tell us, because there is information somewhere that some big shots are importing sugar into this country.

Secondly, we are wondering why the sugarcane prices are going down but the sugar price is going high. The farmers are suffering. The farmers are stuck with sugarcane. They cannot sell anywhere. The other time you remember I was giving information that Kamuli Sugar had closed. They had promised to open on Thursday but they failed because stock is still high. They later promised to open on Monday but they did not. Yesterday, as I was passing there, I even got concerned because instead of vehicles facing the direction of the factory, they were facing the exit. They cannot open now and they said they will give notice as to when they will open. This is equally the case in other places.

Therefore, we wonder whether the minister has shown interest in finding out why the price of sugarcane is going down but the price of sugar is constant or going up. The reason could be very clear and we would need the minister to help us with this so that we can solve the problem affecting this country.

4.54
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minister for giving this report. However, I also have concerns just like other Members. 

I have a gentleman who wants to establish a sugar factory in my constituency. He had gone to have a kind of consultation with the managers of Mayuge Sugar. When we met and were trying to discuss these issues, a lot of concerns were raised by this group of people from Mayuge Sugar. They were telling me that much as he wants to establish a factory, for them they have serious problems, particularly concerning the issue of the market being flooded with sugar that is imported. 

They also said that although initially they had problems amongst themselves as sugar factories concerning out growers and sugarcane, for this particular issue they are together. They expressed a lot of challenges caused by the importation of sugar.
	
I would like to inquire from the minister if this sugar is really being smuggled by the boda bodas. If so, we should know the quantity which is being carried either on a bicycle or motorcycle. How can sugar carried on a motorcycle affect the market to this extent? It is very disturbing.

We come here to present issues but I think we should try to be honest to Ugandans. These sugar factories have been established, and we have said time and again that we should promote industrialisation to create jobs and get more taxes for the country. However, if we do not protect these industries which are already established, how are we going to have our people employed? 

Hon. Ochen has just told us that if the situation continues, the best would be to cut on the cost of production. Cutting on the cost of production would mean reducing the number of people, and that means that people will lose their jobs. Therefore, I think that much as we try to protect our already established industries, let us also try to protect the people. 

Otherwise, we have many other challenges related to issues of investment. Much as the existing factories have problems in terms of delivery of goods from factories –(Member timed out.)

4.54
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. 

The minister said that smuggling has contributed towards disorganizing the price of sugar. I represent a border constituency - it borders Kenya - where smuggling has been thriving, especially when the prices of sugar in Kenya go high. Uganda Revenue Authority is very strict and I would like to assure this honourable House that smuggling using that route is very low for goods entering into Uganda. Maybe the minister should clearly highlight the names of the borders where URA has impounded 5,500 metric tonnes. Could it have been across the Congo border or the Uganda-Kenya border? –(Mr Macho rose_)- Let me take the information from another colleague who represents a border constituency. 

MR  MACHO: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Trade, Industries and Cooperatives for her statement. However, I would like to inform the minister that there is no smuggling in this country. As I speak, the prices of most items that would have come to Uganda through cross-border trade are expensive here and some of them are almost the same cost. 

This issue of branding people at the border as smugglers is very unfair. Further, there is no boda boda person who can carry the tonnes of sugar that are being dumped here. Government should just find a way of controlling the inflow.  How can you smuggle sugar from Brazil through oceans to Busia in Uganda on a boda boda? (Laughter) I think the minister is not fair to brand Ugandans smugglers of sugar. 

MR ANGURA: Thank you very much, my colleague, for the information. I would like the minister to also clarify whether the sugar that is impounded is verified. Is it sugar grown within the region or does it come from across the oceans?
	
As a matter of fact, many of our people have lost jobs. We used to be good smugglers, I cannot deny that. However, many of our people are idle and smuggling has been almost eliminated. I would like to request the minister to clarify on these issues. Otherwise, boda bodas cannot import sugar that can change the price of sugar in this country. We should test the sugar that is imported to find out whether it is sugar from Kenya or from within the region, so that we can be able to determine where it is coming from. Thank you very much.

5.01
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister was reading her statement, I was wondering, because the truth of the matter is that the borders are porous but I doubt the idea that there are people who use bicycles to ferry sugar in large quantities from Kenya to Uganda. Maybe she is referring to wheelchairs for the disabled people. In fact, these have been allowed to procure whatever they wish from across, but they are very few.

The East African Community protocol was signed and it removed restrictions and allowed free movement of goods, labour and services. This leaves me wondering whether it is being implemented or it has been left there to gather dust on the shelves. This is because the minister said in her statement that she is about to contact her colleagues in the partner states of Rwanda, Tanzania and Kenya about harmonising the prices of imports and exports of the region and yet the protocol was signed long ago. She also attributes the high skyrocketing prices of sugar last year to drought and shortage in Kenya and Rwanda, forgetting that this temptation to smuggle could be coming because of failure to implement some of these important protocols. 

I seek clarification from the minister as to whether the protocol is being implemented to the letter or it has been shelved. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to appreciate the minister for the report. Usually, I refer to reality and I will never differ from that.

First of all, I wish to also add my voice to the previous Members who contributed. Yes, we have porous borders, but should the minister be everywhere? I think we also need to look at the implementers. When you speak about sugar entering or leaving Uganda, who are responsible at the border posts?

Madam Speaker, we blame Government time and again, but who is the government? I speak as a member of the Committee on Agriculture. When we went to Kenya to find out what happens there, and when we went to some other place, we found Kakira sugar being packaged into smaller packets and being rebranded. Who is responsible for that? 

When we saw this, we came back and asked a lot of questions. How does Kakira sugar become another brand? Who gives people that authority to take out the sugar and rebrand it and then it goes back? Maybe it is business, but who is responsible for that different brand? When it goes outside there, does it go as different sugar and yet we know it comes from Uganda?

As Ugandans, we need to applaud ourselves, but we lose a lot of taxes. I therefore add my voice to the rest to ask the minister to look into some of these issues, so that we address the nation and tell the people the truth. Where we have failed, we need to admit it. I thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you can tell us whether the rules of origin are no longer applicable?

5.06
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank all the Members for the contributions they have made. I will respond to that, but on the issue of the statement made about the million tonnes of sugar brought into the country, that needs to be investigated.

Secondly, industrial sugar is imported because it is not produced here in Uganda. We import industrial sugar for confectionaries, beer and manufacturing. That is allowed; it can be imported into the country. 

On the issues of the borders and how we shall manage them, I want to say that the borders are so porous and I am glad all Members have alluded to that. We must admit that smuggling actually takes place and it is criminal. It is a crime that is committed, not only during the day probably, but any time under concealment. We must admit that that is an area that we must control, with the support of the police, intelligence organisations, plus the communities around the borders. 

On the issue of why sugarcane prices are low, as you may recall I mentioned in my statement that we had rains in the last quarter and that definitely enabled the abundance of sugarcane. When you look at the economics, definitely the prices go down because there is abundant sugarcane. We get all our data pertaining to importation and exportation from Uganda Revenue Authority. 

On the issue of carrying sugar on motorcycles, we might not say that it is the sole reason or justification for the drop in the prices. There are also other reasons which I alluded to. First of all, there is excess sugar in the region, for example in Kenya because they import it and in Rwanda because of importation. That is also another reason. Instead of the exports that were carried out before, sugar is mainly for domestic consumption here in Uganda. That could have also caused the drop in prices.

On whether we comply with the East African protocol, yes we do. However, the East African Community Customs Union and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) Treaty allow for free movement of goods. There is also special provision for some sensitive products which are regulated and restricted. Sugar is one of those products that are regulated. Trade in sugar, therefore, is managed under a duty remission.

The impounded sugar we talked about was seized at the Kenya and DRC borders. Normally, the smuggling is done in two or three bags on bicycles, but repeatedly, one can make about ten trips a day, starting at 5.00am in the morning and going throughout the day and night. We cannot rule this out if there are several players doing that. However, there are also other means of smuggling. Like I said, smuggling is a crime that can be done under all forms of concealment.

Kenya imported sugar under COMESA duty remission and that is allowed. The issue of imported sugar for transit markets is a matter that is handled by our revenue authority. We rely entirely on data by Uganda Revenue Authority. They manage the transit sugar. It is not Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. However, they do give us information because we work closely with them. Government’s interest is also to protect our local industry.

The vitality of cane and sugar prices is determined by many actors, including rainfall, like I mentioned, demand and supply, regional market demand, international market forces, but also the domestic demand. What I would like to state here is that we do comply with the EAC protocol. 

Borders are porous, but we commit that as a ministry, we are going to work closely with our security organisations to ensure that we curb that. We have to engage even the regional security along the borders to ensure that we curb smuggling, which we admit has become –(Interruption)

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry I did not intend to interrupt the minister. I have been listening patiently and I see my colleagues also trying to follow the explanations so that they get answers to their questions. However, I am getting more confused because the minister is dodging straight questions –(Interjection)– I am giving a preamble to the point of order. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to dodge Members’ questions? A case in point is when she was asked whether boda bodas can bring sugar from Brazil. We wanted to know whether she is aware that sugar is being -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, maybe you were not listening. The minister explained that there are several boda boda activities and what they do can make a difference. If they are several during the day and night running - That is what she said-

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for her to continue, unless she - (Interruption) - Honourable members, you know I have been keeping quiet and I normally do not disturb. The Speaker has said that is what the minister has said. I would like to put this on record: Is it in order for the minister to say boda bodas of Uganda go to Brazil and bring sugar up to here? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you are really misusing our Rules of Procedure. She did not say they went to Brazil, rode on the water until they came back here. She talked about sugar landing in Kenya and then being moved back and forth. That is what she said, not going to Brazil by boda boda. Honourable minister, please conclude. 

MS KYAMBADDE: I would like to conclude, Madam Speaker. I admitted three issues: One, industrial sugar is imported; secondly, smuggling is taking place and it is a crime; thirdly, we shall work closely with our neighbours to investigate further into the smuggling of this sugar and ensure that we control it. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this matter really affects our farmers. They are endangered. How quickly can you come back to us with the report on what you are doing because they are really endangered? 

MS KYAMBADDE: On the issue of the farmers, we have to work closely with the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to ensure we control smuggling mainly. It is the one affecting the farmers. 

THE SPEAKER: How quickly? Many Members here represent sugarcane growers. Therefore, they are anxious about their incomes and failure to take their children to school. We would like to know when this can be solved so that the farmers are comfortable to continue growing or not growing sugarcane.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I raised substantial issues and I laid documents on the Table showing the trailers exporting tonnes of sugar into Uganda’s local markets. This requires a substantial response because I was not speaking to myself. Even URA is part of the racket avoiding taxes on this sugar because they are sharing the loot. Therefore, we need a substantial response to my issues.

MS KYAMBADDE: That is why I said we need to investigate as I do not have an answer now. Uganda Revenue Authority is the controller of all the data concerning the imports of sugar into this country. Therefore, we have to investigate. 

Maybe, Madam Speaker, it is up to you now to decide on how we have to go about it, whether through a committee- However, if you could give us two weeks, we would be able to get back with the report on the basis of the information that has been submitted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall ask the Clerk to make copies for the minister so that she is able to study them and come back to us. If after those two weeks, we are not satisfied, we will have to go for an investigation by the House.

Honourable members, I have a small announcement. Tomorrow is Ash Wednesday. His Grace Stanley Ntagali will be here to conduct the service from 7.15 a.m. to 8.30 a.m. Please, wake up early and come. 

Also, on Saturday, the head of the Seventh Day Adventist Church is coming to Uganda. There will be a big function at Kololo the whole day for the Seventh Day Adventists (SDAs) and friends like you. Therefore, hon. Idah Nantaba is inviting you to go to Kololo to attend prayers. I hope they will send the cards.

The Minister of Education and Sports has got something - Ah, the money person is going to help the Minister of Education and Sports.

5.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, hon. Kaberuka raised an issue regarding teachers that were recruited and deployed in 2017 in 180 schools but up to now, they have not been paid. We were supposed to give clarification. 

After cross-checking the facts, we note that the national budget for 2017/2018 was finalised and appropriated by Parliament without an allocation to the Ministry of Education and Sports to recruit and deploy teachers. You will note that Government policy requires that recruitment and deployment of civil servants should be against the available budget. 

However, we have made a provision of Shs 28.39 billion in the Financial Year 2018/2019 for the 180 grant-aided secondary schools. Therefore, beginning with July this year, this situation will be corrected.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Kaberuka, you are not satisfied? 

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development needs to liaise with the Ministry of Public Service on this subject. This is because it was a well harnessed process in the budget processes. These are the correspondences from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development with the Ministry of Public Service and the Ministry of Education and Sports. 

The Ministry of Education and Sports should not hide behind that because when the ministry was coding these schools, it was in liaison with the finance ministry. I would like to implore the Committee on Education and Sports to come in.

Madam Speaker, I remember there was a crisis in the universities, especially Kabale University, because their money was reallocated and they promised they were going to bring a supplementary budget. That is when the ministry requested for a supplementary budget and these people have been dillydallying and hiding behind that. 

We need clear clarification. We need a joint statement from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Public Service. Why did you code these schools without money? Where did this money go?

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister said he did not budget for them in the last financial year; isn’t it?

5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development if they are availing money as he has indicated. 

I remember very well we came here and informed this House that we were coding 100 schools. Unfortunately, when we went ahead to advertise, we were asked by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to halt the advertisement because they did not have money for the recruitment exercise.

Therefore, if they are availing money now, as Ministry of Education and Sports we appreciate. It would help us to recruit. The schools were already coded but we could not go ahead with the recruitment because we did not have money. 

That item had been indicated under an unfunded priority. Therefore, I would like to thank the minister since he has indicated that they are going to avail money; we shall go ahead to recruit. He has clearly indicated it that it is going to be in the 2018/2019 budget.

MR KABERUKA: My problem is with the Minister of Public Service instructing the education minister to recruit 100 teachers for the coded schools. The education minister should tell us what it means when you interview teachers and send them to subcounties where there are no schools. They remain redundant for the whole financial year all because you coded the school and went ahead to recruit.

Madam Speaker, in your district, the Education Service Commission went there and recruited 27 teaching and non- teaching staff. I am going to lay the list of the 100 schools on the Table. 

If you look at this letter from the Ministry of Public Service to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, it says, “Coding of secondary school grant aided for Financial Year 2017/2018.” That is why I want this Ministry of Public Service to come in and tell us whether they diverted this money. 

It says, “Reference is made to yours ADM137115155/01, dated 19 November 2016, in which you requested this ministry to code 100 newly grant-aided schools. This is to inform you that 100 schools for grant aiding during Financial Year 2017/2018 have been coded. Attached here is a schedule of the respective codes allocated to each of the secondary schools to enable your further action on the same”.

Madam Speaker, for all those schools on that list you have, money for all the non-teaching and teaching staff, amounting to Shs 21.7 billion, was already earmarked. We would like to know where this money went-(Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, it would be important for the Minister of Public Service to come and make a statement on where he got the authority to instruct the Minister of Education and Sports to do what he did, so that this House gets to know how the Government institutions operate.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, it is true the process of coding and grant aiding the 100 secondary schools started some few years ago. That process can only be realised through allocation of money. We cannot say it has been concluded unless there are resources to implement that.

Therefore, during this financial year, 2017/2018, the coding was authorized by Ministry of Public Service but funds were not allocated. We are telling the House that this allocation will take place in 2018/2019, a few months from now. We have captured this in the Budget Framework Paper and we are committing ourselves that beginning July, these funds will be available; therefore, recruitment and deployment of these people can go on.

However, as for now, whether you have coded or not, you will not have the teachers in school unless you have the money to pay them. It is as straightforward as that. There is no money that was allocated for these schools in 2017/2018 but there is money to be allocated in 2018/2019.

MS AKURUT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. The financial year does not tally with the calendar year of the term; what happens if the resources have been allocated for this financial year, 2018/2019, which begins in July, yet the academic term already started? Does it mean the students from these schools will start in the second term of the academic year? Thank you.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, we want this clear. The recruitment and deployment is already done.

THE SPEAKER: Have they now been assigned schools?

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, they went to these schools and recruited the sitting teachers –(Interjections)- Protect me, Madam Speaker. We want to know because these people have been bringing supplementary budgets. Minister of Finance, do you want to tell us that you are not going to bring another supplementary budget for another activity other than supporting this activity, which has already been done? 

You have already spent money on this Education Service Commission to go traversing the entire country recruiting these people. Aren’t you going to bring another supplementary budget in this financial year?

Madam Speaker, these are our children and schools in our subcounties where there were no schools. This is also a Government programme where they are saying every subcounty should have a school.

THE SPEAKER: What are you proposing, hon. Kaberuka?

MR KABERUKA: I propose that the minister brings a supplementary budget tomorrow so that we finance these people, so that they start operating. This is because the 100 schools were supposed to be brought this year and another batch the following year.

THE SPEAKER: That is the proposal, Minister of Finance. Do you want to think about it? Are you sure about how to move?

MR BAHATI: Before we commit and think about it, we would like probably, the Minister of Education and Sports to clarify whether people were recruited and deployed. Are there people working without being paid? Our communication was clear that they should not go on and recruit until they get the funds. Therefore, maybe she can first clarify this.

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, we must appreciate the fact that all the schools that were coded have been in existence. However, because we coded them - Remember, the teachers were already there, although some schools did not have enough teachers. Therefore, when Ministry of Education and Sports codes, what is expected is that there is money and once we carry out the recruitment process, it means they will be put on the payroll. 

The challenge we have as Ministry of Education and Sports is that when we coded, we were given permission by the Ministry of Public Service to go ahead. However, when we coded and advertised for recruitment, the Ministry of Finance wrote to the Ministry of Education and Sports to stop and indeed we stopped. We did not go ahead to recruit because the finance ministry had clearly indicated that there was no wage bill, so we could not proceed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to make it clear that as Ministry of Education and Sports, we get stuck if we do not have resources, and we cannot go ahead to recruit. That is why I appreciated the finance ministry if they have now availed money.

Members will agree with us that when we presented our budget, it indicated clearly that that part was as an unfunded priority. When it is unfunded, our hands are tied because we cannot go ahead without resources. If the Ministry of Finance can avail the money, for us we are ready to proceed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to imagine that some of these teachers were already in those schools, so they already had salaries in the other capacity, maybe not in this new one. Also, we do not know who has been receiving or not receiving. Perhaps, let us agree to get the money this in the next financial year. However, if there are issues of arrears, they should be brought separately, and clearly point out who have not been paid.

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, I want it on record because this is her docket. The other day, I visited the Committee on Education when they had invited Mr Muhakanizi and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that same question was asked - why these people have not been paid. Actually, the minister dodged the meeting. 

We want minister to state on record here whether the Education Service Commission did not interview these people in their respective schools and then we put it to rest. That is her docket; if she is killing it, then we know that she is the one killing it.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, fortunately one of these schools is in my constituency. I know that the Education Service Commission interviewed them. However, the question is: were they given appointment letters for the new financial year?

MR KABERUKA: Madam Speaker, for that reason, I would like to lay these papers on the Table. This is the letter from Ministry of Education and Sports written by hon. Seninde to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Public Service. It says, “Submission of additional wage requirement for the Financial Year 2017/2018, primary schools, and provision of additional wages for the schools and institutions under the education sector for Financial Year 2017/2018. It was written on 29 November 2016. I beg to lay.

I would also like to lay on the Table a letter from the Ministry of Public Service to the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Education and Sports, informing them that they had coded grant aided secondary schools for Financial Year 2017/2018. I beg to lay.

I would also like to lay on the Table the list of schools whose teaching and non-teaching staff were interviewed in October last year. These are 100 schools. One list has the following districts: Gomba, Adjumani, Alebtong, Amolatar, Amuria, Apac, Arua, Budaka, Bugiri, Buhweju, Buikwe, Bukedea, Bukomansimbi, Bukwo, Bulambuli, Bundibugyo, Bushenyi, Busia, Butaleja, Buyende, Gulu, Hoima, Ibanda, Iganga, Isingiro - there are two schools in Isingiro - Jinja, Kabale in Kamuganguzi Sub county, Kabarole, Kaberamaido, Kaliro, Kalungu, Kamuli, Kamwenge, Kanungu, Kapchorwa, Kasese, Katakwi, Kayunga, Kibale, Kiboga, Kibuku, Kiruhura, Kiryandongo, Kisoro, Koboko, Kole, Kotido, Kumi, Kween, Kyankwanzi, Kyegegwa, Kyenjojo, Lamwo, Lira, Luuka, – Luuka has two schools - Luwero, Lwengo, Lyantonde, Manafwa, Masaka, Masindi, Mayuge, Mbale, Mbarara, Mitooma, Mityana, Moroto, Moyo, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono, Nakasekke, Nakasongola, Namayingo, Namutumba, Nebbi, Ntungamo, Nwoya, Pader, Pallisa, Rakai, Rubanda, Rubirizi, Rukungiri, Serere, Sheema, Sironko, Soroti, Wakiso and Yumbe.

These are the schools whose teaching and non-teaching staff were recruited in October last year and now here the minister is denying this fact. We need to interrogate this. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I am aware that the Education Service Commission conducted the interviews, but were they issued with appointment letters and effective when, so that we can know the liability?

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, that is exactly what I was explaining. Much as we were going ahead as Ministry of Education and Sports, we got stuck when the Ministry of Finance wrote to stop us. 

As Ministry of Education and Sports, even if you availed us with the money tomorrow, we shall be ready to proceed. Our challenge is resources. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the chairperson of the Committee on Education and then hon. Mutebi.

5.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Connie Nakayenze): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Education Service Commission indicated to the committee that they had done the recruitment but they were waiting for the money to come so that they give the posting instructions. 

They are not yet appointed because there was no money. However, after we interacted with the finance minister, we came to an understanding that at least this was among the priorities. If they have promised that they are going to give us the money, we should not wait up to the next financial year because the term has already started -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we all accept that interviews were conducted, but when does the appointment take effect?  

MR MUTEBI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate that the ministry went ahead to code schools and interviews were held. We stated that the teachers were in those schools already and we expect that the teachers who were in those schools were the ones interviewed.

The information I would like to give is that the head teachers used their brains and imported teachers from other areas to be interviewed. Those who were teaching in those schools for seven, eight to ten years were not considered. I wrote to the chairperson of the Education Service Commission -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you are raising is important but it is different from what we are discussing. We are talking about those who were recruited, have not received appointment letters and have not been paid. You are talking about some kind of fraud. I accept it, but it is a bit different. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, it may be true that these teachers were teaching in these schools, but when you call them for an interview and promise them jobs, they cease to hold their previous job. The minister needs to tell us whether all these teachers who were interviewed are still teaching at their old posts or whether there are those who lost their jobs because of the interviews which were conducted.

I see the honourable minister laughing but there must be teachers who lost their jobs because of these interviews. Will they be compensated? We need that clarification, because these cases exist.

MR MANGUSHO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Some of these schools have been community schools; parents have been supporting the teachers and these teachers are still volunteering. Some of these schools are in very hard-to-reach areas and parents cannot even afford to pay the teachers. 

Due to the pressure we have been getting from the public, the Education Service Commission reached out to the communities, interacted with the management committees and interviewed the existing staff. They were supposed to be issued with appointment letters which have posting instructions.

In legal language, we say that justice delayed is justice denied. These people should enjoy their rights if they passed their interviews. They should be paid in arrears, if possible, after the supplementary budget, because they are still working.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have now got to know that yes, we recruited. However, were those who were recruited given appointment letters to start? Have those who were not given appointments to start been affected in terms of losing the previous posts they had? I think these are very important questions.

Madam Speaker, we therefore request that together with the Ministry Education and Sports and the Ministry of Public Service, we go back and find out the situation and come to the House with some solutions. However, as for today, we are confirming that we are making a provision of Shs 23.9 billion to recruit everybody who was interviewed next financial year. For this technicality, we can go, consult and come back tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what we should ensure is that this money is in the budget and get a commitment from you that you will not stop the ministry from using that money. Sometimes you do your own things behind our back after we have passed the budget. Confirm that the money will be there and that you will not use your hands to -

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the funds for salaries have the first call on the Consolidated Fund and, therefore, they cannot be moved from here to there. I confirm that it will be available. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so we expect to hear from both you and the Minister of Education and Sports on the other issues of who has been affected, who has not been affected and when the letters will be issued. Thank you.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE 48TH COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION CONFERENCE HELD IN OWERRI, IMO STATE, NIGERIA

5.46
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the 48th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association African Regional Conference. The Rules of Procedure of Parliament state that I give a brief summary of what is entailed in the report.

The Speaker led a delegation to the 48th Commonwealth Parliamentary Association Africa Regional Conference that was hosted by Imo State Branch and the House of Assembly of Imo State from 23 to 25 October 2017 in Owerri, Imo State, Nigeria.

The members of the delegation were, among others: hon. Judith Franca Akello, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Henry Kibalya, hon. Paul Amoru, Madam Jane Kibirige, the Clerk to Parliament, and hon. Jalia Bintu.

Madam Speaker, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association is composed of 180 branches, which are currently grouped geographically into nine Commonwealth regions. The Africa region grouping was founded in the 1950s. After Gambia withdrew in 2013, the CPA Africa Region is now composed of 18 national branches, of which Uganda is one, and some 64 sub-national branches representing provincial/state or territorial legislatures. Irrespective of race, gender and religion, they are all committed to the respect of human rights and freedoms and the pursuit of the ideals of democracy and good governance.

Delegates from 18 national branches and 44 sub-national branches across the Africa region attended the conference. The conference was hosted by hon. Lindiwe Maseko, MP in the South African Parliament and Chairperson of CPA Africa Regional Executive Committee, and the Speaker of the Imo State House of Assembly and President of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (African Region), Dr hon. Acho Ihim. 

The 48th CPA Africa Regional Conference was held under the theme, “Africa’s Agenda 2063 Vision and Master Plan”. Other topics of concern were, the Parliamentary Agenda for peace and conflict resolution and the development agenda of new security architecture by the year 2020. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to read some of the resolutions that were reached during the conference.
Under the inclusive development: gender mapping Africa's Agenda 2063 and the Sustainable Development Goals, it was resolved as follows:

1. 	African parliaments should enact laws to create equal opportunities commissions as the basis for challenging all laws, policies, customs and traditions that discriminate against women, including people with disability.

2. 	Governments in Africa should be encouraged to formulate national gender policies with a view to ensuring gender equity in the distribution of political offices, promote affirmative action and social inclusion.

3. 	African parliaments should ratify treaties and protocols relating to gender parity such as the Maputo Protocol of March 2016 and the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights.

4. 	African parliamentarians’ human rights groups and other stakeholders should champion advocacy against patriarchy and other harmful cultural practices which tend to hinder the access of girls and women to social and economic opportunities, including career development, credit facilities, ownership of land, property, business and signing of contracts. 

5. 	African parliaments should enact legislations promoting girl-child education as well as prohibiting early child marriages, female genital mutilation, gender-based violence, sexual abuse, forced surrogacy. 

6. 	African parliaments should enact family rights Bills to promote girls and women rights to property and family inheritance.

Madam Speaker, under the free movement of people, goods and services, it was resolved thus:

1. 	African governments should ratify and domesticate the 1991 Abuja Treaty on Free Movement of Africans within Africa by adopting a common passport and abolishing all visa regimes.

2. 	African governments should encourage intra-regional trade by implementing the Continental Free Trade Area Agreement of 2012 by removing restrictive tariffs and prohibitive laws that hinder the exchange of goods and services on the continent.

3. 	African governments should invest in cross-border communication and infrastructure networks to ease air, land and sea transportation of people, goods and services in Africa. 

4. 	African counties should fast-track the process of adopting a single customs union as well as a common currency to streamline border clearance, simplify issuance of work permits and promote ease of business within the continent.

Madam Speaker, under the topic of silencing the guns, it was resolved as follows:

1. 	African governments should develop a new security architecture with emphasis on conflict prevention through peace building, identification of early warning signs, diplomacy and accommodation.

2. 	African governments should establish alternative dispute resolution mechanisms to promote arbitration, mediation, reconciliation, negotiation and conflict resolution in order to avert unnecessary dispute.

3. 	African parliaments should pass anti-terrorism and anti-money laundering Acts as well as laws prohibiting cybercrimes.

4. 	African parliaments should regulate against the proliferation of small arms in the continent.

On infrastructure deficit in Africa, it was resolved as follows:

1. 	African governments should strengthen their tax regimes to increase their capacity to generate capital for the implementation of projects and programmes.

2. 	African parliaments should enact legislations aimed at curbing illicit outflows of funds.

3. 	African governments should create an enabling environment to retain our skilled human resources and reverse the present trend of human capital flight or brain drain.

4. 	Governments in Africa should promote transparency and accountability in the management of public finances, thereby encouraging performance, budgeting and good governance.

5. 	Lastly, it was resolved that governments in Africa should recognise, mobilise and ensure they buy-in and ownership of all African stakeholders including the youth, women, organised labour, civil society organisations, the diaspora, the media, African think tanks and research instructions, the organised private sector and many others in terms of resourcing, monitoring and implementation of the vision and master plan.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. A date will be appointed for its discussion here, but avail it to all the Members.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE 63RD COMMONWEALTH PARLIAMENTARY CONFERENCE HELD FROM 1ST TO 8TH NOVEMBER 2017 IN DHAKA, BANGLADESH

MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, in accordance with Rule 33 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, I beg to lay on the Table the Report of the 63rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference held from 1 to 8 November 2017 in Dhaka, Bangladesh. As the rule states, I beg to present a summary of the report.

Madam Speaker, the delegation to the above conference was led by the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda, Ms Rebecca Kadaga. The Members who constituted the delegation, among others, were: hon. Okupa Elijah, hon. Akello Judith Franca, hon. Nsamba Patrick and hon. Bintu Jalia Lukumu Ngonzi Abwooli. 

The conference was held in Dhaka, Bangladesh, from 1 to 8 November 2017 under the theme, “Continuing to enhance high standards of performance of Parliamentarians.” The 63rd Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference recognised the Commonwealth’s commitment to democracy. 

The conference was attended by over 500 parliamentarians and parliamentary clerks representing parliaments and legislatures from across the 180 Commonwealth countries, which brings together Speakers, Members of Parliament and parliamentary staff representing the nine regions of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA). These are Africa, Asia, Australia, British Islands and Mediterranean, Canada, Caribbean, America and Atlantic, India, Pacific and South East Asia.

The CPA reaches all the 52 countries of the Commonwealth as well as national, state, provincial and territorial parliaments and legislatures. The conference also included the 36 small branches conference and meetings of the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians, known as CWP.

The 63rd Conference in Bangladesh was hosted by the CPA President and outgoing Chairperson of the CPA International Executive Committee, the Rt Hon. Dr Shirin Sharmin Chaudhury,  MP and Speaker of the Parliament of Bangladesh. 

Some of the resolutions, which were passed under the different working themes, were:

Under the workshop on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), it was resolved as follows:

1. 	The CPA members should ensure that as their parliaments work towards attaining the SDGs, they meaningfully consult and incorporate women’s perspectives across a variety of demographics.

2. 	Empower the committees of parliament to champion gender consideration of all budgets and Bills, and promote gender-sensitive annual reports that are tabled in parliament.

3. 	Parliaments should ensure that there is promotion of gender equality and empowerment of women and women’s representation in political offices. 

4. 	Parliamentarians should pro-actively play a role in translating the 17 SDGs into legislation and policies for the country’s specific goals.

5. 	Parliaments should be more transparent and have separation of powers, making them easily accessible to the public in order to promote democracy and good governance thereby enhancing people’s participation. 

6. 	A democratic parliament should reflect the social diversities of the population in terms of gender, geography, language, religion, race, ethnicity and any other politically significant characteristics.

Madam Speaker, under the workshop on trade and travel issues, it was recommended that free movement is key to building stronger ties within the Commonwealth countries. Therefore, national parliaments should champion visa-free regimes for Commonwealth citizens hence immigration reforms should be enacted.

Under the workshop on climate change, it was recommended, among others, that parliaments within the Commonwealth should ensure that a framework for combating climate change is developed and implemented within each region and updated at regional conferences.

Under the workshop on critical mass, it was recommended that parliaments must ensure that governments enhance the policy and regulatory frameworks for market-led growth while strengthening the financial sector to expand and better manage infrastructure. It was also recommended that small jurisdictions with limited funding and resources must be strategic, creative and competitive in addressing their unique logistic and infrastructure challenges. 

Further, it was recommended that knowledge and good practice sharing by Commonwealth parliaments at national and sub-national levels should, wherever practicable, be facilitated to help overcome resource gaps. 

Madam Speaker, under CPA benchmarks for democratic legislatures: progress in the past 10 years, it was recommended that branch presidents - these are the Speakers - and clerks should assess their legislatures against the CPA benchmarks to identify improvements and enhancements, and to report on progress at future conferences. 

It was also recommended that where relevant, citizens, civil society and academia should be consulted when parliaments conduct self-assessments with the CPA benchmarks, to promote transparency and accountability. 

It was further recommended that parliaments should use the updated CPA benchmarks on democratic legislatures as a tool to ensure their contribution to SDG 16 on inclusive and accountable governance. 

Madam Speaker, on the topic of giving a voice to the youth: mechanisms for ensuring effective participation of youth in the governance process, it was recommended that parliaments must ensure that the youth parliamentarians are given a voice in all parliamentary, national, regional and international representative bodies. It was also recommended that the youth must be mentored through internships and apprenticeships in statutory bodies and parliamentary functions.

Under the Commonwealth Women Parliamentarians session, it was recommended that women parliamentarians be supported using data-driven strategies to increase women’s political participation and allow them serve as role models. 

It was further recommended that world leaders should create a conducive environment in their countries for women to enter politics and positions of leadership, to achieve the goal of gender equality. 

Accordingly it was noted that women are born equal, and to strive and achieve that equity and equality, the playing field should be made even to enable and provide equal opportunities for all. Parliaments have a key role in how we make this happen. 

Madam Speaker, on gender equality and the role of male parliamentarians, it was recommended that male parliamentarians must work in equal partnership with their female counterparts in championing gender equality. It was further agreed that the male dominated mind-set and personnel of the media must change, and the reportage should promote gender equality objectives and sensitivities.

It was recommended that small branches should collaborate in sharing best practices, expertise and success stories in order to learn and assist one another.

For small jurisdictions with little recourses available, it was agreed that developed countries must enact and enforce legislation establishing accountability and transparency in their governance systems. Further, it was agreed that small jurisdictions with limited funding and resources must be strategic, creative and competitive in addressing their unique logistic and infrastructure challenges.

Lastly, it was agreed that while small branches may not necessarily always face disproportionately different service delivery challenges to larger branches, cooperation between jurisdictions can assist in improving service delivery.

Madam Speaker, on parliamentary innovations in small jurisdictions in the face of financial and human resource challenges, it was recommended that CPA should encourage greater cooperation between small branches within and outside their regions by way of internships and exchanges of technical assistance. 

In addition, it was agreed that to overcome capacity and resource challenges, Commonwealth parliaments in small jurisdictions should, wherever practicable, share knowledge and resources in order to function more effectively.

Madam Speaker, under the role of Parliament in combating corruption, it was recommended that parliaments must provide legislation, resources and institutional tools to fight corruption in the community, government and politics.

Further, it was agreed that parliamentarians should role-model high standards of integrity in personal conduct, maximize transparency across governments, and recognise how policy-making can counter cultures of corruption.

Accordingly, it was agreed that the legislatures should set the legal framework for the establishment and functioning of anti-corruption institutions, including the provision of adequate resources and proper follow up.

Lastly, on the role of parliaments in meeting the challenges of protecting territorial waters, it was recommended that parliaments must ensure that resources are made available to safeguard territorial waters against threats such as overfishing, poaching, habitat destruction, pollution and climate change.

Additionally, it was agreed that parliaments should recognise the potential within territorial waters to provide a secure form of renewable energy whilst respecting the natural environment.

Madam Speaker, it was communicated that the 65th Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference will be hosted by Uganda in 2019 and Uganda was appreciated for offering to host the conference.  Madam Speaker, allow me to lay the report on the Table. 

Finally, the Africa youth conference will be hosted this year and I know you will inform the House and the country at a later stage. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Jalia Bintu. The report will be debated before we close the second session. However, by coincidence, as we were receiving the report from the Commonwealth, we received visitors from the National Assembly of Mauritius, another Commonwealth country. They are up there in the gallery. Please welcome hon. Veda Baloomoody, Member of Parliament; hon. Marie Jeanne Monty, Member of Parliament; hon. Anandi Fawen, deputy permanent secretary; Ms Rinnoca Bejan, from the UNDP; and Ms Angar Lee, also from the UNDP. (Applause)

You are all welcome. They are here to benchmark with us. Just for the record, Mauritius has reached a middle income status and they are ranked very high in governance in Africa. We congratulate them. They also grow sugarcane, so maybe we shall learn something from them.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as you will recall, this report was partially presented but when we realised that the Ministry of Works and Transport was not represented, we had to stop. I now invite the chair to complete the presentation of the report.

6.09
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Ms Lillian Nakate): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report into the inquiry of the mandatory inspection of motor vehicles in Uganda was done by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and as the rules permit, we had members with dissenting views who authored a minority report. 

Madam Speaker, allow me to just summarise the majority report of the committee. I had not read the recommendations and so I would like to give a brief and then summarise. The entire report is about 95 pages but I will take you through about five pages. 

Madam Speaker, the Parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure inquired into the mandatory inspection of motor vehicles by Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS) during the period Ju1y to August 2017. Just like I indicated last time, this inquiry was carried out after a referral by the Speaker on 29 June 2017 on the back of two ministerial statements and two matters of urgent public importance on the subject of mandatory vehicle inspection. 

In your wise ruling, Madam Speaker, you suspended the mandatory inspection of motor vehicles and further directed that the deadline for this exercise, which was 30 June 2017, together with any related announcements in the mass media, be immediately extinguished. From that day, vehicles have been inspected on a voluntary basis.

The thrust of the committee's inquiry was therefore to appraise the Government policy on vehicle inspection, examine the procurement of SGS and the details of the contract as well as the advancement of recommendations for the regularisation of vehicle inspection as a road safety strategy.

Madam Speaker, you recall that prior to 1 July 2007, Uganda Police, under the Inspectorate of Vehicles, conducted motor vehicle inspections as a delegated function from the Ministry of Works and Transport. It is worth noting that effective 1 July 2007, as communicated through the budget speech for the financial year 2007/2008, the Government of Uganda abolished road licence fees to which the annual vehicle inspection was pegged, in favour of enhancement of the fuel levy. This implied waiving the mandatory aspect of vehicle inspection. 

Therefore, vehicle inspection was only required in cases of accidents, and on demand by vehicle owners and operators in the public sector where pre and post repair inspection of vehicles is part of the standard operating procedures. 

The finance minister then informed the House that road licence fees were untenable due to the numerous challenges that had afflicted its administration, namely the high rate of default and the rampant forgery of licence stickers, and that it required a lot of administrative resources to ensure compliance. Therefore, while this policy shift was settling in, efforts were underway at the Ministry of Works and Transport to re-introduce the mandatory inspection of vehicles. 

The mandatory inspection of vehicles is part of the Government effort to improve road safety and stem road carnage. You will recall that a report by World Health Organization on the global status of road safety of 2015 states that road accidents account for about 1.2 million deaths per year with the highest road traffic fatality rates in low income countries. 

Therefore, a private consultant, Lee International, was procured to carry out a study on the re-introduction and privatisation of vehicle inspection services. This was followed by a conceptual framework for the privatisation of vehicle inspection services authored by Mr Denis Sabiiti, the then Commissioner at the Ministry of Works and Transport and now the Member of Parliament for Rubanda West. 

The re-introduction of mandatory vehicle inspections through a private provider, whilst intended to aid the stemming of road carnage, ended up being rife with a host of public concerns, namely exorbitant pricing, inadequate coverage, unrealistic deadlines and the general scepticism over the overall intentions and  interventions. Therefore, in the execution of this inquiry, the committee conducted on-spot assessments of motor vehicle inspection sites at Kawanda, Namanve, Nabbingo and Namulanda. 

The committee reviewed the relevant literature such as the 2007 conceptual framework on the reintroduction of mandatory vehicle inspection. We also looked at the ministerial policy statement as well as the issues that were raised by hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga. We looked at the contract for the provision of these services signed between SGS and the Government of Uganda. The committee further reviewed the statutory instruments that are in place together with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and the relevant international instruments on road safety and motor vehicle inspection plus the inherent obligations that bind Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the committee also met 15 different groups of witnesses and over 50 individuals from whom the committee enlisted significant information as a basis for its recommendations. 

The following are the key findings:

Statistics and Road Safety Data in Uganda

The committee noted that the absence of a crash data system in Uganda has impeded accident cause analysis. While the Ministry of Works and Transport cited defective vehicles as contributing 10 per cent of the total prevalence of accidents in its justification for the reintroduction of mandatory inspection, reports from police, using subjective methods and narratives from its staff, say that they account for only 2.1 per cent of the total traffic accidents in Uganda. 

Therefore, the committee was compelled to review a number of reports from police. We also interacted with the Assistant Inspector General of Police (AIGP) Dr Steven Kasiima, the Director of Traffic, who appeared with the Commissioner of Police in charge of the Inspectorate of Vehicles (IOV), Engineer Franklin Kugonza, on 4 August 2017. 

In this meeting, AIGP Kasiima cast doubt on these statistics and noted that in developing countries, mechanical conditions of vehicles contribute to about 20 to 25 per cent of the total accidents. He confirmed this by recommending a crash data system like is the practice in Ghana and Botswana.

The Commissioner of Police also clarified that the mandate of IOV was limited to vehicles under contention; for example, the ones that have had accidents and those that lack vital data like a chassis number at registration. The Commissioner of Police informed the committee that under the umbrella of protecting life and property, the IOV carried out operations to net vehicles that were in dangerous mechanical condition and indeed on average, they would net 18 per cent of the vehicles on every operation.

Madam Speaker, the committee observed the contradictions in the statistics and concluded that the available police reports generated using subjective methods rather than scientific methods were unreliable. The committee further noted that this subjectivity often leads the police to incriminate motorists for offences such as reckless driving in a bid to apportion responsibility for traffic accidents. It is because of this that there have been incidents of motorists attempting to flee traffic accident scenes to avert arrest. A crash data system, therefore, would scientifically establish the actual cause of traffic accidents and hence, the exoneration of such motorists.

Procurement of SGS

The committee examined the chronology of the process of procuring a service provider for the mandatory inspection of vehicles; adherence to the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) Act and the regulations thereunder; methods of procurement used; observance of the ethical standards, or the lack of it, during the procurement process; the PPDA report on the administrative review process as a result of the application for administrative review by Environmental System Products Holdings (ESP) – one of the bidders; submissions by PPDA, the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Uganda Motor Industry Association and SGS.

The committee notes that the procurement of SGS as a service provider for the mandatory inspection of vehicles took about eight years, spanning the period of 2007 to 2015, with four contract committees. The process was initially cancelled because of the use of the wrong bidding documents prior to 2009 and was later marred by allegations of breaches of ethics with regard to leaking competitor information and undue interference.

While this cancellation was a collective intervention, the fact that for about a year the Ministry of Works and Transport was conducting a tendering process premised on a wrong procurement method is an indictment on the then head of the contracts committee and all the members. Therefore, the gist of the allegations of ethical breaches on the side of SGS and ESP and some officials from the Ministry of Works and Transport, including hon. Denis Sabiiti and Mr Ronald Amanyire, remain unresolved. These actions require further investigation by the Inspector General of Government (IGG) or the criminal investigations department.

Contract Clearance by the Solicitor-General

The committee met with the Solicitor-General to clarify on the validity of the contract. On 2 March 2015, a draft contract was forwarded to the Solicitor-General for clearance under the reference “Request for approval of a contract for provision of motor vehicle services: MOWT/SVCS/07-08/00111.” This was responded to on 6 March 2015, with the Solicitor-General clearing the contract.

At his appearance before the committee, the Solicitor-General asserted that the contract was perused through and cleared basing on its consistency with the law. 

It is the committee’s considered opinion that by clearing the contract, the Attorney-General conformed to Article 119(5) of the Constitution which provides thus: “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, no agreement, contract, treaty, convention or document by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has an interest, shall be concluded without legal advice from the Attorney-General except in such cases and subject to such conditions as Parliament may by law prescribe.” This makes the contract for the provision of the motor vehicle services valid.

Terms and Conditions of the Contract and Performance Review

The evaluation of the contract that was signed on 15 March 2015 between the Government of Uganda and SGS revealed breaches by both SGS and the Ministry of Works and Transport. Some of them under SGS included the failure to adhere to the contractual commencement date for vehicle inspection, non-adherence to the timelines for payment of concessions fees and the procedures, as well as inadequate national coverage.

Under the Ministry of Works and Transport, some of the breaches included the following:  
Inaction in the case of breaches by SGS yet they were obliged under clause 7.7, which says thus: “The Ministry of Works and Transport shall have a right to unilateral announcement of request to terminate this agreement at any time the provider fails to observe the terms and conditions of this contract or fails with due diligence and any action necessary for the performance of the agreement.” Madam Speaker, this was not done despite the breaches by SGS.

Inept contract supervision. The Ministry of Works and Transport failed to put in place a multi-stakeholder team to supervise SGS. 

Failure to provide an appeals procedure to which vehicle owners and providers, in the event of disputed inspection results or decisions, according to clause 3.3.2 of the conditions of the contract. 

Wrongfully approved the rates of inspection without considering the socio-economic aspects and failed to negotiate for affordable rates for the citizens. In fact, when SGS submitted its proposal, the ministry wholly accepted to take the same rates, which were later gazzeted.

The other breach by the Ministry of Works and Transport was that it failed to provide the key performance indicators from the onset. This is in accordance with clause 3.4.4 of the contract, which would form a basis for the evaluation of the contract with this specific provider. In the absence of the master test centre, there was no way we were going to ensure quality control when dealing with the provider.

The committee was aware of the various ambiguous clauses that were deliberately inserted into the contract that were favouring the provider. 

In light of the aforementioned findings, the committee explored all the possible remedial actions including termination and the cost of termination as per clause 7.8.5 of the conditions of contract, which states that: 

“In the event that the contract is terminated by the Government of Uganda or the Ministry of Works and Transport for any cause, except as provided for in this contract, before the expiry of the five year term or any extension or renewal of such term, the Ministry of Works and Transport shall pay the provider at law or in equity in respect of the termination of this contract, 75 per cent of the value of the total investment by the provider or 100 per cent of the expected income of the provider from the services, whichever is greater as the cost of demobilisation.”

In this particular case, available information shows that the contractor within a spell of barely seven months had purportedly invested Shs 51.2 bi11ion, a figure that may be hard to verify considering the inherent lapses in contract supervision. The end result is that in the event of termination, the already over-burdened taxpayers will have to meet a cost, which may be potentiality inflated.

Madam Speaker, aware that the Ministry of Works and Transport had a right for a unilateral announcement of request to terminate this agreement as per clause 7.7 of the conditions of the contract but did not do so; also aware that both parties were in breach of the conditions of the contract, as I have just elaborated; further noting that clause 7.6 of the conditions of contract clearly states that “The contract can be terminated or amended based on the mutual agreement of the parties.” 

It is the considered view of the committee that this contract cannot or should not be terminated but suspended with critical areas of re-negotiations recommended to the parties. All the decisions that were taken by the majority team of my committee were based on consensus. We did not vote on any issue for the entire investigation.

As I conclude, below are the recommendations. Madam Speaker, aware that you suspended the mandatory aspects, this committee recommends that the entire implementation of the contract be suspended so that we do not have any voluntary inspections going on. The committee therefore recommends as follows:

That the implementation of the contract for mandatory inspection of motor vehicles be immediately suspended for a period of not less than three months, to enable a review and re-negotiation of the contract by the Ministry of Works on transport with emphasis to the following:

    a) Significantly slashing the cost of inspection to make it more affordable and equitable. This will enable motorists present their vehicles for inspection more regularly thereby progressively enabling the improvement of the condition of vehicles and ultimately reducing road carnage;
    b) Constitute a multi stakeholder supervisory team that includes National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), Uganda National Bureau of Statistics (UNBS) and the Uganda Police Force. This will cater for a multi-dimensional nature of vehicle inspection that incorporates aspects of air quality, standards and enforcement;
    c) Institutionalise the role of the Auditor-General in periodically auditing the vehicle inspection exercise. These audits should focus on aspects such as value for money, physical performance and financial performance;
    d) Streamline information sharing in a manner that includes Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) Uganda Police Force (UPF), NEMA and UNBS. This will ensure that the information accruing to the vehicle inspection exercise is effectively shared with other Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) under whose mandate, related policy matters are domiciled. Specifically, the synergy with URA will ease the verification of vehicle logbooks and contribute to the creation of a reliable motor vehicle database, which was one of the objectives of the policy;
    e) Establishment of a master test centre; this is a key quality control strategy that will ensure that the vehicle inspection results are independently verified for accuracy and reliability;
    f) Establishment of a crash data system; this will go a long way in aiding accident cause analysis and the storage of related information, the basis of which road safety reports and policies may be derived;
    g) Streamlining revenue payment procedure in conformity with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015;
    h) Vehicle inspection should be augmented by other interventions notably, public sensitisation on road safety so as to mitigate the behavioral causes of road accidents such as over loading, reckless driving, driving under the influence of toxic substances and non-observance of the traffic rules and regulations.

The committee fully supports motor vehicle inspection as a strategic tool for improving road safety and stemming road carnage. The committee further notes that there were challenges. However, in spite of the challenges identified, the committee encourages regular vehicle inspection to improve the condition of vehicles that will enable us realise the overall objective of improving road safety services in Uganda. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair and your committee members for that report. Can we now invite the -

MS NAKATE: Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table, the following documents:
    • A copy of the contract for the provision of mandatory vehicle inspection services between the SGS and the Government of Uganda;
    • A report of the inquiry into the mandatory inspection of motor vehicle services in Uganda by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure;
    • The minutes of the meetings of the investigation;	

I beg to lay the following documents: a copy of the ministerial policy statement on the 23 November 2016; a ministerial policy statement for 29 June 2017; a publication notice on the deadline of the mandatory inspection of vehicles; Uganda standards and calibration report from Uganda National Bureau of Standards; a Conceptual framework from the Private Motor Vehicle Inspection Programme and attendant documents; a copy/sample certificate issued by SGS; costs of vehicle inspection by SGS; due diligence report on SGS; submission by UNBS to the committee; copy of the letter from Workshop Electronics Limited inviting Mr Ronald Amanyire to South Africa; minutes of the contracts of the Management Team; the June 2016 Progress Report on the Mandatory Inspection of Vehicles; submission by SGS; submission by Uganda Motor Industry Association; submission by NEMA; submission by Ministry of Works and Transport; submission by IGG Contract Management Team minutes of the meetings; the legal opinion of the legal counsel on the conflict of interest; the submission by Uganda Motor Vehicle Association; the submission by the Solicitor-General; submission by SGS; submission by Mr Andrew Karamagi; the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998; the mandatory inspection project submission by SGS; the final report Volume 1: Study for the Reintroduction and Privatisation of Motor Vehicle Inspection Services; administrative Review Report by PPDA; additional information from SGS. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I have already laid the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998. I also beg to lay the various information that was submitted from the Ministry of Works and Transport. Finally, I beg to lay the request for proposals for the providers for the Ministry of Works and Transport. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and your committee. I look forward to the day when we shall go digital so that chairpersons do not have to carry kilogrammes of documents. I thank you so much for the work.

Let me now invite the members with the minority report. Hon. Othieno Okoth –(Applause) Honourable members, you are in breach of our Rules of Procedure. You are anticipating the report. (Laughter)

6.38
MR RICHARD OTHIENO OKOTH (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I present this report, pursuant to Rule 202 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. We have seven areas of dissent from the main report and these include: 

    1. Redundancy of the recommendation of the main report with regard to suspension and renegotiation of the contract with SGS;
    2. Failure of the main report to pass a verdict on the extent to which Government policy of vehicle inspection addresses road carnage especially considering that vehicle conditions, which this inspection seeks to tackle only accounts for two per cent of the cause of road accidents in Uganda compared to behaviour of road users, which contributes up to 80 per cent of road accidents in Uganda;
    3. The complicity of silence on the main report to apportion responsibility for lapses in procurement, breach of procurement, ethics and possible collusion with some bidders;
    4. Fundamental breaches by SGS on contractual obligations;
    5. Influence peddling and corrupt practices by SGS;
    6. Noncompliance with Article 119(4)(b) of the 1995 Constitution; and 
    7. Contravention of the rules of procedure by the Chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the re-committal of this report.

This minority report is actually the true report of the committee unanimously arrived at on 6 September 2017. I will throw more light on that. 

I will briefly talk about our areas of dissent. 

To begin with is the redundancy of the recommendation of the main report on the suspension and renegotiation of the contract with SGS. Whereas the main report recommends suspension of the implementation of the contract for a period of not less than three months to pave way for review and renegotiation, the above recommendation is redundant considering that on 29 June 2017, the House, under your stewardship, Madam Speaker, effectively suspended the mandatory inspection of motor vehicles to allow for a review of the contract and other matters incidental thereto by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure.  

This is exactly what the report is again recommending. The House suspended and referred the matter to the committee to inquire. The committee comes back and says, “We recommend suspension for three months,” and yet the House had already spent over four months inquiring into this matter.

In addition, Section 12.5 of the contract provides that any modifications in terms of the agreement may only be made by written agreement between the parties. This implies that a resolution of Parliament, which is not party to the contract, cannot be one of the grounds on which renegotiation can be premised. This renders recommendation of the main report defectively redundant. In any case, the main report simply seeks three more months of engagement with the Ministry of Works and Transport over this matter and yet the committee has already spent more than four months.

In our considered opinion, we recommend that the contract with SGS requires immediate termination – (Applause) - to pave way for a total overhaul of the defective vehicle inspection environment, which is characterised by the absence of a Master Test Centre, inept monitoring and supervision, exorbitant pricing and the absence of functional synergies with other key sectors.

Much as we are talking about Master Test Centre here, the issue is not even about the centre but standards. SGS does not have standards for inspection of cars. The standards are with the manufacturers and the manufacturers have not provided any standards. Therefore, SGS cannot claim to be inspecting vehicles because they do not have standards from the manufacturers. We shall elucidate on this much more.

In the interest of time, I just would like to comment on some of these issues like the statistics on which the inspection is premised. The main report cites lack of a Crash Data Centre and tries to create an impression that the statistics being provided by the Uganda Police Force are unreliable and therefore, should be disregarded. The issue of a Crash Data Centre is actually meant to help the National Road Safety Council to monitor the issues of road safety in the country. 

The Uganda Police Force has its own database and records. It is actually the Uganda Police Force that visits every accident scene in the country and makes a record. The data from the Uganda Police Force is actually captured by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics which is a body authorised to keep official statistics on any matter in this country.

Therefore, it is not correct to say that there is no Data Crash Centre, which is supposed to be catered for by the National Road Safety Council. Parliament has been appropriating money to National Road Safety Council every year for setting up this Data Crash Centre. However, for unknown reasons, the money is appropriated and the National Road Safety Council has never established the Data Crash Centre. 

Actually, to the contrary, when Dr Stephen Kasiima appeared before the committee, together with his team, they wanted to persuade the committee to believe that the Data Crash Centre actually existed. We insisted that for us to believe them, we must see the centre.  They could not take us to the Data Crash Centre which was not in existence and that is when they conceded that the Data Crash Centre did not exist. Therefore, it is not true that the absence of the Data Crash Centre which is supposed to be maintained by the National Road Safety Council invalidates the data maintained by Uganda Police Force. 

Madam Speaker, the argument here is that - I may not go through this in the interest of time. According to the Uganda Police Force, the major cause of road accidents in Uganda is the behaviour of motorists and not the mechanical conditions of the vehicles. The mechanical conditions of the vehicles only contributes 2 per cent of the total accidents in the country. Therefore, any prudent policy should address the major cause of road accidents and not what some people say that if you address the 2 per cent - it is because there is a profit motive in it and that there is money that can be generated by subjecting everything movable on roads to inspection.

The inspection by SGS is basically premised on brakes, wheel alignment, headlamps, suspensions, and so on. Now, all these point to the mechanic elements of the vehicle other than the human and behavioural related aspects of the usage of the roads. 

Therefore, it is the considered opinion of the members that we recommend that re-evaluation of Government’s interventions in road safety with a view of claiming mandatory vehicle inspection from the private monopoly in the hands of SGS should be looked at so that we strengthen the Uganda Police Force and the Inspectorate of Vehicles which has a nationwide reach. (Applause) This should be done to ensure that all Ugandans in various parts of the country can easily access vehicles inspection services and doing so, we shall be helping the Uganda Police Force to professionalise. 

This is done for the UPDF - which is given several assignments to handle and we do not see why the Uganda Police Force should not also be entrusted with the inspection of motor vehicles. This is one of the ways you can diversify the services of the Uganda Police Force. 

On the role of vehicle inspection in improving air quality, one of the objectives of the mandatory inspections of motor vehicles is improvement of air quality through monitoring vehicles exhaust emissions. While the main report delved into the explanation of benefits of measuring air quality, its convenience and so on, it falls short of clearly evaluating whether in its current state, the checking of exhaust emission by SGS has any linkage with the environmental policy interventions by NEMA and the Ministry of Water and Environment. During meetings with NEMA, the committee was informed that NEMA was not involved in the conceptualisation of the air quality related aspect of motor vehicle inspection by SGS. Even after commencement of the inspection, NEMA was not involved in setting up parameters against which exhaust emissions would be measured. The involvement of NEMA was limited to issuance of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) certificates for Kawanda and Namanve and not all inspection sitess. The absence of linkage with NEMA implies that the data generated by SGS does not inform environmental policy interventions. 

During a field verification visit to the vehicle inspection sites on the 31st of July 2017, it emerged that the data on exhaust emission is kept by SGS and NEMA is not one of those with whom the information is shared. This implies that the realisation of this policy objective of improving air quality remains a dream with the privatisation of the vehicle inspections, more so, if it is left in the hands of SGS.

On the creation of comprehensive motor vehicle data and the inability of SGS to do so, the realisation of this policy is farfetched in as far as SGS does not have any functional information sharing platforms with the Uganda Revenue Authority whose purview lies in the registration and licensing of the motor vehicles as envisaged in part 2 of the Traffic and Road Safety Act of 1998.

The SGS is, instead, requiring motorists to present copies of their logbooks during vehicle inspections. Motorists without logbooks are turned away from having their vehicles inspected. The committee notes that even for the logbooks presented, SGS does not have the mechanism of ascertaining the authenticity. 

In the absence of an information interface with URA, especially on motor vehicle and motor cycle registration, SGS is unable to keep abreast with the trends in terms of numbers and specifications of imported motor vehicles and motor cycles, thereby, impeding their ability to forecast demand for inspections and equipment compatibility in time. 

Besides, the compilation of such motor vehicle data by a private entity is detrimental to national information security especially considering that the profit motive is the major driving force for the private capital.

On the potentially prohibitive cost of vehicles inspection that the chairperson has alluded to, our recommendation is that the current cost of inspection, regardless of who is conducting the vehicle inspection, should be slashed by at least 75 per cent and capped to avoid arbitrary increases. At the moment, SGS has got a leeway because the contract allows them to increase the cost of vehicle inspections the moment there is an increase in the price index. 

As you know and given our economy, the Consumer Price Index is always rising. Therefore, that gives SGS a leeway to always adjust their prices upwards. It could even be monthly. It does not say the adjustment can be on a given basis; it can be daily or monthly. This month, you can pay Shs 60,000 and when you go back next month, they can say it is Shs 100,000 because the Consumer Price Index has increased.

We are saying that any future price changes should be pegged to tabling of a requisite statutory instrument before Parliament at least three months before any such price adjustments are made.

I will go to influence paddling by SGS, lack of transparency and unfairness in the procurement process. The procurement process for the award of contracts for provision of mandatory motor vehicle inspection services in Uganda was stage managed right from the beginning to the end to favour SGS, which was the preferred choice even before the process could begin.

The 15th meeting of the Top Management Team (TMT) of the Ministry of Works and Transport sitting on 10 November, 2008 at 10.30 a.m. in the ministry’s Kampala Boardroom discussed the re-introduction and privatisation of the motor vehicle inspection services project. 

Despite the fact that SGS was mainly involved in setting up motor vehicle testing plants in Ivory Coast – they were not involved in testing but just setting up the plant. 

The said TMT meeting noted that SGS seemed to be the most credible company for the mandatory motor vehicle testing services in Uganda and resolved that bid documents be carefully prepared with strict evaluation criteria so as to eliminate all the would be competitors of SGS. 

In that regard, Eng. Denis Sabiiti was then directed to revise the bid documents to that effect, which instruction he effectively executed. It is, however, noteworthy that although Eng. Denis Sabiiti - of course there are a lot of ethical issues that arose because of the way he executed this directive - was cleared by the High Court, this clearance was in as far as his right to a fair hearing was concerned, but not on allegations of unethical practices by him during the procurement process. 

When the High Court ruled that Eng. Denis Sabiiti was not given a fair hearing; what these people were supposed to do was to summon Eng. Denis Sabiiti and retable the issues to him. However, for some unknown reason, they chose to appeal. They went to Court of Appeal yet it was very obvious that they had not given him a right to a fair hearing.

Therefore, they did not have any ground to appeal. The option which was available to them was to resummon Eng. Sabiiti, table the same allegations against him and say, “Look, these are the allegations, what is your defense?” They chose to go to court to make an appeal. Of course the court ruled that Eng. Sabiiti was not given a fair hearing but court did not hear the merits of the allegations against him.

The court did not address itself to the merits of the accusations against him then which inter-alia included collusion with one Mr Ferdinand Bitanihirwe, who was Eng. Sabiiti's classmate at St. Mary’s College Kisubi and also at Makerere University. Mr Ferdinand Bitanihirwe was also a former Country Manager of SGS, who sent him an email advising him on how to lock out competitors of SGS by requiring bidders for the provision of mandatory motor vehicle services to have at least worked in three continents and must have capital investments worth at least 12 million Euros which is equivalent to Shs 38.8 billion.

However, the denial of any wrong doing by Eng. Denis Sabiiti notwithstanding, there was a similar requirement for bidders' annual sales revenue, which was, put at a minimum of $12 million. 

Given that this was the focus of the email communication from the then SGS Country Manager, which was eventually followed, it leaves no imagination on the weight of influence SGS had on the procurement process to the detriment of competitors. This unfair undertaking amounts to prohibited unethical conduct and interference in the bidding process by SGS thereby giving the firm undue advantage over other bidders.

Furthermore, the Minister of State for Works and Transport in charge of Transport in a confidential dossier to the committee, gave a chronology of how Eng. Denis Sabiiti, then Commissioner for Transport Regulation had maintained underhand operations, which not only favoured SGS during the procurement process but delivered the mandatory motor vehicle inspection service contract to the firm as evidenced by the following turn of events - (Interjections) - the current minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, proceed with your report.

MR OTHIENO OKOTH: Madam Speaker, this is how things unfolded; in December 2014, Eng. Denis Sabiiti who was then Commissioner for Transport Regulation and Chairperson of Contracts Committee, approved a team to do due diligence on SGS without terms of reference. 

On 10 February 2015, Eng. Sabiiti as Chairperson of the Contracts Committee approved the due diligence, done without terms of reference.

On the 2nd of March 2015, Eng. Sabiiti perused the contract before forwarding to the Solicitor-General for clearance in total disregard of the need for negotiations as recommended by the evaluation team and approved by the contracts committee. The Ministry of Works and Transport did not have any input in this contract which was eventually signed between SGS and Government.

The Ministry of Works and Transport was not given an opportunity to make the required - what they considered then; they did not have that chance for their input or position. 

On the 17th March 2015, Eng. Sabiiti witnessed the signing of the contract between the Ministry of Works and Transport and SGS. He was one of the signatories and the other one being the Permanent Secretary. 

In May 2015, Eng. Sabiiti resigned. He witnessed the contract on the 17 March 2015 and in May 2015, he resigned as Commissioner in the Ministry of Works and Transport. 

On 17 July 2015, Eng. Sabiiti joined SGS as a Consultant earning – (Laughter) - $3,000 per month where he was retained as the only personnel. In May 2016, of course Eng. Sabiiti resigned from SGS in order to be sworn in as a Member of the Tenth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, given that the output from the contract Eng. Sabiiti had with SGS was so minimal – basically, there was no output or work to be performed in this contract. It was a matter of somebody, at the end of the 30 days, you go for your cheque of $3000 but there was no work. We have the contract here which I am going to lay at the Table.

Given the output from the contract Eng. Sabiiti had with SGS was so minimal compared to the consideration of $3,000 a month and given the fact that the Confidentiality clause of the Contract barred Eng. Denis Sabiiti from disclosing among others the very existence of the consultancy contract, he was not supposed to tell anybody that the contract existed neither was SGS supposed to tell anybody that the contract exited.

This lends credence to the secret behind the lucrative offer as a reward for delivering the mandatory motor vehicle inspection contract to SGS in pursuit of the instruction he had received from the TMT meeting of 10 November 2008, though with unfavourable terms to the Government and people of Uganda.

Contrary to Section 93 (1) and the Fifth Schedule of the PPDA Act which bars employees from any business arrangement that might prevent the effective operation of fair competition or accept a business gift from current or potential Government suppliers or any business hospitality that may be viewed as influence peddling, SGS compromised a number of officers of the Ministry of Works and Transport with juicy offers; we have already talked about the one of Eng. Sabiiti.
 
For suspect reasons, a benevolent treatment was accorded to one Mr Ronald Amanyire who was by then working under Eng. Sabiiti who was granted an all-expenses paid trip to South Africa by Workshop Electronics, a South African based SGS supplier of mobile testing stations, from the 7th to 10th November 2016. 

The purpose of the lucrative offer was to enable Mr Amanyire inspect Workshop Electronics' mobile test stations so as to assist them with any changes which could be necessary for the Ministry of Works and Transport. Whether solicited or not, the conduct of Mr Amanyire, should be investigated further for among others; retaining clandestine operations for SGS to date. Mr Amanyire has offices in all the SGS testing centres.

However, this is information you can only be given in camera because the workers in these stations fear that should you mention anything about Mr Amanyire, then you risk losing your job.  Violating the requirement of observance of the highest ethical standards during the procurement and execution of the contract and, noncompliance with Public Service Regulations, Mr Amanyire went to South Africa without any clearance from his employers; he neither asked for leave nor informed his Permanent Secretary.

It is important to note that following Mr Amanyire’s all-expenses paid trip to South Africa as per the terms afore stated, another team comprising Immaculate Nyamaizi and Anthony Muwonge, both Inspector of Vehicles led by Eng. Fredrick Lukoma Basalirwa who was acting Commissioner for Mechanical Services/Chief Mechanical Engineer visited Workshop Electronics for pre-shipment verification and inspection of the mobile motor vehicle inspection equipment. 

The team submitted its report to the Chief Mechanical Engineer on the 3rd of January 2017. The Chief Mechanical Engineer to whom the report was submitted is the one who led the team for the inspection. As expected, the Lukoma team gave a positive report on the mobile motor vehicle inspection equipment that SGS had procured from Workshop Electronics.

The all-expenses paid trip to South Africa for Mr Amanyire as well as the generous contract for Eng. Denis Sabiiti should be treated as gratification for their role in helping SGS secure the mandatory motor vehicle inspection contract in Uganda. 

Section 7.5.3 of the contract provides that the contract is automatically terminated if the provider gives offers, promises of any loan, fee, reward, or advantage of any kind to any employee of the supervising entity, provided that there is reliable and invincible information about such offers or promises. I wish to lay on the Table the contract which Eng. Sabiiti signed with SGS. 

THE SPEAKER: The date and the parties.

MR OTHIENO OKOTH: It is a consultancy agreement between SGS and BDST Investment Ltd of which Eng. Sabiiti was retained as the only consultant.

Recommendations

    i) SGS should be found culpable of peddling corrupt practices by offering inducements, promises and rewards to employees of the Ministry of Works and Transport, to influence the actions of public officials during the procurement process and execution of the contract, the consequence of which warrants automatic termination of the contract as per section 7.5.3 of the contract.

    ii)  The Government should apply Section 1.2.2 of the contract for the provision of mandatory motor vehicle inspection services which states that in pursuit of Clause 1.2, the procuring and disposing entity may terminate a contract for services if at any time it determines that corrupt or fraudulent practices were engaged in by the representatives of the procuring and disposing entity or of a provider, during the procurement or the execution of the contract. It is very clear that SGS was engaged in this.

    iii) The committee recommends further investigations by relevant Government agencies into the roles of Mr Ronald Amanyire and hon. Denis Sabiiti on unethical practices during the procurement, contracting and implementation of the contract with SGS.

Non-compliance with Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda

Whereas the Government of Uganda represented by the Ministry of Works and Transport purportedly entered into a contract with SGS on the 17th of March 2015, for the provision of mandatory motor vehicle inspection services in Uganda, Section 12.1 relating to the conditions of the contract provides that the Agreement is governed by the laws of the Republic of Uganda.

However Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda compels the Attorney-General to draw and peruse agreements, contracts, treaties, conventions and documents by whatever name called, to which the Government is a party or in respect of which the Government has interest. 

All other subsequent functions of the Attorney-General are subjected to this provision of the Constitution. The Office of the Attorney-General, which is made up of all the officers who work under his direction, inclusive of the Solicitor-General, did not draw the agreement in question as required by the Constitution.

As stated earlier, a confidential brief signed by the Minister of State for Transport submitted – (Interjections) - I have not hidden anything but I am referring to the current Minister of State for Transport.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle the Member. Just listen.

MR OTHIENO OKOTH: The confidential brief submitted to the committee concedes that Eng. Sabiti, then Assistant Commissioner Safety and Inspection, Ministry of Works and Transport, originated and forwarded the contract to the Office of the Attorney-General for clearance without even the input from the Ministry of Works and Transport, thereby denying the ministry the opportunity to negotiate fairer terms with the provider. 

Upon admission of non-compliance with Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution by the Solicitor-General, who appeared before the committee, it is therefore not in dispute that the Office of the Attorney-General did not draw the contract for the provision of mandatory motor vehicle inspection services. 

By abdicating its constitutional mandate, the Attorney-General committed a serious mistake and breach of the law. The Constitution provides mandatory sanctions to several officers and institutions. For instance, the Constitution mandates only this House to make laws; no one else can purport to make laws other than this House. 

The Auditor-General is also mandated by the Constitution to audit all public expenditures. That is why in this Parliament, we only debate reports of the Auditor-General. Otherwise, how he does the work is not our business. What we want is a duly signed report by the Auditor-General. 

The Director Public Prosecution (DPP) is mandated to prosecute all criminal offenses in this country and no one else can prosecute criminal offenses other than him. That is why the other time this House was aggrieved even when the DPP withdrew charges against Mr Aaron Baguma, a police officer. That is a mandate given to him by the Constitution.

What we are saying is that the Constitution compels the Attorney-General to draw contracts. I am saying this in legal terms. We are saying the Attorney-General is supposed to draw and peruse. In this case, they only said they cleared; clearing a contract is not drawing. Therefore, the Attorney-General office abdicated its responsibility to someone else. 

We already said that the Attorney-General and the Minister of Works and Transport did not draw the contract. So, who drew the contract? The fact that the Attorney-General did not perform his or her constitutional mandate – therefore, this contract was entered into by mistake. The person mandated by the supreme law of this country did not draw the contract. 

Section 18 of the Contracts Act, 2010 provides that where a contract is entered into by a mistake in respect of any law in force in Uganda, that contract is void. 

Section 7.8 of the contract provides that grounds for rescission of a contract under conditions specified in items 7.4 - the main report refers to this and dwells more on clause 7.4 of the conditions of the contract. 

Clause 7.4 is to the effect that the term shall be renewed at least once by the Ministry of Works and Transport on satisfactory performance in accordance with the agreed key performance indicators and 7.6 says the contract can be terminated or amended based on the mutual agreement of the parties which the chairperson was referring to.

Section 7.8 says that these other sections shall not deprive the parties of the right to request termination of contract based on other conditions specified by the legislation of the Republic of Uganda.

Further, Section 12.6, of the conditions of the contract in part provides that the rights and remedies provided by this Agreement are cumulative and not exclusive of any rights or remedies provided by law. 

Furthermore, Section 7.8.5 of the contract indemnifies Ministry of Works and Transport against paying the provider at law or in equity in respect of termination of the contract if it is within the provisions of the contract. 

As it is, non-compliance with Article 119(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, is a grave mistake in respect of the supreme law of the land that renders the contract void.

It is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Works and Transport should rescind the voidable contract and revert to Section 53(2) of the Contracts Act, which provides thus, “A party who rescinds a voidable contract shall, if that party received any benefit from the other party to the contract, restore the benefit to the person from which it is received.”

As it is, the Government of the Republic of Uganda has so far received from SGS only Shs 123,476,845, as concession fee which it shall be liable to refund to SGS as a consequence of rescission of the voidable contract. It is not true that this country will pay a colossal sum of money. What we are mandated to pay if we rescind this contract is Shs – (Interjections) - and this is provided for in the law. 

This Contract act was made by this Parliament. It is only Shs 123,476,845. I do not think the Government of Uganda can fail to pay or Shs 123,476,845 can be termed as a colossal sum of money that the Government will be burdened to pay back to SGS.

This House alone raised Shs 250 million, for the She Cranes. How can the whole Government of Uganda fail to raise just Shs 123,476,845 as a refund to SGS? How can we call that a colossal sum of money? We considered this as blackmail - (Applause) - which Government should not accept. 

I would like to draw the attention of Members to clause 3.4.4 of the contract, which creates a monopoly for SGS. Clause 3.4.4 of the contract requires the Ministry of Works and Transport as the supervising entity to provide adequate and proper protection of the exclusive rights of SGS for the concession period and enlist the assistance of the traffic Police and URA to enforce mandatory motor vehicle inspection regulations to support commercially viable test station operations by enforcing the mandatory presentation of motor vehicles for inspection.

The issue here is that as a country, we must make sure that we take vehicles for inspection so that SGS makes commercial profits. Otherwise, should we fail to provide enough vehicles there, they will say that. “You have failed on your part, you are not providing us with vehicles and therefore, we are making losses.” Meanwhile, the police is going to be very harsh on the roads, motorists are going to be subjected to very severe treatment because they are under strict instructions to ensure that as many vehicles as possible go to the test centres so that SGS makes profits.

Madam Speaker, this monopoly clause contravenes Article 40(2) of the Constitution, which provides that “Every person in Uganda has a right to practice his or her profession and to carry on any lawful occupation, trade or business.” We have 12 representatives of vehicle manufacturers in this country. As we speak, before the suspension came into effect, SGS was already directing – and this is where it becomes a problem. SGS had the audacity to write to these suppliers of brand new cars to stop offering after sales contractual obligations. 

In Parliament, we buy brand new cars from Toyota and so on. Toyota has an obligation of providing after sales services such as maintenance and inspection for a minimum of one year. Under this agreement, all suppliers of vehicles are not allowed to provide after sales contractual obligations. This is not far-fetched because during the last Easter break, SGS had a campaign of promoting road safety in the country and they were checking for their clients free of charge.

SGS wrote to Toyota and others, stopping them from providing these services to their clients. This order was not issued by Government of Uganda but by a lady called Susan Naava. She had the audacity to write to Toyota and all other suppliers of motor vehicles instructing them to stop inspecting and providing after sales services to their contractors.

Secondly, as we stated earlier, SGS does not have standards. As we speak, SGS cannot test vehicles that were manufactured after 2015 as they do not have the capacity to do so. In addition, they cannot inspect vehicles that were manufactured before 1975. Of course, we would not mind about that because we do not have such vehicles. However, if Parliament was to purchase a 2018 model vehicle, SGS cannot test it.

There was a case where one of the clients of SGS took a vehicle for inspection and it failed the test with the reason that the lights were malfunctioning. This was a brand new Toyota car and it so happens that the latest car models have new technology called telescopic lights, which are self-adjusting. Since SGS did not have the technology to test such vehicles, they said the vehicle had failed the test. This shows the risks that we are putting our motorists to.

Therefore, we are saying that SGS does not have the competence and we are creating a monopoly, which violates our Constitution by refusing people to practice their trade. If you allow SGS to continue with this monopoly, it means that the 12 suppliers of brand new cars will be rendered out of business. These suppliers are here and even appeared before the committee.

Since SGS does not supply vehicles, it would mean that when Parliament buys a brand new Toyota car, it cannot be maintained by Toyota because the SGS monopoly does not allow that. I think that this would be very unfair for this country and that is why we say that it is against our Constitution to create a monopoly situation. The vehicle inspection regime should be opened up such that SGS competes with any other entity such as Uganda Police Force and Toyota. Nobody will stop SGS from inspecting vehicles from this country.

As stated earlier, the unfortunate situation is that as we speak, SGS has stopped local vehicle dealership from inspecting vehicles while relying on the contractual monopoly clause, which was given to them by the contract. 

Regarding exorbitant inspection fees, clause 3.1.2 of the contract on the rights and obligations of the parties bestows upon the private contractor, which is SGS, the right to levy inspection fees for each type of inspection executed in amounts established by the supervising entity and specified in the price schedule for the financial proposal. The prices quoted by the bidder shall be adjusted on the date of commencement, if the Consumer Price Index (CPI) on the date of commencement has changed by more than 3.0 points. This implies that the current inspection costs may rise further with increases in the CPI, which are a reflection of the cost of living. As the cost of living rises, so will the cost of vehicle inspection potentially to worsen the conditions of life of the masses.

The report notes the audible public outcries regarding the cost of inspection and its ramifications. As is common business practice, especially among public commuters, this cost will be transferred to the public and with it, people’s disposable incomes will be eroded.

Clause 3.1.3 of the conditions of the contract on the rights and obligations of parties provide that the variations in the cost of inspection will be a product of the ratification of the Ministry of Works and Transport. The report also notes that when the service provider applied for the adjustment of unit prices for the provision of motor vehicle inspection services on 12 April 2016, the Ministry of Works and Transport wholly embraced the unit pricing without any consideration of the effect of this pricing. To date, these are the reigning charges of inspection by SGS.

Breach of timelines for payment of concession fees

The SGS breached by up to eight months clause 4.1 of the conditions of the contract, which provides that the service provider (SGS) shall pay to Ministry of Works and Transport a monthly fee equivalent to 10 per cent of the gross turnover for each month by the 15th day of the following month.

Madam Speaker, the issue of what amounts to 10 per cent of gross turnover is in itself in dispute. What SGS paid was actually not 10 per cent of the gross because this gross was defined in the contract. However, because of collusion with some officials in Ministry of Works and Transport, they deliberately decided to fix a certain rate. 

While clause 4.6 of the contract provides that a daily interest shall be charged based on the 364-day Bank of Uganda Treasury Bill discounting rate, plus 4 per cent on defaulting on the monthly payments, there was no attempt by Ministry of Works and Transport to claim this interest.

Madam Speaker, this Shs 123 million, which we were talking about earlier on, was only paid on the day SGS appeared before the committee. What happened is that we demanded for a receipt. As we were demanding, they kept on dilly dallying, then they rushed and paid. They then brought the receipt to us the following day. If it had not been for this inquiry, to date, SGS would not have paid any concession fees. It was just because of the inquiry that they rushed and paid the concession fee. 

Please note that the Ministry of Works and Transport was not bothered. That shows the extent to which SGS has got hold of the entire ministry in regard to the vehicle inspection regime. The people who are supposed to ensure that SGS complies with its contractual obligations are the very people who have already been compromised by SGS.

On breach of commencement date of inspection, clause 7.1 of the conditions of the contract stipulates that the provider shall commence the provision of the motor vehicle inspection services not later than 18 months from the date of contract signature. Considering that the contract was signed on l7 March 2015, mandatory vehicle inspection should have commenced by l7 September 2016, the logical preconditions for inspection being the readiness of the agreed upon seven fixed inspection sites namely: Kawanda, Namanve, Nabbingo, Namulanda, Mbale, Gulu and Mbarara, along with three mobile testing equipment.

However, the committee ascertained that inspection began after 20 months; on 28 November 2016 moreover at only one site and that is Kawanda. In spite of this breach, there was no evidence that the supervising entity, that is Ministry of Works and Transport, initiated any attempts at reprimanding SGS for this breach. It was not until Thursday, 1 December 2016 that a one Benon M. Kajuna wrote retrospectively, on behalf of the permanent secretary, extending the commencement date of motor vehicle inspections from 17 September 2016 to 28 November 2016. 

It is noteworthy that SGS had commenced inspection two days earlier on 28 November 2017. This letter can therefore be construed, at best, as a late attempt to insulate SGS from a severe breach of contract relating to commencement of inspection. The same letter asked SGS to collect its performance security and yet barely 10 per cent of the required structures for inspection were ready, thereby predisposing the taxpayer to loss. 

Madam Speaker, the only security Ugandans had was the performance security, which Ministry of Works and Transport returned even before the commencement. Therefore, there is nothing to insulate us. Even if SGS were to violate its contract, there is no remedy that can be reverted to.

At this point, the Ministry of Works and Transport should have evoked clause 7.7 of the contract, which grants the Ministry of Works and Transport unilateral powers to terminate the contract due to breaches of one of the conditions of the contract. This was not done and it points to complicity in breaching the contract.

Based on the foregoing cases of breaches, we find no merit in SGS continuing with the contract. Ministry of Works and Transport should initiate immediate termination of the contract with SGS for mandatory vehicle inspection. In the meantime, Government should do a functional and manpower audit of the Uganda Police Force with a view of returning the role of vehicle inspection to the Uganda Police Inspectorate of vehicles.

The competitive advantage that Uganda Police Force has over SGS is the nationwide reach, presence of staff, contribution to institutional growth and sustainability since Uganda Police Force is a state apparatus and not a private business.

Madam Speaker, on the dismal number of vehicles inspected, as at 23 August 2017, nine months after commencement of inspection, SGS only had three operational inspection sites and had tested only 31,327 vehicles of the estimated one million vehicles in the country. Of the tests so far carried out, 24,618, which was 79 per cent of vehicles passed while 6,709, which was 21 per cent failed. The dismal number of vehicles inspected is partially due to the limited reach of SGS and the exorbitant cost of inspection.

Location of premises

On the location of premises, the committee noted that some stations such as Namanve and Namulanda are too close to the busy highways along which they are located and this poses a safety threat especially when queues of vehicles spill over into the road as was the case during the looming deadline of 30 June 20l7 that was extinguished by Parliament.

The SGS involvement in possible tax evasion through fraudulent land transactions

The SGS incorporated a number of companies for purposes of holding land and business operations but under the management of a one, Christophe Dubois. A number of plots of land were acquired and invested in these companies. However, SGS evaded paying stamp duties on the transfer of land title deeds into this company’s ownership as exemplified by the cases in Kawanda and Nabbingo.

Madam Speaker, section 54 of the Registration of Titles Act (RTA) is to the effect that only registered instruments are effectual to pass any interest in any land, among others. Once an instrument is registered upon payment of a fee and/or taxes, it is given a unique number known as Instrument Number. However, this was not the case with SGS land transactions. 

Kawanda Station sits on two plots of land namely plot 580 on Block 107 Kyadondo measuring 0.037 hectares and Plot 577 on Block 107 Kyadondo measuring 1.581 hectares. However, the ownership of both title deeds were transferred to UGMVIS on 31 March 2016 at the same time of 10:11 a.m. using the same Instrument Number WAK00079414. 

It is important to note that each Instrument Number legalises and validates a particular transaction. Practically, two transactions cannot be conducted in one second nor can one Instrument Number validate two transactions. Since in the case of the Kawanda land, the instruments were to validate transfer of ownership, which attracts a Stamp Duty calculated at 0.01 per cent of the value of the land and payable to the Government, by using the same instrument to effect two transactions, SGS succeeded in evading payment of Stamp Duty to the Government on one of the transactions for which they should be held culpable.

Likewise, Madam Speaker, Nabbingo Station stands on two plots of land namely Plot 705 on Block 331 Busiro measuring 0.404 hectares and Plot 706 on Block 331 Busiro measuring O.406 hectares. Similarly, the transfers of ownership on both plots of land to UGMVIS Property Holdings Ltd were effected on 3l March 2016 at the same time of 11.32 a.m. using the same Instrument Number WAK00079434. Again, you find that two transactions were effected within one second, that is, at 11.32 a.m., which is practically impossible, except under fraudulent circumstances with an ulterior motive aforethought. Again, here Stamp Duty was evaded.

Both cases of Kawanda and Nabbingo land transactions are covered with fraud that culminated into tax evasion and loss of revenue to the Government. Tax evasion is a serious offense over which SGS should be sanctioned, officials investigated further and whoever is found culpable be punished accordingly.

The other land transactions involving SGS are equally suspect. For instance, it is not clear why the same plot of land on which Namanve Station sits has two different title deeds, which are held concurrently by SGS' two different subsidiary companies namely UGMVIS Property Holdings Company Limited and SGS Automotive Uganda Limited. 

Plot 1299 on Block 242 Kyadondo, measuring 4.4410 hectares with a 99-year lease effective 1 July 2016 under Instrument WAK00093205 is under the ownership of UGMVIS Property Holdings Co. Ltd of P.O Box 63 Kampala after transferring ownership from MMAKS Nominees Limited of P.O Box 7166 Kampala on 10 April 2017 at 11.18 a.m. using Instrument Number WAK00122294.

However, the same Plot 1299 on Block 242 Kyadondo, measuring 4.4410 hectares with a 99-year lease effective l July 2016 is also under the ownership of SGS Automotive Uganda Limited P.O Box 63 Kampala but this ownership changed from SUMARIA Properties Uganda Limited of P.O Box 7166 Kampala on 20 February 2017 at 12.48 p.m. using Instrument Number WAK00116057.

Strangely, both holding companies have the same address and so do the ones leasing. All these point to one conclusion; that SGS is a fraudulent organisation that should not be entrusted with a monopoly of providing a sensitive service like mandatory motor vehicle inspection and managing the national motor vehicle databank. Such functions are so sensitive that leaving them in the hands of an organisation like SGS with a questionable reputation exposes the country to serious security risk.

Recommendations 

    1. SGS should be investigated further on breaches of tax evasion and involvement in fraudulent activities over which serious sanctions should be preferred. 
    2. The contract on mandatory motor vehicle inspection services should be rescinded on criminal and ethical grounds committed by the group. 

Madam Speaker, we have documents that we are going to lay on the Table. Finally, our point of dissent from the main report is on the contravention of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament by the chairperson of the committee. All these findings were unanimously agreed to by the committee on 6 September 2017 and I have the minutes here.

At a meeting of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure in Room 222, East Committee Room, the committee, after evaluating all the evidence and submissions by the witnesses, unanimously recommended termination of the contract of SGS for mandatory inspection. However, on 11 October 2017, the chairperson convened a meeting – allow me to use this word – and suspiciously moved a motion for recommittal of the report and specifically, the recommendation on termination in favour of a review and renegotiation. 

Madam Speaker, we have already pronounced ourselves on how redundant this would be because Parliament had already suspended and referred the matter to the committee to inquire and advise. Now, here is a committee coming back to the House and saying, “You suspended and referred the matter to us and our recommendation is to suspend and investigate.”

Madam Speaker, we find this very redundant and given that for this kind of inquiry, a lot of time is utilised and resources are used, it would be in vain for a committee of Parliament to come back and say, “Look, we were unable to do the work you gave us. Please, can you suspend and give other people to inquire also?” We found this a little bit out of place.

Madam Speaker, while rule 193(1) of the Rules of Procedure stipulates that the quorum of a committee shall be one third of its members, at the time of the re-committal of the report, there were only eight members present. Even the chairperson of the committee has acknowledged that there were only eight members and I would like to lay on the Table the minutes signed by the chairperson of the committee to the effect that there were only eight members, which was far below the required quorum.

Given that the committee comprises 35 members, quorum would be at least 11 members. When the issue of quorum was raised by the committee clerk, the chairperson insisted that the members' attendance register book had been signed by 11 members. The minutes, which were duly signed by the chairperson, indicates the members who were present and it says that this decision was reached in the presence of eight members namely hon. Soyekwo, hon. Waluswaka, hon. Okwir, hon. Otieno, hon. Asaba, hon. Nakate, hon. Kasolo and hon. Kumama, signed by the chairperson. This is an official report of the committee.

Madam Speaker, considering that quorum is ascertained by physically present members and not theoretical attendance signatures, the members who made this minority report find that the chairperson erred in her attempt to have the report amended.
I must state, at this point, that whereas the motion to recommit the report was raised by the chairperson and the issue of quorum was also raised, the committee never sat again. Even the editing of the report was not done by the committee. This committee never sat and there is no minute that shows that the committee sat, re-considered and changed its opinion from the original recommendation, which was arrived at on 26 September 2017, to now saying that we are unable to make any findings so we recommend to the House that it suspends the contract and reviews it.

Given the fact that there were technical flaws with regard to the way the main report was processed, we find that those errors rendered the main report procedurally untenable. I would like to ask the House to ignore the main report and consider the minority report, which has been duly signed by 10 members of the committee. It is our conviction that if the House adopts this minority report, it will go a long way in salvaging the motor vehicle inspection regime in this country. 

In conclusion, the committee notes that motor vehicle inspection, as a government intervention to improve road safety, is a public good whose delivery should not be blighted by profiteering, especially by the private sector.

A 2015 media report cited the prevalence rate of about 50-60 patients per day at the Mulago National Referral Hospital casualty ward, 80 per cent of whom are boda boda related accident victims juxtaposed against the earlier stated annual estimated 18,000 cases of traffic accidents in Uganda as per the 2015 Uganda Police Force (UPF) road crash report. 

It goes without saying that the cost of traffic accidents is immense and therefore, the pursuit of road safety through interventions such as motor vehicle testing is effectively a public good. Implementation of road safety needs interventions that garner high levels of compliance and not costly punitive profit-driven interventions that the existing vehicle inspection by SGS has become. This partially explains why vehicle inspection by Inspector of Vehicles (IOV), prior to 1998, was free of charge with Shs 12,000 being charged if an individual was initiating the inspection.

The committee notes that in the current arrangement of a private monopoly, which is being controlled by Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS), motor vehicle inspection is considered a commercial venture with exorbitant costs.
	
This report therefore recommends the immediate disbandment of the current vehicle inspection arrangement under SGS through termination of the contract and a systematic re-establishment of motor vehicle inspection under Uganda Police Force with the requisite institutional safeguards, fair and equitable pricing, effective intra-governmental synergies and a robust public sensitisation on road safety. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge the House to adopt this minority report to help this country in moving ahead. This House is a people’s representative house and we represent the concerns of Ugandans. On many occasions, even services that can be undertaken by Ugandans are being given to foreigners. 

It is therefore our considered opinion that if this House adopts this minority report, Uganda Police Force, which is mandated to carry out vehicle inspection in this country, will go a long way in building the institutional capacity of Uganda Police Force just like we have done with the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces. We have built the capacity of the UPDF and they are carrying out a lot of activities, including Operation Wealth Creation. We do not see anything wrong with empowering Uganda Police Force, which already has the personnel and more can be trained to carry out mandatory motor vehicle inspection in this country. I beg to move. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the minority report on the inquiry into mandatory motor vehicle inspections in Uganda by the parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure.

I also beg to lay on the Table the invitation letter for a visa application to Mr Ronald Amanyire from Workshop Electronics Limited of South Africa for a visit to South Africa from 7 November to 10 November 2016. I beg to lay.

I have already laid on the Table the SGS contract with hon. Eng. Sabiiti.  

I lay on the Table, minutes of the meeting of the parliamentary Committee on Physical Infrastructure held on Wednesday, 11 October 2017 in Committee Room 013, Parliament House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Otieno and your team of the minority report for that elaborate presentation. Honourable members, a few weeks back, hon. Denis Sabiiti was hovering around my office with what he called his statement saying that he had issues with the report and wanted to be put on the Order Paper.

I declined to put him on the Order Paper and told him that I am waiting for the officially delegated committee to report before he can say anything about that issue. He is here, I do not know whether he should speak now or tomorrow - [Members: “Tomorrow.”] He speaks tomorrow? Okay, he will be given an opportunity to speak tomorrow. However, hon. Nakate wanted to say something.

8.07
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Otieno and his colleagues who authored the minority report. Briefly, I would like to observe that indeed, some good work was done by both committees because you will find that the minority report was actually throwing more light on the majority report. However, I have a few issues to clarify on, to correct the record before we can go into debate. This is because people can be misguided. 

Madam Speaker, I just laid on the Table the minutes of the several meetings that we had. We have recordings for some of the witnesses and the clerk prepared the minutes and I signed them myself. I even have a photocopy of some of the minutes that the honourable member was referring to and indeed, they do not rhyme with what he was talking about. I am trying to talk about the issue where they are saying that there was contravention of the Rules of Procedure by the chairperson.

Honourable members, throughout the investigation, we did not, at any time, have any issues for voting. (Interjections) No, I am clearing my name and throwing more light for debate –(Interjections)– Yes, honourable members. It is not anywhere in the Rules of Procedure, which I have read cover to cover, that we have a chairperson moving a motion. It is not true and I would like to inform the House that the information that has been provided about contravention of the rules is not true. The committee did not have any voting taking place and at the time we were trying to consider this, the draft report was still in progress. I just wanted to make this clear and I have laid on the Table the minutes signed by myself and the clerk and it is not right. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot settle the issues of the committee on this Floor. I think we may want to ask our Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to examine that situation but not on the Floor of this House.

Honourable members, the report has been quite lengthy, involving and comprehensive. They have raised many points of law, which I would also want to refresh myself with and I know that the minister would want to read both reports. I also know that you have listened for a long time and you may want to organise yourselves for the debate. Therefore, I would like to adjourn this debate to tomorrow at 2 p.m. The House is adjourned to 2 p.m. tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 8.09 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 14 February 2018 at 2.00 p.m.)

