Wednesday, 25 February 2015

Parliament met at 2.43 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to appeal to you to use your staying power today so that we can do some of the work that is outstanding. 

I would also like to welcome hon. Badda, who has been sick. He is back and is still a bit immobile, but we are glad to have him. I thank you very much.

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO A SECTORAL COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE
WITH RULE 176 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Bahinduka Mugarra does not have a sectoral committee and so, I would like to send him to the Committee on ICT. If you have no objection, I put the question that hon. Bahinduka go serve on the Committee on ICT.

(Question put and agreed to.)

LAYING OF PAPERS

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

THE SPEAKER: Can I “borrow” Dr Baryomunsi to help me lay these papers on Table since I cannot see my commissioners.

2.45
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the following reports on Table from the Office of the Auditor-General:

    i. Nyakinama Sub-County, Kisoro District
    ii. Nyabwishenya Sub-County, Kisoro District
    iii. Nyarubuye Sub-County, Kisoro District
    iv. Yivu Sub-County, Maracha District
    v. Oleba Sub-County, Maracha District
    vi. Kijomoro Sub-County, Maracha District
    vii. Nyadri Sub-County, Maracha District
    viii. Olefe Sub-County, Maracha District
    ix. Oluvu Sub-County, Maracha District
    x. Tara Sub-County, Maracha District
    xi. Acowa Sub-County, Amuria District
    xii. Wera Sub-County, Amuria District
    xiii. Kuju Sub-County, Amuria District
    xiv. Orungo Sub-County, Amuria District
    xv. Adumi Sub-County, Arua District
    xvi. Anyiribu Sub-County, Arua District
    xvii. Ayivuni Sub-County, Arua District
    xviii. Aroi Sub-County, Arua District
    xix. Ajia Sub-County, Arua District
    xx. Rengen Sub-County, Kotido District
    xxi. Nakapelimoru Sub-County, Kotido District
    xxii. Panyangara Sub-County, Kotido District
    xxiii. Anaka Sub-County, Nwoya District
    xxiv. Koch Goma Sub-County, Nwoya District
    xxv. Opwateta Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxvi. Putiputi Sub-County, Pallisa District
    xxvii. Abanga Sub-County, Zombo District
    xxviii. Zeu Sub-County, Zombo District
    xxix. Nyapea Sub-County, Zombo District
    xxx. Kango Sub-County, Zombo
    xxxi. Atyak Sub-County, Zombo District
    xxxii. Jang Okoro Sub-County, Zombo District
    xxxiii. Paidha Sub-County, Zombo District

Madam Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Dr Baryomunsi. All these are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back.

PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTION TIME

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Badda, did you want to say something?

2.51
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): I thank you. However, I do not see the Prime Minister. To whom are we going to address the questions –(Interjections)- can I continue?

THE SPEAKER: No, hold on. The time for the Prime Minister starts at 3 O’clock and I hope that he will be here in the next five minutes.

2.52
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, it is already 3 p.m. As the practice of this House, we know that today is when we have our questions to Government through the Prime Minister. I am set aback as I look at the Frontbench and we do not have an explanation why the whole bench of the Government side is absent.

We would have been confortable to get that guidance that maybe the sitting will be delayed or the question time will be rescheduled so that we start with other business. I think that it would be good practice for the Government side to let the Speaker’s office know so that we as members get to know. If they are not around and they are committed elsewhere, let this House be informed and the Members start with other programmes rather than just seeing a front bench of the Government side completely empty.

I saw the Minister for Karamoja here –(Interjections)- they are arriving. 

On a serious note, I would like to see the Government side take this House seriously by letting the House run in a business-like manner. We are going to be conducting business at will when the Speaker’s office is not even informed in advance. It makes work very difficult for us who want to raise issues and we expect the Government through various channels to be in charge of issues. However, as you can see, it has been evident - my vice President has just arrived here.

We would like you, Madam Speaker, to make this Government very serious and take note that we are not happy about the way they are doing their business without making us know what they are doing.

2.55
MR KASSIANO WADRI (FDC, Terego County, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The culture of giving time to the Prime Minister to answer questions is derived from the Commonwealth parliamentary practice and more specifically from the House of Commons where a Prime Minister is an Executive Prime Minister and equivalent of the President here. He is the last person to talk on matters of policy and programmes. 

This makes me wonder as to whether our copy and paste style is still relevant because our Prime Minister is not an Executive Prime Minister. When we ask him questions he/she cannot be in position to answer them authentically with full authority without recourse to the appointing authority. This is something which I have been thinking over.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Wadri. I have not heard the Prime Minister saying he is going to check with the President. He has answered our questions here.

MR WADRI: I do not dispute the fact that the Prime Minister who was Amama Mbabazi then or hon. Rugunda now are able to answer, but I am asking myself about the essence and rationale of having this Prime Minister’s question time. Are we really on the right track as a country? This is something that I am asking as food for thought. It may not be answered now but when we look at the two parliamentary practices, they are different. Our parliamentary practice here is different; we do not have that type of arrangement like in the House of Commons or in India. They are not the same. This is something for us to think about in future to see whether our Rules of Procedure are relevant. 

In connection with our proceedings here in Parliament, you remember some time back we used to have live transmission by UBC but at a certain time, they came up and said that Parliamentary Commission owes them a very substantial amount of money and of late, we no longer see our proceedings broadcast live. Is it because of our failure to pay UBC? I just want to be educated on that, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I will answer on the last one. When we started live broadcasts, we made an agreement to broadcast our proceedings for free. That is what the agreement says and anybody trying to claim for money is a thief. Now, I welcome the Prime Minister.

5.59
MR FRED BADDA (NRM, Bujumba County, Kalangala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank you and the Members for praying for me to heal faster. Thank you so much.

It is now one year and two months since the ship well known as MV Kalangala was taken by the Ministry of Works to Mwanza for repair. Yet the minister had informed us in the press that this ship was going to take only two months for repair in Mwanza.

I have raised this issue over and over again on the floor and the Hansard has it on record that you have instructed the ministers to respond to the issue as to why this ship has stayed in Mwanza for more than a year now. The ministers for over four times refused to respond to your instructions.

Can the Prime Minister now tell us why the ministers of works have refused to respond to the issue of the ship and to respect the chair? It is now four times that the Speaker has instructed the Minister of Works to make a comment on the matters of the ship at Mwanza. The ministers have completely refused to comment on this matter.

The other question is when are we to expect this ship back because it is the lifeline of the people of Kalangala?

3.00
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, my apologies that I came this late. My colleagues and I were in a Cabinet meeting and I expect the Minister for Works to be here shortly. There is no way the minister for works would disobey the Speaker’s directive. There may have been delays in responding but as Leader of Government Business, I will ensure that the responsible minister comes and gives an appropriate answer at the earliest opportunity possible. In fact, if he comes this afternoon with permission, he should be able to respond to this matter. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MR DENIS OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is the Prime Minister aware that there are some districts in Uganda with acting Chief Administrative Officers and there are some ministries with acting Permanent Secretaries and these officers have been acting beyond the statutory provision in the public service standing orders?

Is he aware of any plans by Government to ensure that these officers are substantially appointed into their positions? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable member for raising this important point. It is true and we are aware that a number of positions are occupied by acting officers. Government through the Ministry of Public Service and Public Service Commission is expeditiously taking steps to get this corrected. I thank you.

3.03
MS CD LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, does Government have clear and accurate statistics on the number of civil servants on the government payroll, say teachers and health workers? For example, can I know the number of teachers and health workers on the government payroll for Pader District?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government has information on this subject. The critical point though, has been the accuracy in some cases and that is why Government has been doing all it can to ensure that ghost workers in whatever category are weeded out as quickly as possible so that only those people who are working are paid. 

So we have the information and extra steps have been taken to ensure the accuracy of the names and of the numbers and now that the national identity cards are being issued, we know that that is going to augment our effort to clean the registers and accuracy of public servants. I thank you.

3.05
MS LILLY ADONG (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, does Government really supervise projects that are being funded under Central Government and the construction in the districts? I am raising this because in Nwoya, we have a three billion project under Judiciary. The construction started three months ago, but the contractor has abandoned the site and there is no sign of construction going on. I am wondering whether there is any supervision being done or reports reaching your office?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, supervision and implementation are part of the work that Government does. We are aware that sometimes some projects do not go on as smoothly as they should be going and I am glad that the honourable member has raised this matter. I wish she had directly raised it earlier; perhaps the problem would have already been corrected. Thank you.

3.06
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We passed the Uganda Road Fund Act, 2008. It is an obligation of Government to operationalize it and we have been talking about it here and Government had been assuring us that it is bringing an amendment to make full operationalization of that Act. May I know from the Prime Minister – can he give us a timeline when he is introducing either the amendment of the URA Act that allows direct depositing of road user funds to the account of the Road Fund so that it can be fully operationalized given the backlog of road maintenance in Uganda?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, this is an important subject that our colleague has raised. I must also say that this was one of the issues that we discussed in Kyankwanzi. There is need and urgency for specific measures to be taken. The responsible minister will be coming to the House so that the House can take the appropriate measures.

3.08
MR PETER OKEYOH (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to know from the Prime Minister what steps they are taking to stop the entry into this country of monofilament nets. These are illegal nets from China that Uganda Revenue Authority taxes. Our people buy these nets throughout the districts that have lakes and our people are instead penalised. What steps is the Government taking to make sure that these illegal nets do not enter into the country and save our people from buying these nets and losing a lot of money?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of illegal nets and illegal fishing and draining our lakes of fish is a very important subject. I know that our colleague, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, has been battling with this. But I do agree with him that we should simplify it by making sure that nets that are illegal are not allowed in the country. I would want somebody more specific and technical to address this very point. I will ask hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, because this is her specific area of specialisation, to come with a more comprehensive answer on this important subject.

3.09
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 22 October 2010, His Excellency the President directed that South Busoga Central Forest Reserve be de-gazetted. It is now coming to five years and this has not been implemented. May I know from the Prime Minister when this directive will be implemented? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the issue of de-gazettement of forests is an important subject matter. I am not personally acquainted with this presidential directive. I will need to find out more information on the matter before the House can be given more authentic and authoritative information.

3.10
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. Rt hon. Prime Minister, what are the likely impacts of the falling oil prices on the Ugandan economy and on the development of the oil sector in Uganda?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Mawanda is raising a point that many of us are contemplating about and the media has been awash with a number of articles on this subject matter. I think the people of Uganda are entitled to an authoritative statement on this subject matter. Actually, this should have come earlier than this. 

Therefore, as Leader of Government Business, I will ask the responsible minister to make a comprehensive statement on the impact of oil prices on the economy and on the oil sector that is developing in Uganda.

3.12
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In December last year, this Parliament passed a loan request from African Development Bank to tarmac the Rukungiri- Kanungu Road. The expectation was that by mid this year, the construction work would start. I have information that Government has delayed to relay some of the papers to African Development Bank and this is going to result in civil work beginning in 2016. 

My question to the Prime Minister is, is he aware or is it possible that Government or some elements within Government are trying to frustrate the people of Kanungu? Are you denying us a tarmac road? (Laughter)

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Ndugu Baryomunsi is fully aware that this information was extensively discussed by H.E the President during his recent visit to Kanungu. He assured the people that the road was coming soon. If there is anybody attempting to delay it, that person will receive the wrath of Government – (Interjections) - no doubt about that. We do not want any project to delay, especially a project that gives good communication to the people of Uganda, including Kanungu.

3.13
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (NRM, Bunyole County East, Butaleja): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It was recently reported in the local media that since the decentralisation of the payroll, Government has made a saving of over Shs 100 billion in the last three months. This shows that some individuals have in the past been progressively fleecing this nation of billions of shillings of money in form of ghost workers. 

Given that we have been paying workers through their bank accounts and given that there is this saving, which shows a glaring fact that somebody has been stealing this money, I want to find out from Government: what action has been taken since this discovery was made to find out who has been doing it and what action should be taken to the individuals who have been fleecing this nation? May I find out from the Prime Minister?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, it is correct that since the decentralisation of the payroll, some money has been saved. This clearly implies that some people had been pocketing money, which was not theirs. The responsible government departments are already taking measures to get that issue sorted out so that the culprits can be brought to book.

3.15
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On 9 April last year, this Parliament passed a motion on the victims of the LRA war and 10 resolutions were passed by this Parliament. The Speaker, then, directed Government to brief Parliament within a period of three months about the progress of the proposed resolutions. 

May I, therefore, know from the Prime Minister how far Government has gone to addressing the 10 resolutions that were passed by Parliament?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would have to check on why the report has not been given. As all of us know, the issue of victims of the Lord’s Resistance Army is something that Government takes very seriously. I know the Opposition also takes it very seriously. The country also takes it very seriously. 

Therefore, we will follow this up and I expect that a report will be made in a very short time. I would even say that within the course of the month, a report should be able to come. We will find out why there has been a delay, which should not have been the case.

3.16
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Ex-servicemen and other Ugandans who have served in the various armies - at least those from my constituency - were collected and they spent a whole week at Wakiso being registered. They were asked to register their bank accounts to be paid. Some of them are very old. Can the Prime Minister tell the ex-servicemen, wherever they are in Uganda through their representatives here, whether that registration was a “Kiwani” or they are going to be paid and when?

Dr RUGUNDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought that hon. Ssemujju would be more straightforward and use words that are commonly known in the House other than introducing words from his constituency to the House to mystify issues instead of making them even clearer. (Laughter)

However, on a serious note, Government is concerned about the ex-servicemen – both the recent and old ones and a registration exercise took place throughout the country. The aim is to ensure that the due payments of these ex-servicemen are given. Payment has already started but it is starting in phases. I think it is right that Government should give more information so that both the ex-servicemen and those associated with them and the whole country know what the programme of payment is.

3.19
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We used to have something called “NAADS” and I do not know whether it still exists. However, in my constituency, I see uniformed men moving as agents of wealth creation. Now that we are almost concluding the third quarter of our budget, would the Prime Minister kindly inform me and this country the extent to which wealth has been created in this nation and the extent to which the farmers are now in a better platform in terms of access to inputs and water for production? Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, my sister Abia Bako’s point of wealth creation is a very important point. Actually, H.E the President has been touring the country, specifically focussing on the importance of empowering the population through wealth creation.

The presence of members of UPDF is to re-enforce the Government’s structures to ensure that inputs, seedlings and the likes reach the population. This exercise is already on-going. It has already scored some successes in a number of areas and if it has not yet had the desired impact in Arua and the entire West Nile area, I am sure it will come soon. 

Therefore, my appeal to you, colleagues, is to give unequivocal and total support to the UPDF members who have come in to re-enforce the Operation Wealth Creation.

3.21
DR SAM OKUONZI (Independent, Vurra County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had the PRDP II and it ran into problems. It was terminated prematurely and we do not know its fate. Can the Prime Minister inform us about the fate of PRDP?

DR RUGUNDA: The PRDP is one of the vibrant programmes that are going on in the country. Many people have already benefitted from it, especially compatriots in northern and eastern Uganda. It is one of the programmes deliberately designed to bring affirmative action to the areas that were afflicted by the conflicts and as far as we are concerned, it is performing well. In fact, it is requiring more and more reinforcement because the population deeply appreciates its performance.

3.23
MS JOY ATIM ONGOM (Independent, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It was last year that Government came up with a programme of spraying at least 14 districts of northern Uganda and part of eastern Uganda against mosquitoes. 

Madam Speaker, it was not easy to convince the population to accept the indoor residual spraying, but we managed to convince them. It is very unfortunate that the spray attendants, given the contract of only three weeks, did their work, sprayed houses and to date, they have not been paid. I do not know whether the Prime Minister is aware of this situation. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Well, if they have not been paid, I think there must be an error or mistakes or delay on efficiency that needs to be checked. 

I would advise the honourable colleague, and I will reinforce her, to ensure that the health sector - I do not see the Minister of Health - follows it up and deals with it. This is some good work done that must be paid for. 

Therefore, payment will be made. I do not see why they should not be paid. It is because there must be money; if there was no money, the job would not have been contracted. If proper work and due diligence have been done, there will be money paid for the value that was provided.

3.25
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. May the Prime Minister inform this House when Government plans to issue new oil production licenses since oil licenses expired and this is hampering the efforts to meet our target of producing oil in Uganda? Thank you.

Dr Rugunda: There have also been some media reports on this subject matter. This is an ongoing matter and the Minister of Energy will be making a clear position on that.

3.25
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Can the Prime minister tell this country and especially the people of Mbale about the intruders who have been going to their lands and setting up mark stones? 

We know that Government is in a panic to reclaim the wetlands that had been given away. But now we see people being protected by the police, trespassing into people’s land and setting up mark stones. Can you explain to the whole country about these people who are doing this without the knowledge of the owners of that land?

DR RUGUNDA: Government is definitely not in panic. It is in full charge and control. As to the issue of mark stones, this may require investigation, but mark stones should normally be put in places that have been properly demarcated while the community in the area is in agreement that the surveys have been proper and that the land belongs to the people concerned.

3.27
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of the BKK; that is Bukungu, Kagwara and Kaberamaido ferry was a very contentious issue in the 2011/12 budget. Can the Prime Minister inform this House about the fate of the BKK ferry, where it has reached and what the people of these areas should expect out of this project in order to access and cross Lake Kyoga?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, Government attaches great importance on easing transport for the wanainchi.  I do not however have specific information on the ferry. Nevertheless, I will ask the Minister of Works and Transport to respond comprehensively on the subject matter as soon as possible.

3.28
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, farmers in this country are complaining they are accessing finances through the microfinance support centres. What is Government doing or planning to do to enable farmers especially in the rural areas to access finances?

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, finance institutions are aggressively looking for people to lend money to so long as they meet the essential and minimum requirements. I am rather surprised that there is a bottleneck where a microfinance institution is not making money available. This is a matter that will be pursued by the Minister of Finance to find out why there is a problem.

3.29
MS ROSEMARY NYAKIKONGORO (Independent, Woman Representative, Sheema): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to find out from Government the effort they have to aid people especially those suffering from non-communicable diseases.

Madam Speaker, I have been reliably informed by members from my constituency and I am at pain because within a week, we have buried six men who have died of prostate cancer and some are still in hospitals. Those who have been referred to Mulago National Referral Hospital have said that the cost is too much. To get an injection, you have to pay Shs 1 million and these are elderly people and farmers from Sheema.

In addition to that, they refer them to Mulago National Referral Hospital and yet most of them do not even have where to start from. What plans do you have to help people to access fast medication from Mbarara Referral Hospital which is nearer to them and to get fairly priced medication? It becomes disappointing when -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, you are now debating!

MS NYAKIKONGORO: What programmes does Government have to assist people who are suffering from non-communicable diseases?

DR RUGUNDA: As we contain and control communicable diseases, non-communicable diseases, their importance and cause for morbidity and mortality will increase. So suffice it to say, that Government plans to make the services available through decentralisation of treatment, for example, of cancer so that people do not just come to Mulago National Referral Hospital for cancer treatment, but they go to regional centres. For example, now in Gulu, at St Mary’s Hospital Lacor, there are good cancer treatment services and more regional centres are going to be made available so that people do not have to travel long distances for proper treatment.

3.33
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have, from time to time, been asked about Hepatitis B and that the vaccination is only affordable by rich people. Are we going to vaccinate the people of Uganda who cannot afford to pull - I just had mine and it was Shs 120,000 and in some places, it is more than that amount for a complete dose. Is there any plan to try and vaccinate the people of Uganda against Hepatitis B?

DR RUGUNDA: This is a major point and Ugandans are very concerned about this. Government has already embarked on this programme of vaccinating people against Hepatitis B. It first started with all children who are now being vaccinated and part of the vaccines is against Hepatitis B.

We have also started with health workers. However, as you rightly said, the cost is still prohibitive. As the cost comes down and the capacity of Government to purchase vaccines increases, more people especially the most vulnerable ones, will be vaccinated.

3.33
MS ANN AURU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My question is related to what hon. Aol has asked. My interest is on the village health teams.

Hon. Prime Minister, the village health teams are part of the health workers at the village level. The health workers of Uganda are now getting free vaccination for Hepatitis B. Is there any special consideration at least for the village health teams? 

DR RUGUNDA: The village health workers are the frontline workers in the health sector. They are doing very commendable work and indeed they are vulnerable to getting infected. There is no doubt that they will be among those prioritised when vaccines against Hepatitis B become more available.

3.35
MS MARGARET KOMUHANGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The question I have for the Prime Minister is that the only CT scan we have at the national referral hospital broke down two months ago. Ugandans are now being referred expensively to private hospitals for the service. When can this CT scan be repaired? Why can’t we have more than one CT scan at Mulago Referral Hospital?

DR RUGUNDA: The importance of a functional CT scan at Mulago Hospital is essential. I am sure that the Ministry of Health, which is responsible, is already taking the necessary steps to ensure that the CT scan at Mulago is working. 

As time goes on, more scans will be available for the wanainchi both in private and public hospitals. There is urgency. I will be able to get more specific information on this matter but I would be surprised if the ministry was not already taking the necessary steps to have the scan repaired.

3.36
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The National Resistance Movement (NRM) Government has been saluted for protecting people and their property. In the past three months, the country has witnessed a lot of murders by use of guns including a Member of Parliament who almost died in the last two days. Can we -(Interjections)- yes, who narrowly escaped being murdered by the goons. My point is loud and clear. We would like to find out from the Prime Minister how safe the country and people are, or what steps are in place to protect the people and their property? I thank you.  

DR RUGUNDA: I agree with the honourable member that where the Government of NRM has done very well among other sectors is security. Even this particular spate of killings, Government has already arrested a number of suspects. There is one or two of them still on the run but we believe that they are also going to be arrested. Therefore, measures have already been taken and some success has been scored.

Let me also take this opportunity to appeal to honourable members and the whole country to be vigilant and to help the police to ensure that these bad elements are identified and brought to the courts of law.

3.38
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (NRM, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last December, I went to Wakiso District to inquire about the bad roads in Ndejje, where I stay. While coming back from the district offices, I was charged Shs 2,000. When I asked them why, they told me that the district agreed to charge Shs 2,000 as revenue collection. I found it strange that a public place like a district charges whoever goes to seek services. I also found it very dangerous that other districts like Mayuge have copied that and are also charging people who go to seek services.

My question to the Prime Minister is, which law is this district using to collect money from people who visit to seek services at a public institution? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I do not think I understood the question. Where is the money being charged from?

MR MAJEGERE: I am speaking English but I –(Laughter)– I think it is the different schools we went to. I went to Wakiso District to tell them about the poor state of roads in Ndejje where I stay. On coming back from the district, I found barricades or road blocks. They wanted Shs 2,000. I actually had Shs 50,000 but it took them 30 minutes to get change. When I asked, I was told that the district agreed to charge Shs 2,000 per vehicle.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, what you are asking is whether the Prime Minister is aware that there is a road toll there for which they charge Shs 2,000. Is that the question?

MR MAJEGERE: Yes and under what law? 

DR RUGUNDA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for further explaining the issue but I am not aware. I suppose the colleague should have reported either to the police or to the nearest authority to get a satisfactory explanation. Since he is an honourable Member of Parliament, I think he should perhaps have linked up with political leadership in the area to explain why that anomaly is in place. 

I do not see why there should be road blocks to prevent people from travelling more easily. If there are going to be charges, they should be at specific places of providing service and not block people from travelling.

3.41
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For over five years today, the President did promise our grassroot leaders - the LC I chairpersons - a semblance of a means of transport; the bicycles. To date, the chairpersons of Isingiro District have never received anything like a bicycle. May I know from the Prime Minister what programme he has to ensure that the President’s pledge is fulfilled? I do not know if the other districts have received theirs.

DR RUGUNDA: This is a very important matter because it affects the wanainchi on the ground. I have just been consulting with the honourable Minister of Local Government, who has assured me that the procurement process for the bicycles for LCs I will commence as soon as money is available.

THE SPEAKER: Before he comes in, hon. Prime Minister, I am sorry to intervene. This is a very serious matter. The LCs are worried that once we have the changes, they will not get the bicycles. It is a very serious matter indeed.

3.43
MR KENETH OMONA (NRM, Kaberamaido County, Kaberamaido): Perhaps you are right, Madam Speaker. For the last three consecutive years, we have been losing more than 3,000 people on our roads as a result of road accidents and that is according to the road traffic police. I am therefore asking the Prime Minister whether there is any plan that Government has to reduce these road accidents in this country. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: I am glad, Madam Speaker, that the colleague has raised the issue of road carnage because this is an imminently preventable matter. The police are doing what they can. Let me also call on motorists wherever they may be and the pedestrians for that matter and all road users to be vigilant to ensure that they avoid drunk-driving, overloading and also ensure that the vehicles they use on the road are in good mechanical conditions. This will reduce the chances of causing accidents.

It is therefore a collective responsibility for collective vigilance in order to reduce accidents and carnage on our roads.

MS HELLEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is the government doing to fill the gap as a result of the new policy shift that requires all primary head teachers to be degree holders? It has left so many primary schools without head teachers as a result of massive enrolment in the day programme in order to beat the deadline of the requirement.

DR RUGUNDA: I am being informed of a new policy and since I have the minister responsible for education here, I think she should whisper so that we can give the honourable members of Parliament the factual position about the requirement that primary school head teachers should have degrees. Is that true - (Interjections) - Okay, I am assured by the Minister of Education that it is not a requirement that one must have a degree in order to be a head teacher of a primary school.

3.48
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Prime Minister, the people of Rubaga South have requested me to seek for a constitutional clarification on a matter of a public concern and I expect a serious answer.

Under Article 178(13), the regional tier system was supposed to be fully operational in July 2006. Since that period, there has been no sign that Government is doing anything to ensure that regional tiers begin. If they are a failure, why do you not create an enabling environment for the development of the federal system of governance? We need a serious answer. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I wish to salute ndugu Lukyamuzi’s consistence in spite of repeated failures for a federal state in the country but the position about the regional tier - as you know, there was no adequate enthusiasm among districts to consummate the system of regional tiers in the country. It is a constitutional provision. If districts are ready and enthusiastic to consummate that, Government is more than happy to put it in practice.

3.50
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to ask the Prime Minister when he intends to bring to Parliament relevant pieces of law that will guide this country through the 2015 election. 

I am asking this question because you raised it yourself, when we opened the Fourth Session of the Ninth Parliament, Madam Speaker. We have been promised so many times but up to now, we have not seen any indication to that effect even on the order paper. We do not see any attempts from Government to bring relevant pieces of law that will guide us in the electoral processes, including the voters register. Thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, hon. Cecilia Ogwal is raising a very legitimate point. Actually, Government is in final stages. Cabinet is due to discuss the amendments that are being proposed before they are delivered to Parliament. While I would not want to stick myself to the question of timing, I do expect that within a couple of weeks or so, Cabinet will have discussed this after which the proposal will be brought to Parliament.

I should also point out that one of the reasons for the slight delay is that both the substantive Attorney-General and the honourable Minister for Justice are out of the country on duty. The Cabinet considered it prudent that before discussing these matters, we should have these two people, who have been playing such a critical role in the process to be present. We will be through in the Cabinet very soon and the amendments will be before you in the House, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I came into the House this afternoon eager to attend the session of the Prime Minister’s Question Time. I thought this is time where Government states its position unequivocally for the country to be guided. I have listened well to the last 10 questions starting with the issue of the ferry in Kaberamaido and other places, to the bicycles and now to the critical question of the transition to 2016. I find the Prime Minister’s responses casual and non-committal.

To inform the House that the ministers are out of the country, therefore, the House cannot be informed about the specific time when we shall get the relevant laws to transit in 2016, I find it extremely sorry. This is the point where we must receive strict and strong answers. It is not a mere ritual where you receive answers and ponder about it, yet you do not get exactly what the Government position is. Are we procedurally right to waste this critical and valuable time on a Prime Minister who is dillydallying particularly on matters of public importance like the transition, the bicycles and many queries that have been raised?

We need specific answers when demanding for timelines and strong commitment from Government. I have observed that we end up going away with nothing. I have not heard any credible response since the Prime Minister started talking. Are we procedurally right therefore to waste this time of Prime Minister’s Question Time when there is nothing tangible we are getting out of his responses?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Prime Minister, I think the country is concerned that we are going to an election year. When we were opening this third meeting, I said that I am worried that probably after June, there will be nobody sitting in the House to do serious work and if there are going to be constitutional amendments, we need to consult not just here but the countryside. Therefore, time is of essence. We would like to know when you will come here to lay the first reading. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I definitely take objection to the provocation by my brother, the honourable Member for Lwemiyaga. Nevertheless, I refuse to respond in the same currency. What I have told this House is as factual as it can be. It is true that the Attorney-General is leading our team in cases in London in the oil sector. The reports we are getting from London indicate that we are doing very well. Therefore, since the Attorney-General is the head of this sector on constitutional reforms, it is only right and prudent that his input, since he has been a critical architect in this matter, should be sought. This is not to suggest in any way that the government cannot run without any of the ministers. However, facts should be said as they are and it is as simple as that.

3.57
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is in regard to the on-going restocking programme in Amuru District since it has been highly politicised. What measures is the government putting in place to ensure that it is a holistic programme that will benefit everybody irrespective of their political affiliations? I thank you.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, if my sister is making reference to restocking, restocking is a programme for all deserving Ugandans irrespective of their political or other affiliations. It is specifically earmarked and taking place in specific areas of the country that were affected by the conflicts that we have heard before. If anybody is discriminated against, that is a mistake. The idea is that all those that are deserving and qualify should be handled evenly and fairly.
3.59
MS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek response from the Prime Minister. In Masindi, there is Kamurasi Primary Teachers College. As we speak, the principal has refused to admit girls and he has actually put up a circular on the notice board that he is not admitting girls. Parents thought that maybe it was phased, they volunteered to buy decker beds but he refused arguing that he has more than enough but that he will not be admitting girls anymore. May I know whether this is a government policy shift from promoting the girl child education to marginalising girls and women further?

DR RUGUNDA: I can say without any fear of contradiction that Government policy is definitely to promote girl child education. If there is discrimination, the Ministry of Education and Sports together with Government will ensure that discrimination is stopped. I have got assurance from the Minister of Education and Sports that she is going straight away to take up the matter.

4.01
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mr Prime Minister, there is a huge disparity between salaries paid to doctors working in general hospitals vis-à-vis salaries paid to doctors in health centres IV in the country. For instance, the doctors in general hospitals are earning Shs 900,000 as compared to about Shs 2,600,000 for doctors working in health centres IV. As a result, doctors in general hospitals are terribly under motivated. This has led to poor services in the hospitals and people are dying like insects sprayed with pesticides. Patients have been abandoned; a case in point is in Kayunga –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what you would like to know is whether the Prime Minister is aware that the doctors in those other areas are demotivated. Isn’t that the question?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Well. My question is about the disparity and whether this is policy of Government and if it is not, how does the Prime Minister intend to address this problem?

DR RUGUNDA: As colleagues may know, Madam Speaker, this House strongly spearheaded and the government supported the programme of making sure that health workers, particularly doctors, are enabled to be at health centres and a deliberate policy of an incentive for them to go to the health centres was made. That explains why their salaries were augmented. As resources become more available, doctors in general hospitals will also be equally considered.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have used 50 minutes mainly because we did not have Prime Minister’s Question Time last week. We shall consider the other questions next Wednesday.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we were considering clause 45. I put the question that -

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I am sorry to rise at this point. I raised a very pertinent matter of national importance about the demolition of a property in Jinja. The minister promised to appear in this House with a statement the subsequent week but when the people I represent see me laughing with the minister on a daily basis – yesterday, they accused me of laughing with the Minister of Internal Affairs without giving them feedback.

Madam Chairperson, is it proper for us to proceed with the committee stage when a statement has not yet been made? As we speak, the developer is continuing with the work. The matter was raised in Parliament and the order given was not obeyed. It seems there is a lot of impunity in this country and when my people see me laughing with the minister in the House, they think we are not doing anything. I thought we would first dispose of that matter before we proceed with the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, you were supposed to come here to address us on the issue of the eviction on Alidina Street in Jinja, which was carried out at 3 O’clock in the morning under disputed circumstances.

THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chairperson, investigations have been going on and were completed. I request that I give this report tomorrow afternoon. We are ready with the report.

Clause 45

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, you had some proposals on clause 45.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 45, having had a detailed discussion in yesterday’s session and in light of that discussion and after careful consideration of our current circumstances, it is clear that it may not be possible to enforce the disposal permit and the circumstances surrounding it. This may be introduced later after thorough study has been done. I therefore propose that we do away with the requirement for a disposal permit in clause 45(3) and subsequent clauses in this part of the Bill. 

I propose the following; since it is not clear from clause 45(2) why a medical officer forwards a certificate of cause of death to a registration officer, I propose to amend clause 45(2) to add after “registration officer” the words “who shall cause the particulars of such death to be entered in this register in the prescribed manner.” The redraft shall read as follows:
“A certificate of cause of death signed in accordance with subsection (1) shall be forwarded forthwith by the medical officer to the registration officer who shall cause the particulars of such death to be entered in the register in the prescribed manner.”

Then delete clause 45(3) and renumber accordingly. Redraft clause 45 (4) to read as follows: “Subject to the Inquest Act, when an inquest is held on the body of a deceased person, the magistrate holding the inquest shall forward to the registration officer a certified copy of such findings and upon receipt of such report, shall cause the particulars of such death to be entered in the register in the prescribed manner.”
Clause 45 (1) and (5) remain the way they were. I beg to submit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 45 be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46

GEN.  NYAKAIRIMA: In view of what we have passed above, we propose to delete clause 46 because of the earlier requirement of a disposal permit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 46 be deleted. 

MR EKANYA: I would like clarification from the minister; some of us of recent have wished to have the issue of disposal, if it is related to burials - like it happens in Kenya - burials or disposal of the dead is on Saturday to enable people work. This requires mortuaries to be built by Government.

Madam Chairperson, even as we speak, if you are not aware, there are candidates campaigning in your constituency and mine during burials from Monday to Sunday. The President had one time hinted that we should have funerals and burials on one day. I do not know whether that provision is being taken care of here so that we engage in productive activities during the week. The Bible also says that let their dead bury the dead.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, are you considering setting a date for burials? The Kenyans do it; you do not bury on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. You wait until Saturday. It seems the minister is not interested in that proposal. I put the question that clause 46 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, deleted.

Clause 47, deleted.

Clause 48

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I propose to amend; (a) Sub-clauses (2) and (3) of clause 48 to replace the word “authority” where reference is made to the Executive Director.

(b) Sub-clause (3) by deleting the words “Maintain a” between the words “Shall” and “Register” and the redraft of clause 48 (3) shall read as follows:

“The authority shall register presumed deaths and shall enter therein all orders issued by the Court and served upon the authority in respect to the presumed deaths.”

(c) Where reference is made to seven years in clause 48(1), it should instead be replaced with three years as stipulated in the Estates of Missing of Person Management Act, Cap. 159, section 20, which provides that a person shall be presumed dead where a period of three years beginning with the date of disappearance of the deceased lapses.

The justification here, Madam Chairperson, is for the consistence in drafting of the Bill and to align the Bill with other laws in the country. I beg to move.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking clarification from the minister. We live in a situation where our people are taken out of the country and their papers are taken away from them and they cannot easily come back to Uganda. Also, people are held in captivity for long periods even within the country. Actually, when I saw the seven years, I thought that since we are required to renew the identity cards, we would lift this period to 10 years. However, the minister is moving to make it three years which I think is too short a period. Is it possible that we make it either 10 years or maintain the seven but not three years? Three is too short. I beg to submit.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I agree with hon. Kamateeka. The rationale or the reason why we should reduce from seven to three seems unclear. If we are arguing that we need to streamline this law with other laws, I think that the requirement of renewing our identity cards should apply here as argued by hon. Kamateeka.

However, my strong point is on clause 48(3) which reads, “The executive director shall maintain a register of presumed deaths and shall enter therein all orders issued by the Court and served upon the executive director in respect of presumed death.” 

I see no reason why it should be, “The authority shall register…” because this is an administrative matter. Therefore, the Executive Director is directly in charge of the day to day changes and happenings. To me, the position in clause 48(3) is clearer and more specific than the proposed amendment. Thank you.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I find no problem with what the minister has proposed because the minister is saying that there exists a law, which spells out the time within which someone is presumed dead. This is a latter Act and the minister is just reconciling the law because in interpretation, it is presumed that by the time we are making this new law, we are aware of the existence of the other law. Therefore, he is just bringing this law into conformity with the other law. I would like to propose that we take the position of the minister. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am not very comfortable with reducing the period. Three years is short. Someone may walk in in the fourth year.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, there exists a law which talks about the same time. If we make it seven - because what the minister is saying is that there exists a law, which talks about three years. If we make one of seven years, will that mean that in effect we are amending the other law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: The one of three years was in respect to missing persons, the one of seven is a presumption of death and that law is there.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, here we are dealing with registration of persons and the presumption of death because we assume that if you are going somewhere, maybe if I am leaving my place in Kabukye in Kamuli to go somewhere, I must inform someone. However, if it is a period of three months and people do not know my whereabouts - it is a period of three years - the rationale is that there are some things which follow death. When you are presumed dead, people may apply to manage your estate; that is also the other matter. Just imagine when you have an estate for seven years and people do not know what happened. They do not know where you are. Your estate will be put to waste because people do not know where you went to.

Under the Missing Persons Act, we are assuming that if an order is given and you surface, you apply to Court for an order to vacate. Therefore, it is from that perspective that the presumption of death within three years gives an opportunity for your estate to be managed. Thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson, for the opportunity. I equally find the reduction of the years from seven to three a little bit perturbing. Three years would be applicable if somebody went missing and that is already captured. However, for presumption of death, at least you need to give it a bit of time for investigation and even for the person to be able to communicate.

You may find that somebody is somewhere under captivity and is just not able to write a letter within three years. Therefore, at least for the presumption of death, it is better that we assume someone is dead after seven years but three years is too short a time. I beg to submit.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think hon. Mwiru and the minister made a point that under section 20 of the Estates of Missing Persons Management Act, you are actually presumed dead if you disappear for three years because your estate cannot be managed until there is a presumption of death.

Three years is a very long period – (Interjections) - for a person to just disappear off the surface of the earth. If you cannot be traced for three complete years, it means you are probably dead. I heard the argument of my wonderful daughter, hon. Nyakecho, that you can fail to communicate for three complete years and – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Odoi, for giving way. Madam Chairperson, just two days ago, as I was travelling back from Agago, I passed via a certain village called Wanglobo in Agago District and I visited an old woman who told me that her grandson disappeared in 1993 but last year, when one of the LRA rebels returned, they told her that the son is alive in the Central African Republic. That was over 10 years and you are saying that three years is enough for somebody to be presumed dead. 

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, I will treat that as an exceptional circumstance; that the person actually went to war or was abducted and taken to war but they did not volunteer. The family should have known that that person was in captivity of the LRA. I am not so sure that we are going to legislate for that particular purpose.

It is not possible to keep a person on the register as living if he has not had any contact with the civilised world for three complete years. You will assume for a fact that this person has not sought medical assistance for three years and you still think they are alive. They have not probably turned up to vote or for any civic duty for three complete years; they should be entered in the register of people presumed dead.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, this is the only area that Law is marrying with the concepts of Economics. In the legal jurisprudence we do not do a lot of presumption. We do on innocence and death under Article 28.

The economists who are in this House would say, they assume and presume factors remaining constant. Madam Speaker, as we legislate, this is presumption and I do not want to think that we are thinking that we are killing anybody by legislating; that when you are not seen for three years, you are dead. 

Let me help ourselves to know that this is purely presumption. You have left, probably you have property; how do you help this family to even move forward? We are looking at progress in this family, estates being squandered; people are fighting over it and maybe stealing it. If there is no law to protect that kind of family, then if we put it seven years, you know that it will take you seven years to resolve the matter.

Whereas three years appear to be short, the presumption also of this proposal is that seven years then, there were no mobile phone and no internet. People would take forever - they would even walk on foot from here up to DRC -(Interjection)– who am I to refuse Mama?

MS CECILIA OGWAL: I would like to give you information. Madam Chairperson, as an African woman, I know that a man can be engaged in hunting or –(Interjections)- and he may disappear either engaged in bush war or whatever and if in three years he is presumed dead, any other brother in the family can take over the wife. That is the culture.

I want us to think about this. If you declared somebody presumed dead and then the clan goes traditional and allows one of the brothers to take over the wife of this presumed dead brother plus the children and the home, then after four or five years, the man turns up -(Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, while we are legislating on this, let us think about that because the reality on the ground is different. We are not legislating for ourselves but for those rural people. This has happened. During the Second World War when Ugandans got involved in the British Second World War. Many people were presumed dead but eventually they turned up and when they turned up - there is a song in Lango, which is very interesting. They say “Ogwang woto ilum” then he found the wife “pe dong dwogo.” This means, the husband called Ogwang went and never came back; so, what do I do?

We feel that as Africans and Ugandans, we must continue to respect our culture. By respecting our culture, it means we must give opportunity for this rural woman to wait for her husband to come back. At least, give them as much time as possible. That is my plea -(Members rose_)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I was just concluding. I appreciate the information from Dokolo but all that I am trying to say is, that is the beauty of the law of presumption. When you appear, the matter is rebuttable. That is why you presume. Presumptions are rebuttable in law not in economics - but in law, presumed innocent until proved guilty.

Now, here presumed dead until you appear -(Laughter)- I have a case in point. The issue of managing families; in Uganda, we have various culture and customs. 

Mine may not be as different but this is the very reason that we should be presuming that the person disappearing or missing is aware that “well, I am a way for this period of time; I will be presumed dead; my wife may have a child with somebody called Odoi or with whoever else” -(Laughter)- this is the presumption.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, my worry about the effect of the presumption of death is that your death is declared and following that, someone applies for a letter of administration to your estate, they will distribute your estates. That is what it means. You come back and there is no estate. I am worried about the three years. I do not know what Members think.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, a man in Rukungiri shot somebody because he wanted to release some prisoners. He just shot people and took off to Congo. Congo is a very big place with jungles. This man came back after four years and by the way, he is now very sick and in Kampala now. Do you want to tell me that if I get a problem and go to exile - three years only surely, Madam Chairperson, I come back and find somebody has taken over my wife; he is in charge of my children and has even taken over my houses and cows?

Honourable minister, I am kindly requesting you, Gen. Aronda Nyakairima, can you accept seven years because honestly we are Ugandans and cannot take things for granted?

MS ANITE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am objecting to the proposal of three years. I would like to say that the minister should agree with us that we should give seven years for very obvious reasons.

Even when people go just to do business near here in South Sudan, because of poor network and the hardship of the area they are in, they fail to communicate to their families. I have a live example of my own brother who went to South Sudan, stayed there for five years. For a moment, we thought he had died but five years later, he came. We had even organised funeral rites for this young man but five years later, he showed up. 

When he showed up, we had to organise prayers to say that he did not die and re-dig this grave that we had just prepared for cultural rites. I would want to say that people go out of this country to do business not only in South Sudan; even some of them go to the US and many other places, but they fail to communicate with their families.

Therefore, for you to declare someone dead in three years is wrong. I want to object in the strongest terms that we leave it open and if someone comes back - if we cannot agree with seven years, we leave it open. Even with this political era, someone can kidnap you and proceed with you to another country and hide you because they do not want you to be here - (Applause) - I would like to say that we proceed with seven years. Thank you. 

MR AYOO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would equally agree that presuming somebody dead within three years would be such a short time. I would like us to help the minister to deal with a situation where there is already an existing law, the Estate of Missing Persons Management Act, which says that after three years of no communication, then it is presumed that you are dead and other people can take over your estate.
Therefore, I would like for us to see how we balance this because we cannot say that we are presuming seven years for this Bill and yet, we already have an existing law that is also talking about three years. If we can agree on that and sort it out, we will move faster. Do we say seven years and yet, there is another law that says three years? How are we going to go about this? Do we now have to amend the other law to seven years so that they can all be at par? Can this Act repeal the other one and then we will move by this? I thank you.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: I thank you. On the point of the three years, it will now be better for the minister to tell us what the reasons are to justify the reduction to three years. What are the reasons? When we have it between five to seven years, it will be better. It will reduce the disadvantages because there are consequences of reducing these years as we have already noted. Can we then know from the minister what the reasons are for us to reduce?

MS MUSEVENI: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to say that this is a law that would help those women that my sister from Dokolo is referring to. if we talk about those women who are going to wait for seven years for the husbands to turn up, they will suffer so much with the children -(Laughter)- however –(Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members.

MS MUSEVENI: Madam Chairperson, if every man out there knows that if they are away for three years, they are risking losing their families and property, they will not be away for three years. (Applause) So, if Government says that they have to be waited upon for seven years at least, then you put the whole family to suffer for all that time as they wait for that person whose whereabouts are not known. 

The three years would ensure that every man who has some responsibility to their family will make sure that in that time, they will be back home. Then, they have the right to take care of the family. The family should not be subjected to seven years to wait for a man who has no responsibility. I thank you. (Applause)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I also would like to support the seven years because of an incident that I have personally seen. I have a maternal uncle who left Kanungu in 1978 and we just recently located him recently in Ssese Islands. My uncle left a wife and two children and the lady has never remarried and is now an old woman. However, my uncle married another two wives and they have children in Ssese Islands. But the first woman is going to die as though she was a widow.

Seven years, I believe is time enough. I do not believe in three years; seven years would be reasonable enough. If somebody has not been responsible and maybe, where that person went - for example, assuming that my uncle was a reasonable man and went to Nairobi to work but things did not go well but returns after seven years, something would come out better. 

Therefore, by putting it at seven years, we can give a chance to those who could have gone somewhere but they got stuck but were able to reorganise themselves to come back. I thank you.

DR MUTENDE: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Of course, the debate could be taking a gender bias particularly following the input from Mama Cecilia. 

However, let us give this a broader perspective. Three years of waiting is a very long time particularly from – we are assuming that its only men that disappear. What about when the women disappear? Really, three years is a long time.

Let us look at recent events. In March last year, when a Malaysian plane flying from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing just disappeared in thin air and up to now, nobody knows the whereabouts of the passengers. Now, those people have been presumed dead. Supposing we had the law that said seven years – those widows and widowers left behind would have to keep waiting. I think that up to three years is long enough. I thank you.

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In this controversial clause, there seems to be two points of contention. The first one brought forward by hon. Museveni is that the family will be made to suffer and the women will miss. She did not specify what they will miss. (Laughter) However, I want to say the following –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Chairperson, I wonder whether it is really in order for a senior member of this House in the name of hon. Kassiano Wadri to firmly talk about issues that are very obvious –(Laughter)- and especially challenging a Member who has already left the Floor. Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think he heard properly. Please, continue.

MR WADRI: Madam Speaker, before I even continue with the points that I had in mind, I want to set the record straight. I quoted exactly what hon. Museveni said and went further to say that she did not mention what the women will miss. If she had probably mentioned, it would have guided my direction. 

Therefore, there are two issues; the first issue that has been brought is that the estate of the person presumed to be dead will suffer. As we make this law, I think that we need to be conscious of the changing environment. Today, the communities are being constantly sensitised about the need to have wills and it is the ideal thing to do. But even if that was not so, there is a provision in the law for administration of the estates of persons who have died intestate. So, why would we preoccupy ourselves by lowering the number of years? 

I still think very sincerely that the seven years is long enough for us, within which we can still operate because during that time, should anything happen, why then don’t we use the Succession Act that provides for intestate administration of estates of deceased persons rather than bringing it lower just because of the case of estates administration. I think that seven years is good enough even for a person who will be missing; she will still be able to tolerate whatever is to be missed for seven years if they are committed. I thank you. (Laughter)

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson, I would like to differ with the honourable colleagues who are talking of three years. It is such a short time because I know of a Member of Parliament who was my predecessor. He was missing for 50 years; his name is John Ogwang Beridwogo - in the UK. People had forgotten about him but because we did not have such a law, which restricts us to three years, he had an opportunity to serve his people and his country. 

I have many of them coming from my own home area in Lango who have been missing for very many years. This is about a fight for the future honourable members. Let us not legislate our citizens out of this country. 

I am asking Members to be considerate to those who ran out of this country some years ago. Let us be honest and know that our citizens are out there, who we can presume missing or dead if we pass this law. This is about fighting for our people who are out of this country –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Honourable members, we should realise that the world is becoming advanced. These days, you cannot stay somewhere for more than three or five years without anybody knowing where you are. We have internet, mobile phones and many other gadgets for communication. Those who are saying that for more than 15 years in the past, there were no proper means of communication - therefore, three years is more than enough.

MR EBIL: I am not taking that information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I just would like to draw the attention of the minister to section 108 of the Evidence Act, which provides that, “When the question is whether a person is alive or dead and it is proved that he/she has not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him or her, if he or she had been alive, the burden of proving that he or she is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it. So, seven years is under the Evidence Act.” (Applause)

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, this law was conceived to harmonise a number of existing laws in order to bring a new innovation in registration of deaths and births, in order to usher in a new transformation in this area and that is the aim of this provision that we move away from some of those practices. I know with time, some of those pieces of legislations will be looked at.
 
However, if the law - here, we were stating also the existing laws. I am at a loss on how to harmonise Caps 59, section 20 of the Management of Estates of Missing Persons Act and then with that one. I do not know how we can harmonise the two before we either take three or seven years. We need guidance from the Attorney-General.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know when you are going to amend the Evidence Act or if you have plans to amend it because the existing law is seven years.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: With your guidance, Madam Chairperson, and given the views of possible - but I have been in Dokolo; I have not seen hunters; there are no more hunters in Dokolo. But let us take seven years and move on. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 48 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose to amend (a) clause 49 (1) by replacing the word “director” with the word “authority”. The Justification is for consistency in drafting of this Bill.

b) Clause 49(2)(h) to replace the phrase “…identity card number or passport number or alien number of the deceased” with the phrase “national identification number or alien identification number for a deceased who is a citizen of Uganda and an alien respectively.”

Then redraft it as follows: “A certificate of death issued under sub-section (1) shall contain the following: Information concerning the deceased, which shall include name, place of birth, date of death, sex, nationality, national identification number or alien identification number of a deceased, who is a citizen of Uganda or alien respectively and any other information as may be prescribed by the minister.”

c) “The information contained in a certificate of death issued under this Act is presumed to be correct and it may be received as evidence in any judicial proceedings.”

The justification is for consistency in drafting of this Bill as similar proposals have been made above. I beg to submit.

DR BARYOMUNSI: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. In clause 49(2) the minister has omitted cause of death as one of the ingredients of that certificate. Is it deliberate or is it by error because the cause of death is very important information, which should appear on the death certificate.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: It is an omission, Madam Chairperson, which we will check.

MS JOY ONGOM: Madam Chairperson, on the same issue, the minister has also omitted the age of the deceased. It is very important because it will help in the legal proceedings -(Interjections)- it is better to know the age of the deceased whether he is an adult or an infant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it simply has a date of death; it does not say when the person was born, whether he is an adult or an infant. Hon. minister, any objection? We have two additions; that is the cause of the death and then the date of birth.

MR AYOO: Madam Chairperson, when we include the cause of death when we know that most people in villages, when they die, they may not know exactly cause of the death because they are not medical officer to ascertain that the person died because of such and such a condition. Now, what cause will they put there, unknown cause, because you have to be sure?

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, in (b), I thought that if somebody has died and it is not conclusive as we were debating yesterday and the evidence is given about the cause of death- what do you mean by “any other information as may be prescribed by the minister.” What does that mean? Death is conclusive, evidence has been given and – but they are saying in b) “any other information as may be prescribed by the minister.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: May be they want to put there the height.

MR KAKOOZA: Isn’t it redundant? The evidence must be there - the cause of death is there, everything is conclusive, somebody has died.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not think we should tie the minister’s hands. You can not anticipate all the circumstances under which somebody dies. Therefore, honourable members, I put the question that with those two amendments, clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 50

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, we move to delete clause 50 because it has been taken care of by the removal of the requirement of a death permit.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Madam Chairperson, I put the question that clause 50 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50 deleted.

Clause 51

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I intend to amend clause 51 by replacing, the words “birth register book” and “the death register book” with the word “register” and then redraft the clause as follows: “Within 10 days of the last days of each month, every registration officer shall forward to the supervising officer a copy of all entries made by him or her in the register during the preceding month.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 51 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.
 
Clause 52

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: I move to delete clause 52 as it has also been taken care of.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 52 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, deleted.
Clause 53

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose to (a) amend clause 53(1) by replacing with the word “authority” where reference is made to the words “executive director.”

b) Delete the words “and a registration officer of birth and death” then redraft it as follows: “The authority shall upon payment of prescribed fee furnish a certified copy of any entry in a register or return in its custody or a certified copy of any extracts from the entry.”

c)  In clause 53 (2) where reference is made to the words “executive director”, they should be replaced with the words “authorised staff of the authority” and then redraft it as follows: A copy of any entry in the register or a return of any copy of any extract from the entry, which is certified under the hand of the authorised staff of the authority to be a correct copy, shall be a prima facie evidence in all Court proceedings of the facts contained in the copy. The justification is to align the clause with the Bill and for consistence in drafting and the use of the phrases. I beg to move.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I have no problem with the spirit behind these amendments. However, the drafting needs a lot to be desired. They are saying that “the authority shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, furnish a certified copy of any entry in a register or return in its custody a certified copy of any extract from that entry which is certified under hand of the authority to be a correct copy, shall be a prima facie evidence in all Court proceeding of the facts contained in the copy”. 

Now, the word “shall furnish” I am not very conversant, it should furnish who? It should come out clearly. If you are furnishing the person applying for it, it should be clear. So, it is not very clear, Madam Chairperson, if you take a second reading of that whole provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you want to say furnish the applicant?

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Madam Chairperson, there is absolutely nothing wrong with this drafting. It is standard legislative drafting. You cannot, for a fact state in every section that “the authority shall furnish an applicant.” Of course, there must be a person interested in the entry or in the certified copy.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  The one who has paid the fees.

MR ODOI OYWELOWO: Yes, the one who has paid the fees and it is reflected in the drafting.

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, my concern was actually the same, that when you say “the executive director and the registration officer of birth and death shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee”- it is as if the officers are the ones paying. Or when you say “the Authority shall upon payment of the prescribed fee”- it is as if it is the authority which is paying the fee. So, why don’t you say, “Upon receipt of the prescribed fee” rather than say “upon payment”. I beg to submit that we replace “upon payment” with “upon receipt.”

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Do you have a problem with that minister?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the concern of the honourable member. We do not have enough time to go through drafting drills. (Laughter) The word “the authority shall” then a comma; in drafting, that means you are going to introduce something else. (Interjections) Now, I appreciate that this is in English but this is now legislative drafting and I do not see any problem. “The Authority shall, upon” somebody has to move the Authority. “Upon payment” - now, this is why Dr Baryomunsi when he gets up or Dr Bitekyerezo, they will speak Latin in English and we pay them for that. 

So, Madam Chairperson, there is no problem per se. Actually, if you say “the authority shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, furnish…”, the duty of the authority there is to furnish.

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to inform our legal experts that we are not legislating for the legal mind but for people to appreciate and understand what they are reading. So, we should make laws in a language that is clear to all the people.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, if we say “the authority shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, furnish an applicant with a certified copy.” “An applicant” must be there. We must be clear who you are furnishing. However much you are making the law, we have done legislative drafting and so forth but the law must be clear in its provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Is there any objection minister to that addition?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, if he is introducing “the applicant” at the end, you rather introduce “the applicant” at the beginning so that anybody reading this law will get to know. If the word “applicant” is confusing us or who is making the payments, then we should make “the applicant” – “… upon payment by the applicant.” Then the rest you say, “….. furnish…” if that will make us very comfortable and understand. But you are not making - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, you want to say, “The authority shall, upon payment by an applicant of the prescribed fee …” 

MR OBOTH: Yes, because there is no way- just for the sake of the comfort – we have law students -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, let us introduce the two words “an applicant” between “payment” and “of”

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, what he was proposing was okay, that we begin with “upon payment of the prescribed fee by the applicant, the authority shall furnish…” that is better English for all the lawyers and the common people of this nation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: There is no problem with that. Let us bring the applicant at the beginning and say, “Upon payment….” Say it again, hon. Kamateeka, so that we can vote.

MS KAMATEEKA: “Upon payment of the prescribed fee by the applicant, the authority shall furnish…” The rest remains as is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 53 be amended as proposed by the minister and amended by Members on the Floor.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I have some amendments.

    a. By deleting the words, “or any registration officer when authorised by the executive director.” and replacing it with, “may authorise staff of the authority to…” Then redraft clause 54(1) to read as follows: “The executive director may authorise staff of the authority to correct any error in the register, returns, index or certificates.”

    b.  Clause 54(2) by inserting immediately after the term “executive director” the words “or other staff of the authority as may be authorised by the executive director.” Then redraft clause 54(2) as follows: “Any correction made under Sub-section (1) shall be done without eraser and shall be authenticated by the executive director or other staff of the authority as may be authorised by executive director.” 

The justification is to align the clause with the Bill and to be consistent with drafting language and the usage of the phrases. I beg to move.

MS JOY ONGOM: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to appreciate the amendment of the minister. However, I feel that the authorisation should be in writing, not only authorising a member or a staff. In addition, when we talk of a staff, even a cleaner is a staff. Can we be specific on the staff that will be authorised? Most specifically, I feel that the authorisation should be in writing.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to say, “The executive director may in writing authorise…” something like that? Any objection, minister? 

MR KAKOBA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also thank the honourable member for raising this. However, much as we would like things to be very much clear, there are issues that are administrative and can be handled at that level. This issue of authorisation is an administrative that we do not need to be put here. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, altering data in a register can be treated orally?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to amend and say that, “The executive director may authorise staff of the authority in writing.” This is because I have on several occasions listened to the President of this country; he writes everything. When you tell a lie, he will tell you, “I wrote.” Can this person write for purposes of being very clear? 
There are some instances where a small person can change things and we end up getting messed up. If it is authorising alteration of things, why doesn’t he put it in writing? We want sanity and transparency. Thank you.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: For avoidance of risks in this very critical register- we have no problem with that formulation by Dr Bitekyerezo.

MS NANTUME: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I get concerned when we are giving authority to the executive director to correct any error. I would think that there must be a statement that, “In consultation with the relatives…” Let me give you an example. The executive director is a civil servant somewhere and is going to change information of the deceased at that level. I become suspicious that for any reasons, something may be changed in favour of someone’s interest.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Like altering the cause of death?

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the fear is correcting any error. Here, you do not need the relative. It is a mistake. It could be a typo or an omission. Do we still need relatives in the correction of these errors? The error could be at entry. This is purely administrative. 

However, on all the instances you see any error in the register; the register becomes the property of the authority. Those are the monthly returns they will be making. Do you want them to call a relative when they make these monthly returns, reports, an index – intellectual property of the authority. 

About certificates, who issues these certificates? What is our fear here? These documents that are within the authority, I would understand if you are talking about information or data. Most of these data cannot be changed or altered. When data is entered, it cannot be an error.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us include the requirement for writing. I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.
Clause 55

GEN. ARONDA NKYAKAIRIMA: I propose that clause 55 be moved to be part ix of the Bill, which is generally providing for offences and penalties under this Bill. The re-numbering should be done accordingly. The justification is that it makes a proper flow.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are just moving it from here and sending it to part ix of the Bill? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, clause 55 tends to suggest a punishment on the part of someone who fails to furnish information about the registration of death or birth. However, it omits to create an obligation and penalty on part of a registrar, who receives information to register and does not register. That is why I would propose to amend it to read that, “Any person, who being, under duty:

    a. To register the birth or death of any person;

    b. To furnish information, relating to the birth or death of any person and fails to do so within a specified period of time or refuses to state any of the prescribed parts commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding six points or a jail term not exceeding three months.”

The justification is that there are instances when you need things like the birth certificate. We have seen that being done when we used to go to register in charge of birth certificates when the birth certificates were needed at school. You would find people lining up and the registrar would actually not effect these registrations. The amendment will cause an obligation on the part of the registrar also to ensure that these registrations must be done expeditiously other than letting the files pile without registering because this may even facilitate corruption at the end of it. I beg to move.

MR ANYWARACH: I to agree with hon. Paul Mwiru. However, I suggest that we make his proposal a stand-alone clause. Why? It is because the spirit of clause 55(1) is on failure or refusal to undertake your duty in registering births or deaths within the prescribed period of time.

The second issue is on giving false information. This is still on the person probably to register, but now you have the person who is working as the registrar; the person supposed to register. This is what hon. Paul Mwiru is bringing. If he wilfully decides not to register you or decides to change or distort the information, there must be at least an imputed punishment against him. Therefore, that should be a stand-alone clause.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I thought clause 55(1) is all inclusive to create an obligation on the registrar; the person registering cannot refuse or fail to do so.

Secondly, to create an offence - actually clause 55(1) makes it an offence and even prescribes the punishment to a person who does not register or refuses to register. To be clear, it reads: “Any person who, being under a duty to register the births or deaths of any person fails to do so within the prescribed period or refuses to state any of the prescribed particulars, commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding six currency points or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months.” It is all inclusive. What I understood from hon. Paul Mwiru’s submission was about creating an offence for a person who wilfully refuses or gives false information. 

In clause 55 (2) if I give false information to a person, like hon. Paul Mwiru said,  to the registrar - this particular clause creates an offence for me to do so- I thought the two would be - the registrar is catered for in clause 55 (1).

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, this is also a drafting problem. I am glad that hon. Oboth and I were all at the International Law Institute for drafting lessons. What we are saying is that the message which should come out very clearly in drafting is: First, we should create an obligation for a person who has a duty to furnish information about the registration. 

Secondly, the person who is supposed to register - that is why this section relating to the offences and penalties is coming almost at the end of the Act. I hope my brother is convinced now. We are only trying to be specific - because even when you read this clause the way it is, you cannot easily discern it. At this point we are talking about the registrar and the person who fails to furnish information on the same. That is why I wish to reiterate my earlier proposal, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: However, in my view, it contains both but maybe what you want is to split them – clause 55(1) for the registrar and clause 55(2) for the person who fails to give information. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I am now at clause 55(1). I am trying to cater for the registrar and the person who takes information to the registrar. I would say that any person who, being under duty to register or report the births or deaths of any person, fails to do so, within the prescribed period of - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What did you say?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Any person who, being under a duty to register - that means the registrar - or report the birth or death of any person - doesn’t it cater for both the registrar and the person who takes the information?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why don’t we split that section into two so that the registrar and the person failing to give information are stand-alone?

MR OBOTH: I thought the proposal by hon. Dr Bitekyerezo would save us the ink and paper because it creates a duty - I, who is the registrar and who is also a parent or a guardian and I refuse to report - I think that would save the ink but since we have enough space, we can actually create a stand-alone provision. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Minister, do you have any objection to splitting these? It is because you have put both the duties of the registrar and the giver of the information together. Suppose you allow the clause for the registrar to stand alone from the one who gives the information, each with separate punishment?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, separating them will strengthen the clause.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, the clause should be split and we will ask the legal officers to restate it.

MS NANTUME: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to inquire something from the minister. In the circumstance that a person is found dead somewhere minus any data or relative, who will be responsible for registering the death of that person? Who will have committed the offence of not registering the death of that person because they cannot keep that body rotting without burial?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We have already taken care of it in the previous clauses.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: In clause 56, Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I propose that it be made part of clause 58 of the Bill, which generally gives powers to the minister to make regulations for proper implementation of the Act and renumbering to be done accordingly. The justification is for proper drafting and orderliness of the Bill, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you just lifting this from clause 56 to make it part of clause 58 without any change? I put the question that clause 56 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, agreed to.
Clause 57

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: In clause 57, stating provisions - I agree with the relevance of the provisions in light of the insertion of the new parts - 5 and 6.  However, I have proposed a redraft of clause 59 of the Bill, which will take care of the committee’s concerns under the proposed clause 57(2). For the concerns under clause 57 (1) above, I have proposed to redraft it under clause 60; it will be read to you later under transitional arrangements when we get there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall look at it under Clause 60. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Okay, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you very much. Let us go back to the committee’s report.

Clause 29

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, go back to the reports of the committee. We are looking at clause 29. The numbering will of course sequentially change.  That was about the compulsory registration. I put the question that clause 29 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 29, agreed to.)

Clause 30

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, in clause 30 on registration requirements, the committee proposes an amendment by inserting, after sub-clause 5, a new sub-clause 6 to read: “It shall be the duty of an applicant to prove citizenship of Uganda before being registered under this Act.”  The justification is to save time and resources of the authority in getting evidence of citizenship for each applicant.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.)

(Clause 31, agreed to.)
Clause 32

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, in clause 32 on the cancellation of registration, the committee proposes an amendment by:

    i. Re-numbering the current provision as sub-clause 1 , and replace it with the following redraft: “The authority shall cancel registration of a person where: (a) a person has under the law ceased to be a citizen of Uganda; (b) the registration is based on inaccurate and incomplete information; (c) the registration was obtained by fraud, false representation, bribery, or deceit; (d) the card needs to be re-issued due to a defect; (e) double or multiple registrations have taken place; and/or (f) there is an order of Court of cancellation of registration. The justification is to widen the scope of circumstances under which cancellation can take place under the law.

    ii. We propose the insertion of a new Sub-Clause (ii, iii, iv and v) to read: “(ii) before cancellation of the registration and revocation of the document of registration and identification as provided for in sub-section (i), the authority shall issue notice to the holder of the authority’s intention to cancel registration and shall provide the person with reasonable opportunity and forum to show cause why the registration should be cancelled.” 
    iii. The justification is to respect the principle of natural justice, and to eliminate possibilities of unfair and biased cancellation of registration.

In (iii) we propose the provision to read as follows: “Where the registration of a citizen is cancelled or revoked, but such cancellation or revocation is not due to the loss of the person’s Ugandan citizenship, such person may file a new application for registration within such time and upon meeting such condition as maybe provided for in the regulations under this Act; (iv) the minister shall, by notice in the gazette, publish the names and numbers of documents of registration and identification of the person whose registration has been cancelled including those who have received, neglected or failed to surrender the document of registration and identification.” The justification is to put the public on notice about persons whose documents have been cancelled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.


Clause 35

MS NAMUGWANYA: In clause 35, Madam Chair, on the responsibilities of registration officers, we propose to amend paragraph 35(e) by replacing the existing provision with the following phrase: “At the close of each month forward personally to the supervising officer a return of the registration made in a month in the prescribed form.”

The justification is that it is more practical for a registration officer to make a return at the end of the month than at the conclusion of each registration exercise. It is also more practical for the return to be made to the supervising officer than to the executive director.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MS NAMUGWANYA: In clause 36, on non-disclosure of information, the committee proposes an amendment by deleting the phrase, “all in the course of discharging his or her function” in the last line. The justification is that the Access to Information Act, 2005 provides for the procedure of access to information and records of Government ministries, departments, local governments, statutory corporations and bodies, commissions and other Government organisations and agencies. Also under the current Bill, clause 42 sub-clause (iii) provides for access to information where required.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37
MS NAMUGWANYA: This clause relates to national identification register and the committee proposes an amendment in sub-clause 37 (ii) by adding the phrase: “All in any other form after database.” The justification is to cater for the emerging new technology that may invent new and better forms of data storage. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, on continuous update of information, the committee proposes an amendment in sub-clause (2) by inserting the phrase, “Upon notification and with the knowledge of the concerned person” between the words “may” and “you.”

The redraft will read: “For the purposes of this section, the authority may, upon notification and with the knowledge of the concerned person, use the information from other data bases in Government agencies relating to registration of that person to update the register.”

The justification is to protect the personal information of citizens who should give consent in case of any changes, and to eliminate possibilities of abuse of power by the authority. 

In sub-clause 39(3) we propose the replacement of the word, “they” between the words “about” and “person” in the second line with the word “that.” The redraft will read thus: “A person registered under this Act shall notify the authority of any change or error in the information recorded about that person in the register.” The justification is for clarity.

In sub-clause 39 (4) the committee proposes the replacement of the word “thirty,” in the first line, with the word, “ninety.” The justification is to enlarge the period of registration for us to make it realistic in terms of implementation.
In sub-clause 39 (5) we propose the substitution of “1” with “3” and “2” with “4,” in the second line; the redraft will read thus: “A person who, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with sub-clause (3) or (4) commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 50 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both.”  The justification is for proper cross- referencing. 

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to propose an insertion, in clause 39(1) of the phrase: “In consultation with National Information Technology Authority.”

The justification is that under the National Information Technology Authority Act, it is the mandate of the NITAU to set up, monitor and regulate standards of information technology across ministries, MDS, agencies and parastatals. 

Madam Chairperson, the proposed amendment that the Chairperson is bringing - for the authority to interact with other data bases of other MDAs and ministries - may cause conflict and insecurity of data. It is the National Information Authority, which is mandated to guarantee safety and security of the data.  It is this National Information Technology Authority that will regulate and monitor the standards of the National Data Bank where all these MDAs and ministry data bases will be interlinking.

Without the approval of NITAU, it will leave the other MDAs data base at a risk of being interrupted or misused by the authority. That is the reason I am proposing that the registration authority interacts with data bases of the other MDAs; it should do it in consultation or approval by the National Information Technology Authority, which has the core mandate to protect the data. I beg to propose.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I rise with a lot of pain and humility, to oppose the amendment of clause 39(2). The re-drafting in that clause gives the impression that an update is actually re-writing of the information.
Clause 39(2) as it appears in the Bill serves the purpose. The data bases being referred to here should not in any way affect my personal information in the registration certificate.

We want to have a Government that can relate with other agencies. If an Oboth, an Opio or Waiswa somewhere commits a crime and the passport office or in the revenue authority, where there is no inter-linkage on updates - how would a person involved in the criminal act, for instance in the Judiciary, accept his data to be updated on the other side? 

Madam Chairperson, if this is to be a database, we should be able to allow the spirit and the purpose of the headnote on the continuous update of information. It is neither registration nor fresh registration. What is an update in ordinary English? 

There are things that can be updated but my personal data can never be updated. The bio-metric system can never be updated unless I am there. This is where the value for this very law would benefit not only Government, but all of us. You cannot put the authority to the task of getting information about the concerned person from other data bases. You will be crippling Government from ICT –(Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Chairperson and hon. Oboth. The information I would like to give is that, the re-drafting as it is, is the correct way to go because of the experience of other countries, which have already done it this way.

Experience from other countries actually shows that there is a scope of misuse of one’s data. There is even a possibility of somebody totally changing the recording of what is recorded about a person without that person knowing or giving him permission.

In countries like the US, the problems they have been getting - (Interjection) – I am still continuing - there is what they call identity theft, where by somebody can even change ones identity and replace it with that of another person. The provision, as it is here, is correct.

There is a need for a person for whom one is changing data to be notified. It should be “shall be” not “may” because if we use the word, “may” one may not be notified of the changes.

MR OBOTH: what I know is that hon. James Kabajo is an IT guru and even going by his word “shall” there is a presumption again, which is not permitted because it is not a mandatory exercise.
Madam Chair, leave clause 39(2) as it stands where it reads thus: “For purposes of this section, the authority may use the information from other data bases from Government agencies relating to registration of persons, to update the register.”

Should we decide that, for this update to take place, one has to look for a person like hon. Auma in Abim, or James from Kiboga - this update is a misconception that we are going to give fresh information.  Fresh information is not here. One cannot change somebody’s data, as hon. Hon. James Kakooza was saying - even in the US, a person’s data cannot be changed, which relates to them; the bio-metrics data - what can be changed is the person’s criminal record, their family data, for example if they are divorced in court. They do not need to ask that person to give information, for instance, when they divorced.

If a person’s child died and the death was registered, for example, in Kiboga, they cannot come to you to ask for such information. Because the child had been registered the data can be updated. This is what I am talking about, honourable members. Do you need information - you are dragging this and it will mean that every time something changes, one has to go and update their data. Is this the intention of this law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you objecting to the amendment by the committee?

MR OBOTH: Yes, I vehemently object to it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I was just thinking that if the registrar checks the marriage register and sees that the person got married say last month, must they look for that person and ask whether they really got married? (Laughter) Or they just use the information from that register to adjust that person’s data? Must they look for that person?
MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, the Electoral Commission may use the information in the register to comply, maintain, revive and update the voters’ register. Since in the section the headnote talks about the use of information in the register, it does not, for the benefit of reconciliation, prevent you from doing what you want to do. I believe the Electoral Commission can borrow data but can also correct data and know exactly - for instance, if I am going to carry out an election in Bigiri and the data in Government is talking about Ugshs.16 million, I can pick the data and use it to count people in Bugiri. 

It helps in bridging the gap, compare data and in getting credible results. We have what is called reconciliation of figures. If this is the basis, it gives foundation for anybody to get any source of information. It can serve as a basis for doing work. I do not think it is redundant; it has a meaning in itself.

MR MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Chair. I would like to bring to the attention of the House and specifically to hon. James Kakooza that the Electoral Commission is an agency of Government. When you look at the amendment moved by the chair of the committee, you realise that we are actually re-enforcing (3) to allow the Electoral Commission, as an agency of Government,  to use that information.

Once it receives this data, it can use it as per its mandate under Article 60 to update, compile and do everything else. This will save the space we have been talking about. We are only moving this to save Parliament’s time in regard to engaging into arguments. They can use the information under (3). Thank you.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would also like to agree with the amendment by hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi that Clause 40 (2) is redundant and as justified by hon. Paul Mwiru, the Electoral Commission is indeed a government agency.

Since the chairperson of the committee has already moved an amendment to allow the usage of information by government agencies and departments, I do not see the reason for us to introduce another clause on just one particular agency when they are so many. We should leave it under (3) as reinforced by the chair of the committee in her amendment. Thank you.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I do not see any harm whatsoever in maintaining Clause 40 (2) in this law. The clause if you read it verbatim it says: “The Electoral Commission may use the information contained in the register to compile, maintain, revise and update the Voters Register.”

Madam Chair, one of the core functions of the Electoral Commission, under Article 61 (1) (e) is to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters’ register. A voters register is a register of citizens of Uganda above 18 years, who have volunteered to vote. 

Clause 40 (2) is only permissive; they may choose to use the register of citizens to update their register or they may not. What better place do we have to ascertain citizenship other than this? It is the register of citizens of the Republic of Uganda.

There is absolutely nothing wrong with this. It is our responsibility to allow the Electoral Commission use data that has been sieved, cleaned and compiled for purposes of updating the national voters register.

Madam Chair, there has always been the argument that the Electoral Commission is independent - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chair, I appreciate my brother’s point of view. When you look at the amendment moved by the chair of the committee, you realise that (2) limits the use of that information but (3), as amended by the chairperson, gives a wide latitude it can be used for anything.

MR FOX ODOI: I have listened very carefully to hon. Paul Mwiru and still maintain that the draft in 40 (2) in the Bill is the correct way to go.

Madam Chair, I was addressing the question of the independency of the Electoral Commission. But hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi confirmed that this is not an issue and I will let it pass.

MR WADRI: Thank you. Madam Chair, we should not narrow the purpose of this registration exercise just to answer the concerns of Article 60 in our Constitution. There are other government agencies like the National Planning Authority, which require this information in order to properly plan for this country: the health sector, tax collectors, the education sector, the immigration department, and so on, all need this information for various reasons. 

It will be very fraudulent if we only explicitly, in legislation like this, pick one agency and make it the only known users of this information. What kind of legislation is this? What motive do we have? Why don’t we name all the government agencies that will be allowed to use this information? Because even when you talk of the role of Electoral Commission, under Article 61, it is first of all using the data to update the register, just like any other agency will use the same data for its intended purpose.

It is fraudulent for us to explicitly bring in one agency when there are many agencies out there. I support the position of hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, give us a rationale.

MR JAMES BABA: The Electoral Commission is the only body that is mentioned in the Constitution. All other bodies like the National Planning Authority, Uganda Human Rights Commission and so on, are not specifically mentioned. Therefore, we are making exception here in this Bill so that the Electoral Commission may use this data - it is not mandatory. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, I would like to support the minister’s submission about the Electoral Commission using this information if there is need to update the voters register –(Interjections)- hon. Kassiano Wadri, honestly, as a seminarian, let us be very honest to ourselves. The most valid information we have, as far as citizenship is concerned, is going to be this register.

In fact, if the Electoral Commission accesses this information, vote rigging will stop because we will be able to know the people eligible to vote, for example, in Terego. No inflated register for Terego County will emerge at all. It does not do any harm, when it stays. Colleagues, let us agree to let the Electoral Commission access this information for purposes of removing people not eligible to vote. 

MR OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Chair. In a simplistic way, I initially thought this was a little obvious but I eventually discovered that it is more complex. I would be interested in knowing, if 40(2) were to be deleted, what provision is there that will impede Electoral Commission from accessing and as amended, utilising the information? I would have loved to hear that from the minister because this thing of isolating one agency and emphasising it - unless I am not understanding what is behind it.

However, if you are going to say that amend Clause 40(3) and say “access and use the information”, how will Electoral Commission fail to perform? May I hear that from the minister? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, this is an important provision in this Bill and - (Interjection) - We are legislating for a smarter Uganda, it is not a question of conceding. The point here is that of all the clauses that were discussed when the committee undertook to do the work you have tasked them to, the most frequently debated clause was this one. Therefore, we undertook sufficient research and consultation, not only in government but also outside government.

Madam Chairperson, the following were the participating agencies: the Directorate of Immigration, the URSB, NITA (U), Electoral Commission – there were five agencies. None of those is specifically mentioned in the Constitution when it comes to accessing information. It is only Electoral Commission and, therefore, we are very careful in this formulation that an institution, which is a constitutional creation, should be specifically mentioned. 

The debate has been whether this Clause 2 does contradict Article 61 of the Constitution and this has been seriously debated. Therefore, this Article 61(1)(e) of the Constitution and Section 18 of the Electoral Commission Act enjoins the commission to compile, maintain, revise and update the register as has been stated. 

Both provisions do not restrict this source of information from which to compile the data that they may wish to use at any particular time. Another question of debate is whether the Bill compromises independence of the commission as enshrined in this Article.

Subject to (a) of these matters that have been discussed, it is clear that the Electoral Commission, guided by Article 62 of the Constitution, can at its own instance collaborate with other agencies in the performance of its functions. For instance, in its Act cap 140 mandating the commission to ensure that there are secure conditions to conduct elections - and this calls for it to collaborate with the Police. Regarding appointment of the tribunals, during the course of its work it works with the Judiciary. In other words, regarding the question of whether the specific mention does undermine its independence, the matter has been researched and it is not in question. Moreover, it is provided for that it may wish to use information from other sources. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I can understand the anxiety about the Electoral Commission, given its constitutional mandate. However, I also need to be persuaded as to why there is that fear because members are saying it is frivolous, we do not have space and so on. I think those are not convincing reasons. 

To me, the provision could be there or may not be there but my understanding is that the minister put the provision Electoral Commission for purposes of emphasis. This is given the importance of this registration that is going to create a very important database, and also given the cardinal importance of the functions of the Electoral Commission in as far as creating a voters register and updating it is concerned. Therefore, I do not see any harm if we leave that provision there. 

In statistical management, there is what we call triangulation of information. My understanding is that the Electoral Commission will still be compiling its information the way it has been doing but we should not limit it. We should give it authority to refer to any other available information, whether from this registration or from UBOS census data and so forth.

My question is, what is the fear among the members who are saying this provision should not be there? Its co-existence with (3) does not create any harm, in my view. Actually, the robust argument to delete it is actually what creates frivolity in this debate -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to justify the fear. Under the provisions we have passed, you will realise that you can go and register someone at the embassy in Washington or South Sudan. However, there are different requirements for registration for purposes of a voter register. 

For instance, I read through the requirements when we were passing them and it is not a requirement that as one registers, one has to register where he or she stays or originates from. This is in the provision we have passed a few minutes back.

However, when you go to the Electoral Commission’s Act, it is a requirement that you must register where you reside or where you originate from. Therefore, what are we saying? With that fear, you can easily transfer information from South Sudan, Washington or London and they are used for purposes of the voter register. 

That is why we are saying that we are allowing the Electoral Commission to access this data in as far as they want but once they receive this data, they can use it to compile, update or in any other way they want and we have no problem. We are saying that (3), which has been created covers that. We are doing that without delving into the credibility of the information -

THE CHAIRPERSON: How will (3) stop them from doing what you are worried about? 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, (3) gives them that information and I am saying that our proposal reinforces them to use because (2) limits them that when they access the information, they can only use it for purposes of (1) to compile, maintain, revise and update the register.

We are saying that once they receive it under (3) as amended by the chairperson, they can use it for anything. That is why we are saying that (2) becomes redundant because (3) gives the latitude that you can use it in any way.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Chairperson, in medical science we call that DOA; your argument is Dead On Arrival –(Laughter)- because as long as you concede to (3), then your argument collapses. I think the Electoral Commission has the attributes of who qualifies to be a voter.

For instance, the register will have children but I do not think the Electoral Commission will import children and put them in the voters register. Maybe you have mistrust on the Electoral Commission but that is a different matter.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I do not intend to go into the debate because we have already dealt with the debate and we have talked about independence. On the issue of redundancy, in addition to what I found my brother, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, saying on the Floor of the House and very well without struggling, he talked about emphasis for the avoidance of doubt but more than that, it goes further. 

The involvement in the compilation of the voters register, of accessing materials from this particular authority by the Electoral Commission is not a matter that should be left to the mere interpretation that you can only go to (3) where you find agents of government and then infer the power of the Electoral Commission to access any information from the authority. You will be making a fundamental mistake and that is where we get problems.

For instance, the moment we drop it then it is on the Hansard and tomorrow my brother, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi rushes to the Constitutional Court and says, you see they even dropped it specifically on the Floor of the House. Please do not involve us in that impasse. Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, the Deputy Attorney-General is making a fundamental legal interpretation. He is the one who started by saying that the issue of Electoral Commission’s independence cannot be contested. At the same time he goes back and says, it should not be left to interpretation, the Electoral Commission should be directed to use this information. I find this totally contradicting the Constitution and I wish - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I think what the provision is saying is that this information is available if you need it. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, I was still giving information to hon. Baryomunsi before the Attorney-General took over. The information I wanted to give in reference to what my friend hon. Paul Mwiru raised was his suspicion that Electoral Commission, once given this liberty to use this information if necessary, will be able to manipulate it for purposes of elections. That argument should be dismissed -(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I spoke in very clear English and I do not remember using the word “manipulate”. Is it in order for my honourable colleague to attribute statements to me, which I have not used in this House? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe that is what he thought you were saying.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson and thank you hon. Mwiru for withdrawing the earlier statement. The point I am making is that there are laid down procedures on how Electoral Commission registers a person who is going to vote. They will register, update and display and the citizens will be able, at every village, to verify whether this person is a foreigner or not.

Therefore, this issue of saying the Electoral Commission will do that should be dismissed as it is not true. The point I also want to make is, I do not see any disagreement because those who are saying we should not emphasise Electoral Commission - you are saying we can include it as any other agency.

The minister is proposing that we emphasise it for the reasons the Attorney-General has advanced because Electoral Commission is not like any other agency. We should understand this, we are politicians and it is not like any agency of government because the work that it handles is very sensitive for politics of this country. I do not see any disagreement and I support the minister’s proposal.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. It is a very interesting argument that my brother hon. Mwiru wants it in (3) but does not want it in (2). If I may use an example; you can give me with your left hand but do not give me with your right hand. The rationale is you definitely think (2) is stronger. 

If we want to know, under Article 17 of the Constitution, duties of every citizen, Article 17 (1)(h) states, “… to register for electoral and other local purposes.” Coming to the objective of this law under paragraph 2, at present the registration of persons as citizens of Uganda, the registration of citizens for other lawful purposes and the registration of voters is currently conducted by Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Board under the Citizenship and Immigration Control Act cap 66, the Uganda Regulation Services Bureau Act cap 210, the Electoral Commission under the Electoral Commission Act cap 140 respectively.

Madam Chairperson, you cannot go to a place when you do not know the direction. The direction of this Bill is right from the beginning, that this is where we need harmony. You cannot be a citizen - we would not even be elected or contested if we were not citizens. 

This is a register for all citizens and we do not want the Electoral Commission to access the national citizen – [Mr Ekanya: “Clarification.”]– I am very clear in what I am saying. I have ignored the clarification. 

Madam Chairperson, this is a matter of clarity and a matter that the Attorney-General said for emphasis. In legal drafting, if there is a matter repeated or clearly stated and we have been saying it here that let us not state the obvious but here, because we are legislating, we have to state what is very obvious.

I do not see any harm. If your left hand wants to give -(Member timed out.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please conclude.
 
MR OBOTH: I want to conclude, Madam Chairperson. Hon. Ekanya told me he was very informed and I am telling him I am very clear in my communication. 

Madam Chairperson, the principle of the law is clear from the objectives. This country is interested in seeing the direction for us to go. I would invite my friends that we go there together. Whether we think that the water is too deep, let us go with our first foot and we see. If the law does not work out, we shall not take our second foot. I invite you to support this as it is a very good provision.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what I hear from your arguments are that you have no problem except you do not want it to be stated; you want it to be a standalone. You said it is okay under (3) and if it is okay under (3) then there is no problem.

Honourable members, I put the question that – 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I think we are not knitting our arguments properly and are missing the big picture. I was surprised at what the Attorney-General said. Our argument stems from Article 59, which is about the right to vote. It states that every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age or above has a right to vote. 

When they created the Electoral Commission under Article 61, unlike many other statutory instruments, the Electoral Commission was given a direct function by the Constitution and not this Parliament to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register. That very same function was carried verbatim to Section 18 of the Elections Act, which says that the Electoral Commission shall have the duty to compile. 

In Section 19; registration of voters, this is what this section talks about: “Any person who -

    a) is a citizen of Uganda; and
    b) is 18 years of age or above 
shall apply to be registered as a voter in a parish or a ward where that person originates from or resides.” 

We are trying to knitting the argument in order to avoid this ambiguity. When they registered people under this exercise – (Interjections) - I do not want to go into those arguments because they may be sentimental. When they registered people under this exercise, everyone was free to register. The Electoral Commission has a mandate. If I knit his argument and correlate it to this provision of the law that after this exercise, a voters register will be drawn and pinned up for verification, to quote hon. Bahati, that will negate the Electoral Commission’s mandate under Section 19 where I am required to apply. 

You may recall that this registration was not mandatory but optional. There are many Ugandans who did not register and by the command of sections 59 and 19, they are free, at any given time, to go to the Electoral Commission and apply to be registered. To disenfranchise them under sub-section (2) to which –(Interjection)- I thought that I had made this argument and hoped that the good doctor had understood. To disenfranchise them and tell them that they will not vote, by all means and accounts, is not only unconstitutional but also borders on legislating on ingenuity. (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. Is the honourable member in order to mislead this House by saying that when the provision says that the Electoral Commission ‘may’ use the information, this means that it is the sole information that it is going to use for purposes of registration? Is he in order?    

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the provision here is not taking away the power of the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain, revise and update the register. All that they are saying is that as you are doing that, you may also use this information if you want. That is what it is saying.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I would imagine that we as the legislators draw our powers from the Constitution. We are all mindful of the fact that the Electoral Commission is created by the Constitution and I am surprised that in the entire process of this Registration of Persons Bill, there was no reference to the voters register. The voters register has been there and can only be updated and new persons are added as time goes but the basic voters register is there. 

When the process was starting, how come that the ministry did not think of utilising the data and information that was already available in the voters register? Why? The immigration is all biometric. Why didn’t you use the information as contained – 

I think that we should not juggle with words. We must respect the Constitution as we are bound by the law. We vowed before God using the Bible that we shall honour and respect this Constitution. I have my fears with the way we are proceeding. There is absolutely no reason as to why the Electoral Commission should be singled out. You can mention the Immigration Board, the Ministry of Education and Sports or any agency of Government to use the information. Why single out the Electoral Commission? 

Okay, they said that it is because the Electoral Commission is mentioned in the Constitution. What about the Immigration Board that is also mentioned by the Constitution? Why single out the Electoral Commission?

Madam Chairperson, I am now beginning to suspect and I told the minister right from the beginning that he was bringing an exercise without the law. You remember that I was on the Floor of Parliament to challenge your bringing the process before the law –(Interruption)

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We have the immigration law cap 66 in place that was used to undertake this exercise, and we were within the mandate of that legal framework and so we are not in any illegality. Is the honourable member in order to contribute and mislead the House that we undertook a registration exercise illegally when there is a law? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, do you know about that law? 

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have been listening to different contributions and I want to clarify that when the honourable minister, other ministers and members quoted why the Electoral Commission is being brought here - It is within the constitutional mandate. I do not see why members are arguing that when the Electoral Commission is talked about here by saying ‘may use’, this is going to take away the mandate. 

Streamlining this law is going to cure so many problems, including issues of passports. People have been complaining that aliens are getting our passports and I believe that this citizenship registration will streamline voting and check all those fake people who have been using our things. 

I do not see why we are wasting time on this concern when it is even going to help Ugandans to have free and fair elections because the voters from the border areas –(Mrs Museveni rose)- Hon. Janet Museveni, I can give you information. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: She wants to contribute so please conclude.

MS NYAKIKONGORO: Let me conclude. I am saying why are people worried that it is going to distort the Electoral Commission? First of all, it is going to cure the problem of aliens that have been voting in this country and two, it will streamline citizens to contribute. 

By the way, this Electoral Commission may or may not use the data. A lot of funds have been wasted on all those things that Electoral Commission has been doing so it is going to reduce on the budget of Electoral Commission so that, that money can be channelled and used in other sectors. Why don’t you support this one and we pass it instead of wasting time?

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I had caught your eye.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I have seen you.

DR BAYIGGA: Hon. Ssekikubo, this is a friendly force. Madam Chairperson, I have listened carefully and I do not see any reason why we should be excited when there are documents to quote.

Hon. Muwanga Kivumbi read the Electoral Commission Act and the English is very clear that to register, you must apply. “Shall” means mandatory. To use the data on the national register for purposes of updating the electoral register is incorrect because there is no application whatsoever. 

Members, we get excited for nothing. You will need to amend this Act first and foremost. Let me first make this point, hon. Ekanya. You have always been catching the eye of the Speaker so it is me now.

Madam Chairperson, I am saying that under this Act, there are mandatory provisions for those who want to register for purposes of participating in elections. The English is clear and emphasises the mandatory aspect of it. Therefore, unless this is amended, there is no way the Electoral Commission can use data from the national register when somebody has not applied. This is even for updating and it can even be misused if taken as it is – (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I happened to be in Tororo with the Minister of Internal Affairs in a meeting for consultation on registration. I presented a case to the Minister of Internal Affairs then who is here that being from the border, there are very many Kenyan women and men but especially the women who got married and under our law, they have been voting. This is because they are citizens through marriage under the naturalisation process.

The minister then said those categories of people were not allowed to register because there was going to be another form. In my constituency, I have so many people who have been denied the opportunity to register because the process has not been completed. Therefore, if we now allow Electoral Commission to go ahead and use this data, we are going to disenfranchise thousands of people who have been voting and who are citizens through marriage because the Electoral Commission is saying, “you have been registered” and yet the process has not been completed. 

That is why we are just requesting that the Electoral Commission or any government agency can use this information at their will but not through a directive under the law. We are going to disenfranchise many people because the minister said that there was going to be another form for registration of categories of those people. 

The process has not been completed and now you are saying the Electoral Commission should go ahead and use this. What will I tell my voters? You told me when we were in Tororo.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much for that information. Let me first of all rub this one in. This information has been very important but for purposes of our communication, when somebody wants to participate in an election to be on the voters register, we are saying that the law is clear. You must apply and you must be 18 years old.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I once went to Sweden and I acted as an election observer but in Sweden, as soon you reach the age of 18 years, whether you apply or not they send you a voter’s card with a letter saying you are now of voting age and this is your card. That is where we are heading.

MR WADRI: Madam Chairperson, I was given permission to give information. The information I want to give to this House, which I shared with the minister some time back is that the registration form was very faulty and a number of well-informed people shied from being registered because of the definition of a citizen. I am a Ugandan by descent but the words “Ugandan by descent” were not on that form.

Many people actually questioned how they would register under a faulty arrangement. Therefore, many people are going to be disenfranchised from this exercise. You can refresh your minds by looking at the form. A provision for a Ugandan by descent was conspicuously absent and people therefore shunned the whole exercise.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson and I rest my case.

MRS MUSEVENI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I just wanted to say that it is puzzling for me just sitting here listening to all of us wondering why leaders are trying to put words in this clause that is so clear and so simple. It just says, “The Electoral Commission may use this information contained in the register.” This is not something they saying must be done. It just clarifies that the Electoral Commission can use this information also. This is good for everybody in this House, I would imagine.

I do not know why you are trying to craft some words and put them in this clause to make it unrealistic. If we are all talking about this, I think it is so simple and it is not harmful to the electoral register.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, do not intimidate colleagues. Maybe we can defer this and do some other work while you think. Let us go to Clause 41.

I put the question that Clause 41 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Procedure, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have deferred that.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I move on a point of procedure as to whether we are passing these provisions with adequate quorum in this House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 do stand part of the Bill. Honourable chairperson, you had an amendment.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Clause 44; national identification card. The committee proposes that we amend sub clause 44(4) by replacing the current provision with the following sentence: “A national identity card issued under this Act shall be valid until up to such a time as the minister may, by notice in the gazette, declare and upon such declaration, every person with a national identity card so declared to be invalid shall, within the given period in the gazette of the declaration, present himself or herself before a registration officer to be issued with another national identity card in accordance with the Act.”

The justification is to give allowance for unforeseeable circumstances that may require identity cards to be declared invalid.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 be amended as proposed. Another amendment?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I have some minor amendments on Clause 44 to improve my chairperson’s formulation. I have no objection but I propose the following wording for the purposes of clarity and to require that the validity of a national identification card shall be prescribed by regulations and not in the gazette. 

Clause 44(4), “A national identification card shall be valid for such a time as the minister shall prescribe by regulations.” I propose to substitute Clause 44(5) with the following: “Upon expiry of the national identification card, the authority shall, on the application of the holder, renew the card.”

Further, I propose to insert a new sub clause (6) as follows: “Subject to Clause 43(2), for the avoidance of doubt, expiry of a national identification card does not amount to the expiry of citizenship of a person.” That is an improvement. 

The justification is that this should be a matter of prescription by the minister through regulations given that circumstances may change from time to time that we do not have to put the expiry period in the Act. It should be left for the regulations. 

We have improved 44(5) to replace the word “may” with “shall” to ensure that there is no arbitrariness on the part of the authority to guarantee citizens that upon expiry of their cards, they will be renewed. 

Further to note is the insertion of the new sub clause 44(6) for purpose of clarity. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MS NAMUGWANYA: Cancellation of national identification cards. The committee proposes to amend as follows:

    i. By renumbering into sub clauses, insert “(1)” before the statement “the authority shall”.
    ii. Amend by inserting at the beginning of paragraph (a), the phrase “subject to the Section 32 of this Act”. The redraft will read, “(1)(a), subject to Section 32 of this Act, the authority cancels the registration of a person.”
    iii. Insert a new sub clause (2) to read, “Upon the death of a person his or her national identity card automatically lapses.”

The justification is to eliminate opportunities of impersonation by citizens who may use an identity card of the deceased.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 45 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49

MS NAMUGWANYA: Cancellation of alien’s identity cards. The committee proposes to amend as follows:

    i. By renumbering into sub clauses, insert “(1)” before the statement, “the authority shall”. 
    ii. 49(a) Amend by inserting, at the beginning of the paragraph, the phrase “Subject to Section 32 of this Act”. The redraft will thus read, “(1)(a), Subject to Section 32 of this Act, the authority cancels the registration of a person.”
    iii. Insert a new sub clause (2) to read, “Upon the death of an alien his or her alien identity card automatically lapses.”

The justification is to eliminate opportunities of impersonation of the alien.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

MS NAMUGWANYA: Registration of offences. The committee recommends amending as follows:

    i. By deleting 48 on the second last line and replace with “120”
    ii. Delete the word “three” on the second last line and replace it with “five”. Thus the redraft to read, “…commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 120 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.”

The justification is to provide for a more stringent punishment so as to deter committing of the offences.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 51 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 51, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MS NAMUGWANYA: We propose to amend by:

    i. Amend sub clause 53(1) by inserting the phrase “subject to the provisions of this Act” on the first line. The redraft will read, “Subject to the provisions of this Act, a person shall…”

    ii. The justification is for protection of persons who make, produce, print, bind and distribute documents under the provisions of this Act.

    iii. Inserting the phrase “a fine not exceeding 168 currency points” between the words “two” and “imprisonment”.
    iv. By replacing “10” between the words “exceeding” and “years” on the last line with “seven”.
    v. By adding the words “or both” at the end of the sentence. The redraft will thus read, “…commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 160 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding seven years or both.”

The justification is the period of imprisonment was reduced to seven years because 10 years were not commensurate to the offence and a fine was introduced to provide for a corresponding fine.

    vi. By inserting a new sub clause (3) to read, “A person who is convicted under sub clauses (1) and (2) shall forfeit to the state the equipment and material that was used to commit the offence.”

The justification is to provide for a stringent penalty so as to discourage the would-be offenders from committing a similar offence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 53 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54, agreed to.

Clause 55

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I have no objection to the principle in the proposals of the committee. I have however proposed to redraft the clause without making any particular reference to the words “felony” and “misdemeanour”. The redraft would read, “If a person contravenes any provisions of this Act or regulations made under this Act, and where no penalty is specifically provided for, that person commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 36 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 18 months or to both.” 

Justification is that the words “felony” and “misdemeanour” are defined within the meaning of this Act neither is it easy to classify the offences that are envisaged under this general penalty clause being proposed. Felony or misdemeanour are defined in the Penal Code. I beg to move.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I have something on clause 55. Maybe I need to be clarified if we are on 55, part X – Miscellaneous.

MS NAMUGWANYA: The committee had inserted the new clause 55 after clause 54. The introduction of that clause is what the minister was responding to. The honourable colleague is responding to the original clause 55 in the Bill. Therefore, I request that we first handle the inserted clause 55.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Of the minister?

MS NAMUGWANYA: It is the committee which inserted it. The minister was responding to the insertion by the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the new clause 55 say?

MS NAMUGWANYA: The new clause 55, which we introduced here is general penalty. It reads as follows: “If a person contravenes any provisions of this Act or of any rules made subject to this Act, where no other penalty is specifically provided for, that person commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, in the case of a misdemeanour to a fine not exceeding 36 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 18 months or to both and in the case of a felony, to a fine of 72 currency points or to imprisonment for a term of not less three years or both.” Justification is to provide a penalty for offences not expressly provided for under the Bill.

This is what the minister was responding to, honourable Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, that is his proposal? You made some proposal in answer to that?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes, we have an amendment, Madam Chair and honourable colleagues. I have no objection to the committee’s position. However, I propose to re-draft the clause without making any particular reference to the words “felony” and “misdemeanour”. We then re-draft it as follows: “If a person contravenes any provisions of this Act or regulations made under this Act, and where no penalty is specifically provided for, that person commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 36 currency points or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 18 months or both.” 

Justification is that the words “Felony” and “Misdemeanour” are defined within the meaning of this Act neither is it easy to classify the offences that are envisaged under this general penalty clause being proposed. Felony or misdemeanour is defined in the Penal Code. That is our improvement, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Committee chairperson, do you have objections?

MS NAMUGWANYA: I concede to the proposal by the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed, first by the chair and then by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, what happens to the original protection of members and employees from personal liability? Is it deleted in the law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not part of the penalties.

MR KAKOOZA: What she read was an insertion after clause 54. However, the headnote of Part X – miscellaneous reads: “Protection of members and employees from personal liability.” Is it deleted from the Bill? I can read it. It reads: “A member of the board or staff of the authority or a person acting on the direction of such a person is not personally liable for any act or omission done or omitted to be done in good faith in the exercise of the functions of the authority.” Is it deleted?

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, what we called clause 55 was a new insertion by the committee. The original clause 55 still stands part of the Bill. Maybe subsequently, it can become clause 56 as you had guided that the renumbering would be done later.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have been establishing the situation. I think it is an appropriate time to adjourn. Can I invite the minister to move for the House to resume?

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.59
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Rt Hon. Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” and has passed clause 45, deleted clause 46, deleted clause 47, passed clause 48, passed clause 49, deleted clause 50, passed clause 51, deleted clause 52, passed clause 53, passed clause 54, passed clause 55, made clause 56 part of clause 58 in the regulation. 

The committee passed clauses 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38 and 39. Clause 40 was deferred. The committee also passed clauses 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55 as a new clause. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.01
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The report, adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done today. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.01 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 26 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)












