PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTHURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11868STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThursday, 15 February 2024with disabilities, so that they can discuss other comprehensive issues beyond what Hon. Laura Kanushu raised. The meeting will be on Monday at 8.30 a.m. at the Ministry of Education and Sports, so that they can comprehensively look into these issues. We want a very rich statement addressing all components of the issues faced by children with disabilities, as far as education is concerned. I do not see Hon. Ssemujju Nganda; we have unfinished business. (Laughter)  We talked this afternoon and he seems to be stuck somewhere, also following up on parliamentary business to do with the Private Member’s Bill, which Hon. Nsereko moved.However, honourable colleagues, when you become very specific on certain matters, then it is very important for our record to show that the statement you made in this House was backed by evidence. Hon. Ssemujju is not able to be with us here. I have received very many calls with regard to his statement, disputing what he said. For now, until he brings that evidence and tables that matter through the many fora we have as Members of Parliament, I order the Clerk to expunge his statements yesterday from the record of Parliament – (Applause) - as far as Kanyaryeru Senior Secondary School is concerned. Next item.IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 11TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.18 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Thomas Tayebwa, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I welcome you to today’s sitting. For those who have unfinished business, the House has started. (Laughter)  Sorry, I had to remind you.I welcome you to today’s sitting, and we shall handle matters of national importance during Prime Minister’s Time. On Thursday, we try to use as much time as possible to ensure that Members’ issues are raised and handled. I do hope that we shall be able to cover much when we reach that time. Honourable colleagues, I have spoken to the Minister of State for Education and Sports, Hon. Dr Kaducu. As you know, they were releasing O-Level results today; so, the statement, which she was supposed to bring, will be brought next week. I have also told her that she has to hold a meeting with Members of Parliament representing people with disabilities. It also has to be attended by the minister in charge of persons PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA11869THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024LAYING OF PAPERSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson - Procedure, Hon. Macho?2.23MR GEOFREY MACHO (Independent, Busia Municipality, Busia): Mr Speaker, congratulations to you and your family upon your wonderful anniversary yesterday. I rise on a procedural matter that yesterday, you directed the Minister of Education and Sports to give a statement on why Busia Border Seed Secondary School was cancelled from the programme of schools that are going to be constructed. You told her to come today and give a report. As I talk, there is a delegation of more than 30 people from Busia that are coming to get an answer, so that they go and give the people of Busia assurance that the people at the border are also entitled to have at least one secondary school per subcounty . I, therefore, do not know whether we are proceeding well by sitting in this august House, when the minister who was given the assignment is missing. Moreover, she is in a workshop but calling it a meeting for people with disabilities. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. When a point of procedure is raised, I have to rule on it. Hon. Macho, why are you wasting my time; because you know where the minister is? You are even giving me news about where the minister is; I did not know.I know they still had the programme of releasing UNEB results today, and I communicated on that. I said that on Tuesday, these matters will be handled because the minister was kind enough to call and seek my guidance on the matter, and I guided her that way. Honourable colleagues, can we go back to the Order Paper?LAYING OF PAPERSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, Committee on Education and Sports? This report needed too much security. (Laughter)  This is a well-guarded report. 2.26THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, COM -MITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr James Kubeketerya): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to take this op -portunity to lay two reports on the Floor. The first one is a report of the Committee on Edu -cation and Sports on its field visit to appraise the management challenges of Mbale School for the Deaf.The second one is a report of the Committee on Education and Sports on the matter of phasing out comprehensive nursing certificates and diploma courses by the Ministry of Education and Sports. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Chairperson, under Rule 34, you are required to give us highlights of the report with key recommendations, since it is a field report, and then I will appoint the time. However, if you are not ready with a summary, do not mind. Members will read the whole report. MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, most obliged. This is a very wide one. The one about the report is a smaller one, but I beg that it goes to the committee.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you give us a summary? Is the smaller one summarised? MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, the big one was about a petition here from Mbale School for the Deaf where the committee members visited and made several recommendations. Some recommendations regarding Mbale School for the Deaf have been overtaken by events because the administration has changed.The other one was that there were some security officers that were guarding the equipment, and we heard that some of them have been 11870STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTwithdrawn. Mr Speaker, I beg to briefly report on that matter. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sorry, committee chairperson, I want our record of the Hansard  to have it right. Was it a petition or a field study? MR KUBEKETERYA:  Mr Speaker, it was a petition that the Speaker directed the committee to investigate. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Then if it was a petition, please read your report. We captured it here as a field report, which is provided for under Rule 34. Please summarise.MR KUBEKETERYA: Mr Speaker, during the plenary sitting of 19 July 2022, Hon. Alex Ndeezi raised a matter of national importance regarding the mismanagement of Mbale School for the Deaf. The honourable member prayed that the Ministry of Education and Sports implements the recommendations of the ministry’s investigative team contained in its report titled, “Report on the disagreement by the management of Mbale School of the Deaf.”  (Seen in the Hansard  extract of 19 July 2022 and the said report marked as Annex 1 and Annex 2, respectively). Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Procedure, Hon. Kayemba-Ssolo. MR KAYEMBA-SSOLO:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. You requested the comrade chairperson to give us a brief of the report, but he is reading from the start. I think we might leave here at 8.00 p.m. Is he proceeding rightLY by not giving us a brief of the report? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, he is proceeding extremely right. (Applause)  If you heard me very well – and committee chairperson, this is why you need to correct your record. Your record says, “Report of the Committee on Education and Sports on field visit to appraise management challenges of Mbale School for the Deaf.” The moment your report is that way, it is provided for under Rule 34 of our Rules of Procedure whereby under 34(2), you are supposed to give a summary and then I will appoint a date for debate. However, later on, you told me that you were processing a petition. Clerk, help us and capture it as a petition and not a field visit report. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon we have councillors from Zombo District. They will be going back, allow me to introduce them now. (Applause)  They are represented in Parliament by our very own Commissioner, Hon. Esther Afoyochan and Hon. Gabriel Okumu. You can see they are seated together matching. (Laughter ) They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me once again in welcoming them. Thank you. (Applause)Committee chairperson, let us continue. For issues that have been overtaken by events, you do not need to go to them. Go to the prayers and capture issues that you feel we should capture here. MR KUBEKETERYA:  Mr Speaker, as I said, the report is very voluminous and I was trying to give the background when something else came up. I beg that I go to the recommendations – (Interruption)DR BWANIKA:  Mr Speaker, I am not certain that this was a petition. We want to hear from the chairperson to appraise us because when he began reading - the introduction does not prove that, that report arose out of the petition. Are we proceeding rightLY when the chairperson is not certain whether that report arose out of a petition? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Dr Bwanika is raising a very important point. Chairperson, the route you are taking us is not the right one. I have seen here that Hon. Alex Ndeezi raised this matter as a matter of national importance. The Prime Minister gave a response and a vote was needed. Thereafter, the committee decided to go for a field visit. I think the record was very clear from the onset that it was a field visit, not COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Kubeketerya]11871THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024a petition. Let us capture it as a field visit report and then I will appoint time for debate.MR KUBEKETERYA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister Asamo - THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DISABILITY AFFAIRS (Ms Hellen Asamo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think that the committee does not know what they are reporting on. At first, the chairperson said that the head teacher had been removed. It is as plain as that. But I also know that the Minister of Education and Sports, under the leadership of Mama  Janet, already met the people who had issues with the school and some of those actions were taken. I believe that the report could have been overtaken –(Interjection)–  Please, I am on a point of procedure – by events because whatever recommendations they have made, the same complaints were also taken to the ministry and the Ministry of Education and Sports has handled some of those issues and that is what resulted into the head teacher being taken and also how to harmonise the school. Maybe if there are other recommendations other than that, we would be happy to receive them. Is it procedurally right for the chairperson, who does not understand his report, to continue reporting? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Asamo, when you talk like that, I cannot guarantee your security because you saw how this report was guarded when they presented it here. (Laughter)The chairperson, together with his team, know what is in their report but it is a procedural matter. The moment Parliament gives an assignment, although this one – the committee, of course, went for a field visit; it was out of their initiative. However, that also becomes a report of Parliament because they spend resources of Parliament. They must report back and the report must be presented here, whether it was over taken by events or not. There are many things we learn from such reports. If Government took measures, they never reported here and they did not tell us what they resolved. So, we are going to have our report. I do not want to frustrate my committees; let them continue doing their work. Chairperson, you have already finished your work. We can go to the next item. I will appoint time for debate of the report. (Applause) MR KUBEKETERYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to correct the record that I know what I am reading. The comment given by the honourable Minister of State for Disability Affairs was unfortunate for the whole committee. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I did not guarantee her security. (Laughter)MR KUBEKETERYA:  Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Opendi, procedure – the chairperson is one of the most senior legislators, whom we respect very much. MR KUBEKETERYA:  Mr Speaker, I had already laid on the Table the first report. The second report is about the Committee on Education and Sports on the matter of phasing out of comprehensive nursing certificate and diploma courses.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, that is Item No.9 on the Order Paper; you cannot bring it now. MR KUBEKETERYA:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I had allowed Hon. Sarah Opendi on a point of procedure. MS OPENDI:  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My apologies that I have to take you back. We were all in the House yesterday when Hon. Ssemujju 11872STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTmade the statements that he made, specifically saying that His Excellency the President owns or has been supporting Kanyaryeru Secondary School and paying Shs 700,000 per child in that school.Mr Speaker, this is a House of record. A statement is made; the proceedings are live -(Interjections)-  Please, I am on a point of procedure. The proceedings are live and have been captured. Hon. Ssemujju said that he had evidence. If he has evidence and he is not in the House today -Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to demand that Hon. Ssemujju lays his evidence here rather than expunging it? If we continue expunging statements instead of asking Members to substantiate and maybe even apologise – because for him to say that the Head of State pays Shs 700,000 to a student in a particular School, when our children are being paid a capitation grant of Shs 10,000 per term - Mr Speaker, would it not be procedurally right that this statement remains on record until Tuesday when Hon. Ssemujju will appear in this House with his evidence, and then we can proceed to expunge but also demand for an apology from him? Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that this matter remains on the record of this Parliament?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Hon. Sarah. I can understand where you are coming from but two things:1.  I have already ruled on the matter and in case one is not satisfied with my ruling, Rule 87 of our Rules of Procedure provides for how to challenge the Speaker’s ruling.2.  I talked to Hon. Ssemujju today afternoon and he told me that it was raised by a certain former Woman Member of Parliament for Mityana and so, I should help him in getting the record. I promised that we shall cooperate. I told him, “Sir, I cannot do research for you on this matter so, I am going to expunge it from your record. And if you want to reinstate it, then you will bring evidence and you table the matter here.” However, I felt that it was a matter which did not require spending another night on our record books. Through a point of procedure or any other means, a Member can demand Hon. Ssemujju to apologise next week if he comes, if a Member so wishes and whoever will be presiding will guide at that time.But what is very important, honourable colleagues, is that when I am doing things here, I do not do them for the camera; I do them for the record. This record is going to be - and that is the pressure I usually get from you. Most of you want to speak between 2.00 p.m. and 4.00 p.m. when the media is still live and hot. If we are to run the House that way, instead of presenting in Plenary, we shall be using Parliament to address press conferences, which is not the right thing to do. But I understand where you are coming from, Hon. Sarah.MR MAGOLO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Before the Chairperson of the Committee on Education and Sports presented the report, he said that some content in this report has been overtaken by events. But this report implicates one of the administrators who was the headmistress of the school in a way -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, you are debating the report, which I said I will appoint time.MR MAGOLO:  I was just commenting -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, you are delving into a report of which I said I will appoint time. That is debating, unfortunately. Thank you. Next item. [Ms Opendi]COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR11873THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024MOTION FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES ON THE STATE OF REFUGEES AND REFUGEE HOSTING COMMUNITIES IN UGANDATHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Honourable Chairperson -2.45MS DORCAS ACEN (NRM, Woman Representative, Alebtong): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am here to present the report of the Committee on Equal Opportunities on the state of refugees and refugee hosting communities in Uganda. I beg to lay. Allow me to lay the minutes of the meeting of the committee with various stakeholders from the refugees and refugee hosting communities of Uganda. Mr Speaker, with your guidance of yesterday, I would like to go through, very briefly. This report focuses on the situation of refugees in camps distributed throughout the country that the committee visited. In the methodology, while preparing the report, various districts hosting refugees were visited. We held meetings with the leadership of the district local governments of Arua, Koboko, Yumbe, Adjumani, Lamwo, Kiryandongo, Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, and Isingiro. We also visited the host communities. Allow me take you to page 8 where we have the overview of the status of refugees. The settlement camps in Adjumani, Palabek in Lamwo, Bidibidi Refugee Settlement in Yumbe, Imvepi Refugee Settlement in Terego, Kampala settlement, Kiryandongo settlement in Kiryandongo, Kyaka II settlement in Kyangwali, Koboko, Nakivale settlement in Isingiro, Palorinya in Obongi, Rhino settlement in Madi-Okollo and Ramwanja in Kamwenge were visited. Page 18 has the achievements of interventions by Government and the different actors who are working to support refugees and refugee hosting communities. They range from integration of refugees to different services like education, health, food security and livelihoods. I believe you have the report and will be able to read it.Allow me to take you to page 24 where we have challenges, observations and recommendations. One is about the compromised healthcare quality and the pressure on education and the schooling system. Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the above challenges were aggravated by secondary factors. The committee came up with the following recommendations:(i)  The Government of Uganda and its partners such as UNHCR should put in more resources for infrastructure like construction of classrooms, latrine stances and recruitment of more teachers to be able to cope with pressure on the existing education facilities and human resource. (ii)  The Ministry of Education and Sports should develop an in-service refresher short course aimed at specifically equipping teachers of schools in refugee settlements to respond to the unique needs of learners.Another challenge is water, sanitation and hygiene. The committee observed that poor waste management, unmanaged pressure on Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH) facilities, increased dependence on donors for service delivery such as water supply and poor adolescent hygiene, especially for girls risks undermining gains made in refugee management in Uganda.The recommendations under that -1. The committee recommends that Government needs to engage implementing partners to have continuous engagement with refugees and host communities on water user fee to enhance sustainable WASH management in the long run.11874STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT2. The committee also recommends sensitising refugees on simple waste sorting techniques and introduce affordable solid waste management as a temporary measure because mechanised waste management plans are not an affordable option in the short term. 3. The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) should construct more water supply systems and latrines to cater for the increasing influx of refugees.4. Girls should be provided with life skills such as making reusable sanitary pads to avoid dependence on donors for everything.5. The other challenge is management of natural resources where the committee observed that with the intense pressure on natural resources, refugees had started conflicting with host communities on natural resources for survival. The committee recommends for allocation of additional financial resources and measures for natural resource conservation. 6. The committee further observed that the focus of the current Livelihoods Support Programme (LSP) for beneficiary households in refugee host communities were limited to existing economic activities such as subsistence agriculture, petty trade, few livestock, traditional bricklaying, support for boda boda  and taxi transporters. Under that, the committee recommends that Government programmes for host communities should focus on community empowerment initiatives such as specialised skills training and value addition to existing production processes. 7.  The committee also observed that the number of refugees arriving in the country has been increasing at a high rate raising concerns over the long-term sustainability.The committee recommends additional diplomatic efforts to be made to ensure that –a. Peace and tranquillity prevails in the neighbouring countries to enable refugees to resettle in their countries of origin;b. The national refugee policy is reviewed in collaboration with regional governments in order to ensure that the Government and UNHCR, which is the leading UN agency supporting refugees, can resettle excess refugees to third countries.c. In addition, the committee recommends that additional funding should be allocated to the OPM for purposes of -i. Undertaking mobilisation and sensi -tisation activities needed for peaceful coexistence between refugees and host communities;ii. Establishing structured economic interventions to uplift the economic prospect of host communities as a confidence building mechanism for the empowerment of host communities. iii. Facilitating affirmative action for host districts in the areas of social services such as healthcare and education; andiv. Improving agricultural productivity among host communities through affordable irrigation schemes to ensure food security for host communities, who are usually not beneficiaries of the UN food funding. 8.  The committee observed that while local governments hosting refugee settlements have additional pressure on their social services, they do not control additional funding for extra refugee population in their districts.The committee, therefore, recommends that existing budget support to refugees, which is currently centralised in the Office of the Prime Minister, should be restructured so that some funds are reallocated and managed by host local governments. This will stimulate local growth and stem local dissent to refugees. [Ms Acen]11875THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 20249.  The committee observed that the continued influx of new arrivals from South Sudan, which happened throughout 2020-2023 created shortage of land for settlement of new arrivals and poor road networks within the settlements due to heavy rains. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of Uganda should:i.  Expedite the compensation to the landowners where refugee settlements and other institutional and social services such as schools and health centres were constructed; andii.  Rehabilitate roads within the host communities and refugee settlements. The other challenge is about land wrangles. The committee observed that an impending conflict over land ownership and use in refugee settlements exists. The committee identified issues within the area of land management:i.  For accommodating refugees, host communities had high expectations for material benefits in exchange for their land. However, this was not forthcoming.ii.  There were also disagreements over land boundaries among different host communities and with refugees, which created an active conflict over land use and land ownership. The other is about property owners. Some of them were threatening to repossess land formerly given to refugees due to delayed compensation. Some refugees refused to settle in their located plots and chose to migrate to other zones in an attempt to locate their loved ones, which resulted into overcrowding of these particular zones. There was also shortage of land for agriculture leading to fear of food security among the host communities. The committee recommends that Government should:i.  Fast-track settlements of compensation claims by host communities to ensure that host community goodwill is not taken for granted; andii.  Conduct further negotiations with the host communities for more land on a rental basis in pursuit of sustainable food production and reduce dependence on donors for refugee food supply. Another challenge is about the donor cuts . The committee observed that budget cuts to the refugee programme was affecting service delivery, specifically:1. Development Response to Displacement Impact Project(DRDIP) Programme and the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Programme (USMID) was scheduled to end operations in December 2023 in all the areas we visited in the North, Kyangwali and Kiryandongo. 2. In Lamwo, when donors pulled out of the street child project, 37 teachers who were paid under the project were laid off  thereby increasing the teacher-pupils ratio from 1:58 to 1:164.3. In Kyegegwa, a similar issue occurred. Out of 338 teachers in schools, only 98 of them were on the Government payroll and donor partners were paying the remaining 240 teachers. However, Members were informed that a total of 136 teachers and 50 teaching assistants had their contracts terminated by the end of February 2023 due to reduced donor funding across all the schools in the settlement.4. In Lamwo, it is a similar issue about general food assistance in the settlement with collection points, which were established under the UN World Food Programme. This resulted into reduced food allocation as a result of the donor funding cuts.The committee recommends that the Government needs to have contingency financial plans for refugees in situations where 11876STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTdonor funding dwindles, such as it was during the COVID-19 crisis. They should also absorb the teachers recruited under donor support once the projects phases out. There should also be a policy to curtail the inflow of refugees to a sustainable level beyond the goodwill of donors.In conclusion, Mr Speaker, Uganda, for all its hospitality, has, under difficult circumstances, handled a large inflow of refugees from the Great Lakes region. This has placed a lot of pressure on social services, especially in host communities in the country. Currently, in the health sector, there is approximately one doctor for every 24,000 citizens and one nurse per 11,000 people. As a result of the huge inflow of refugees amidst decreasing donor support, Uganda can hardly cope with this trend. The committee strongly recommends that the Government revisits its refugee policy to forestall the probable long-term conflicts resulting from the overflow of refugees and underfunding arising from the cuts in budgetary support from the donors. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable member. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students from Bugema University under the umbrella of Bugema University Students Association. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House. Please, join me in welcoming them. (Applause)  You are always welcome.Honourable colleagues, for the record, when I was mentioning MPs from Zombo, I forgot Hon. Lawrence Songa, Member of Parliament for Ora County and also our very own, Hon. Catherine Mavenjina, Member of Parliament for the elderly. I mentioned Hon. Gabriel Okumu – he was seated with Hon. Esther Afoyochan.Honourable colleagues, I think we should quickly dispose of this report. It is a report that has a recommendation, which you have said is a strong one – saying we should review our refugee policy. What is the intention of closing our borders? Really, that should not be something for this House to handle at this stage. It involves a lot before you reach this kind of decision. I do not want us to break the news from here that Parliament has said: “Please, stop welcoming more refugees.” Such recommendations should be left to the Executive, after wide consultations with the international community. It is our obligation, under international law. You cannot stop someone who is running away from war from entering a country. During the debate, I hope a Member can raise the issue and we amend that recommendation. Hon. Christine Kaaya - I would like to, first, pick MPs from refugee-hosting areas. I have here the Member for Isingiro, the Member for Kisoro - we who are in Kampala are not refugees.  (Laughter)  You might declare me a refugee when you start saying “Kampala, Kampala”. (Laughter)  We are here in Kampala, enjoying ourselves. Honourable colleagues, I will pick you; do not mind. I will start with the Member for Isingiro, Member for Kisoro and the Member for Karamoja. The whole of that line, apart from Hon. Judith Achan, is from West Nile and maybe Bugisu. So, decide among yourselves and agree on one person: I will pick one. I will pick one MP from each hosting area. I would like to have around five Members of Parliament and we conclude this, but I see around nine MPs from West Nile. So, I have picked one from Karamoja. Isingiro, you are for Ankole. I have picked one from Kigezi. I want to pick the Member for Kitgum for Acholi. Busoga, you do not have refugees. Let me pick these for now and then we see how it goes. Okay? For Kampala, it is Hon. Allan Ssewanyana who has many Eritreans. Thank you. [Ms Acen]11877THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 20243.04MS CHRISTINE KAAYA (NUP, Woman Representative, Kiboga):  Thank you, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No. MS KAAYA:  Mr Speaker, you had already offered me an opportunity. This time round, it is the issue of carrying capacity. When we interface with other countries, they have defined the number of refugees to host and when an extra number reports, there is another way of handling them. Recently, I attended a conference with the pastoralists – and all countries faced this issue where people cross over from Sudan to Somalia and everywhere. However, with the help of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), we are supposed to establish our carrying capacities as countries and beyond that number, we negotiate how to handle the extra. Then, as refugees come in, we are supposed to monitor how they will be going back to their respective countries. Mr Speaker, Uganda is cited internationally for hosting climate-induced migrants. Whenever they talk about climate-induced migrants, Uganda is cited number one, meaning that for some people, when they come, having been affected by wars, they cannot go back because the environment is also harsh. So, they have no intention of leaving this country. That is why they are already in conflicts as far as land management and tenure security is concerned. Mr Speaker, we must plan for how refugees will be going back to their countries or else we plan how they can own land in Uganda. Otherwise, as Uganda, we must also concentrate on the host communities. I was working with Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and we used to work with refugee camps in Moyo. The way we treat host communities - There are too many privileges for the refugees, which demotivate our people. They should be empowered to care for the refugees, but it turns out that the host communities are the ones at the mercy of the refugees. Mr Speaker, this issue must be addressed. We are hospitable, but there is a certain point in time when we also need to define the fulfilment of the rights of Ugandans. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Kangwagye? 3.07MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (Indepen -dent, Bukanga County, Isingiro):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I come from Isingiro and I would like to thank the chair -person for their good report and recommenda -tions. You talked about Isingiro and cited only Nakivale Refugee Camp, but you did not talk about Oruchinga Refugee Settlement. It is also found in Isingiro and we also have many refu -gees there. Mr Speaker, they talked about the issue of land ownership and land use. It is the major problem in all refugee-hosting communities. Isingiro started receiving refugees in the 1960s such as the Rwandese, Burundians, Congolese, Somalis, and so many people from different countries. They found the nationals from Isingiro on ground.The government decided to give that land to the refugees without even compensating those people on the ground. You can imagine! When refugees come, they just settle them in people’s gardens and land without even consulting the owners of that land.When they try to complain to us their leaders, there is no way they can be listened to. We have even tried to put some mechanisms on the ground, as leaders, on how we can live with these refugees because they are innocent. They must live a good life. They are also human beings.We know their challenges but when the leadership of the refugees decides to settle these people without considering the leadership of the nationals, that is where problems arise. 11878STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTWe told them, before you settle them, sit with us and we tell you where you can settle these people before you bring problems arise. They have, however, failed – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable, the point is well noted. I hope the Prime Minister has captured it. Thank you. 3.09MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro):  Mr Speaker, thank you very much. It is wrong for - If we are in the East African Community or the African Union, why should some countries export refugees and others import, and we do not handle it at that diplomatic level where states can discuss to address the causes of refugee export? That is a very big issue. Here, the refugees who are in Uganda are from the East African countries yet we have the East African Community, and we have the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. When they hold the summits, what do they discuss? When we had Kony in the North, did the refugees go out beyond the borders? Therefore, why can’t these countries also improvise and have internally displaced people’s camps within their countries? The UN has been in the DRC for close to 10 years now. What are they doing there? Can’t we improvise that these countries create an environment where their own nationals can stay within their boundaries and be protected by the UN and East African force? I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, you remember many Ugandans were once refugees in other countries. [HON. MEMBERS: “Kwizera” ] Please. Our President’s family was in Sweden. In Nairobi, he was not in a camp. So please, honourable colleagues, I think it is wrong for us to start insinuating that these are people who have options. No, these are people who do not have options. Okay. Therefore, we can address other issues of how the process is handled, but the issue of someone who is running away because he has nowhere to stay because of war should not be debatable. Hon. Allan Ssewanyana -3.11MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (NUP, Makindye Division West, Kampala City): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  My name is Allan Ssewanyana -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sorry? MR SSEWANYANA: You called Hon. Allan Ssewanyana and he stood up. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, I turned here. MR SSEWANYANA:  Oh, thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I want to pick from both sides. I know, Hon. Aleper. MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of refugees is a very important for us, as Parliament, to discuss. So many people have been wondering over the massive influx of the refugees, especially here in Kampala. There are so many within our communities, much as people here and outside think that refugees stay in camps, which are not regular in Kampala. However, we have so many, Mr Speaker. We have communities of the Congolese in Makindye, Kibuye II Parish, Eritreans in Lukuli, Nsambya Parish and even the Somalis in Kampala Central. They are almost surpassing the population of the residents there.Mr Speaker, most of these people have too much money to avail themselves with good houses, food and everything good in life. Of course this has brought problems and the landlords there do not wish to accommodate residents of Ugandan descent, preferring Eritreans because they come along with so much money to afford their houses. Now the houses are becoming too expensive for our people. They have been complaining to us, leaders, that, “Please, do something. Can the Government [Mr Kangwagye]11879THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024control these people at least in one place or one area?” They are now going everywhere. They come and take over a flat of more than 50 tenants for themselves. They have been doing this. It is not their fault but the standard of living they have created there is too high for our residents. Therefore, I would like the ministry to try and see how to control this issue because it is becoming a problem. They are even – (Member timed out.) THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ssewanyana does not want rich people in his area. Hon. Rose Obigah - 3.14MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Mr Speaker, I thank the chairperson for this motion. Half the population of Terego are refugees and half are the host community. The refugees have brought in a lot of development in Terego. If you see the funds coming from DRDIP that have built the district headquarters of Terego, it is because of the refugees.Even the most recent ambulance was given to Terego East because of the refugees. West Nile stayed in South Sudan and Congo for such a long time. Thank God some of my colleagues here have never known what it means to be a refugee. We should treat these people with dignity. These are human beings. They have come not because they want your country. They have come because there is a challenge back home. It is only human to be human to them. The few challenges they are having currently, we can address them. Last week, I was able to appreciate all the first graders of PLE, inclusive of refugees. I do not segregate between refugees and the host community because they have been with us for over 20 years. I agree with hosting refugees. If you do not want the ones in Isingiro, please send them to Terego. We still have a lot of land. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Achan Judith. 3.16MS JUDITH ACHAN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to inform my colleague, Hon. Ssewanyana, that the 1951 Refugee Convention of the 28th of July provides internationally the rights of the refugees to own properties. That includes those infrastructures you are talking about. It talks about land.  So, we cannot, as Uganda, being the leading refugee-hosting country, portray a bad image in this House out there that we do not protect refugees and yet, we have so many refugees who sought asylum outside the country. I am a victim of war in northern Uganda. How many people from northern Uganda are outside there, as refugees, seeking asylum?  I want to put it on record that as Uganda, we protect refugees and we will continue to protect them because we know tomorrow is dark. You never know where you will be tomorrow. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Odur -MR ODUR:  Mr Speaker, I am seeking procedural guidance from you on two matters. First is your communication on how this debate should go. If I misunderstood you, I am sorry. You had guided that this House cannot adopt the recommendations provided by the report of the committee to the extent that the refugee policy should be reviewed. Secondly, hearing from the debate by my colleagues here, we seem not to be well-versed with our own law that we made here; the Refugee Act of 2006.  Uganda, as a sovereign state, has the right to reject or to admit, and there are Ugandans who have gone to other countries and they have been refused to enter those countries. Therefore, while we are going to debate, this should be clear that as a sovereign nation, we can say no. It is not a given. We can say yes or no.  11880STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThis Parliament, under Article 79, can make a law on any matter. Mr Speaker, I want you to guide us so that we do not debate as if Uganda is the only country with open legs and wide for whoever wants to come and enter and exit. (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  If there is a person who I knew I would tag along when going to heaven, it was Jonathan Odur but now he is also opening, entering and exiting. (Laughter)  Honourable, what I was emphasising and if you heard how I justified my point, I said this is an issue where the Executive would need to go back, review, do wide consultations with international bodies and we look at our engagements before we come up with such a conclusion. That was my guidance.Why do I say it? Let me tell you, honourable colleagues; we can say statements here. You have heard in some countries, we can say statements here and tomorrow, you hear refugees being attacked.  That is what I am trying to be cautious about.  These are issues which you can assign the Executive to first go and clearly bring out issues to do with the refugee policy, if it needs to be reviewed. Then after, we come here and discuss deeply, guided by full information. What I was avoiding is a situation, which can create problems. I had allowed Hon. Aleper.3.20MR MOSES ALEPER (NRM, Chekwii County (Kadam), Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I just want to be categorical and say that I will restrict myself strictly to the report that was presented.The role of this committee is to ensure that it upholds all the activities that they try to superintend, uphold the principles of equal opportunity, and to ensure that when they look at what is going on in the country, nothing impedes the promotion of the aspects of equal opportunity.When we look at matters of refugees, I would have expected the committee to make sure that it looks at the aspects or the impact of the refugee activity in undermining the principles of equal opportunity.When I listened to the presentation by the chairperson of the committee, what appeared was that the committee went and carried out an oversight role. It almost acted like a sectoral committee because it showed what is happening there. There are no latrines. There are no schools. There are no adequate facilities, etcetera. I think, what the committee should have done is to see whether the practices there are upholding the principles of equal opportunity, whether there is discrimination, whether the presence of refugees there is affecting the policy on equal opportunities. Therefore, I beg that the committee should actually look at the emphasis on the barriers that are not upholding equal opportunities in this country. For example, workplace culture, lack of female leaders, practices of gender stereotypes, etc.  Therefore, I would want that next time when the committee carries out this type of role, it should act as a standing committee and not bring out issues that a sectoral committee would bring, because that would be taken care of in another bit. Lastly, I want – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Zijjan?3.22MR DA VID ZIJJAN (Independent, Butembe County, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The way the conversation is flowing, I sense that there is – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, here we do not use the language of conversations; here we debate. MR ZIJJAN: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I see that the debate is mixing two categories [Mr Odur]11881THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024of people when we talk about the subject of refugees. All refugees are non-Ugandans; they are foreigners, but not every foreigner is a refugee.Therefore, Allan Ssewanyana’s debate is addressing foreigners in Kampala and categorising them generally as refugees. These rich non-Ugandans, who are renting our buildings, are investors. They are running businesses here and supporting our economy and it is wrong to look at someone in Kampala who does not look like a Musoga, and you automatically conclude that this one is a refugee.Secondly, Uganda subscribes to international laws that govern refugees. There is a defence of non-refoulement. Non-refoulement is a defence that says that once someone claims that their life is in danger, you cannot return them to a country from which they are running. Uganda is under obligation to protect whoever arrives at our borders. However, we also do not want to debate as if we are ignorant of the fact that Uganda alone, on its own, does not have the resources to host these people. We have the international community. Now, the report is saying that the international community’s support is dwindling, it is coming down. What needs to be addressed, perhaps at a diplomatic level, is to negotiate with the countries that participate in this cause in increasing resources to Uganda, which is a very friendly country, which does very well in hosting refugees. I thank you.  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, Hon. Zijjan. Hon. Oneka Lit?  3.25MR DENIS ONEKALIT (FDC, Kitgum Minicipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report. This report is very critical for us as Members of Parliament to debate.  We are all candidates of becoming refugees, it depends on the time.  However, when we are debating this report, we may not run away from the issues of the cost-benefit analysis simply because we may not bite more than we can chew. We allow refugees to come. That is obvious. But we also need to control the influx, depending on how we can manage them. It is very paramount, Mr Speaker.When you look at the report, it talks about the dwindling of the donation. It talks about lack of service delivery, which is actually low now, because they are very many. Therefore, it is very important for us to also put into consideration the influx. How many we can admit? It is very important.  Mr Speaker, in Kitgum we border the refugee camp. When you look at service delivery, for example in the hospitals, medicines get finished very fast. The number of services that should be given to other people within the community get drained very fast. Therefore, if we are to allow the influx, as Government, we need to take into consideration equipping the service delivery to be enough to the host community. Hospitals should have enough medicines and the schools should have enough facilitation such that we have a win-win situation. Otherwise, they are very important. We are all candidates of being refugees. I submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The Leader of the Opposition, then followed by Minister Mulimba. 3.28THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I join colleagues in appreciating the committee for this report. There are three critical things: First, Uganda is host to the largest number of refugees in Africa. In fact, as of 2022, we had nearly 1.5 million and that number keeps growing. It is good neighbourliness to give people who are running away from precarious situations 11882STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTshelter and a place of refuge, as it were, and we should not stop doing that. However, we need to compel the Government through the Minister of Foreign Affairs to engage our neighbouring countries because Uganda should not be carrying this burden entirely on its own. This number continues to grow by the day and it has negative impacts back home. We want to welcome refugees, but can we deal with this situation? Can we engage other governments so that Uganda does not get to shoulder this burden alone? If there is some kind of engagement, the Minister of Foreign Affairs should update this House on what exactly is happening, so that we know that we are not just sitting on this issue. Secondly, there is a challenge for the host communities. I have looked at this report and seen how disempowered the host communities are. I am getting more bothered about the host communities beyond just the refugees. This is a report, and it goes beyond the refugees. For example, in Adjumani, out of three counties in the district, none of them has a Health Centre IV , contrary to the existing Government policies of a Health Centre IV per county. That bothers me; I am more concerned about our own. Yes, let us welcome the refugees, but in this situation, even if the refugees were not there, the locals are in a precarious situation themselves. In Yumbe District, two counties had no Health Centres IV , while two others had no health facilities at all. How? In 2024, Government? This is beyond the refugees. This is about our own people; Ugandan people - and it is captured in this report. In several others, we are talking about pressure on education, sanitation and so on. Mr Speaker, we need to compel the Government to be a little more serious about the people of Uganda, and then by extension, the refugees. Let us welcome them, because you might find yourself in a situation that requires you to get shelter elsewhere. However, as we do that, can we empower our local communities, first and foremost, for their own good, away from the refugees because like I have said, even if the refugees were not in place, these communities do not have health centres IV . How? It is not acceptable. Thank you. 3.31THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr John Mulimba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, I thank the committee for their report. Through you, I would like to add that many times in this House, we seem to stab ourselves in the foot when we are carrying out debate, in respect of our national laws and international conventions to which we are signatories. Accordingly, Mr Speaker, I would like to appeal to our committee clerks to help us carry out extensive research before we produce reports. This is because in many cases, they are putting us at cross-roads with the international obligations, to which we are party. May I just say this? Uganda acceded to the 1951 Convention relating the status of refugees in the 1967 Protocol, henceforth, jointly referred to as the 1951 Convention on Refugees. That was on 27 September 1976. The country also ratified the broader regional 1969 Organisation of African Union (OAU) Convention concerning specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa, in 1987. We are discussing here the specifics on how to either accommodate, whether to allow in, and whether to refer to third parties. Those specifics were clearly elucidated in the 1967 Protocol to which we are signatory. Uganda also acceded to the 1954 Convention relating the status of stateless persons on 15 April 1965, with no reservations, but also took part in the 1961 Convention on reduction of the stateless persons. Mr Speaker, hearing the debates here, and also arising from what is contained in the report, and having heard your guidance, I would like [Mr Ssenyonyi]11883THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024to plead with this House that we agree that there are a number of discrepancies, and hiccups in this report, some of which are even showing discordance with our own refugee policy. Accordingly, I would like to agree with your earlier guidance, Mr Speaker, that if this House can permit, we can refer this report back for refinement to look neat and coherent with what is contained in our refugee policy and also in accordance with the international refugee conventions to which we are signatory. In 2009, a special summit of the African Union sat here in Kampala, and resulted in the Kampala Declaration on Refugees. We have that on record. We discussed and put out – what hurts me is that this is the Kampala Declaration on Refugees. The report seems to have a lot of discord in accordance with that declaration. I feel a bit sad when we are discussing this as if we do not know, and yet this was the Kampala Declaration. I plead with Members that yes, we registered the concerns, and most of which are indeed internal administrative issues. If you please, Mr Speaker, you would guide that this report be referred, we refine it and then come back and discuss from a smart point of view. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable colleagues, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Obongi District Local Government. They are represented in Parliament by Hon. Zumura Maneno and Hon. George Bhoka Didi. They have come to observe the proceedings of this House, and because of that, let me allow Hon. Bhoka to make a comment because he has been standing up. Please, stand up for recognition so that we can welcome you. Thank you. (Applause) 3.36DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to thank you for receiving and recognising the presence of my district leaders, led by the Speaker as well as the district chairman in this august House. (Applause)I am equally very happy that they had the opportunity to listen to the debate on the issues and concerns on refugees and host communities. Obongi is one of the districts in Uganda that hosts Palorinya Refugee Settlement. Unique amongst refugee hosting districts in Uganda is that whereas the district has only a population of about 55,000 nationals, 135,000 people in Obongi District are refugees and therefore, as we discuss and debate this important issue of equity in access to opportunities for host and refugee communities, know it touches our hearts. Refugees and host communities have a right, the Government and the international community has a duty to protect, provide and facilitate the progressive realisation of the rights of refugees for quality services. However, within this context, we need to be guided by the global compact on refugees that requires us to see to it that there is safety and security for the refugees wherever they are. That demands that we have access to services but importantly, it requires that host countries and communities are supported by the international community to ensure they provide, in an equitable way, services for both the hosts and refugees. I thank you once again for giving me this opportunity. I submit. 3.39THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I can provide a brief report: in December last year, we had a global refugee forum in Geneva, Switzerland, where Uganda was recognised because of our refugee policies. I represented the President and he was also honoured in the same forum. In 1986, Uganda was an exporter of refugees. Up to 500 refugees were living in other countries around the globe. 11884STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  500 or 500,000?MS NABBANJA: I meant 500,000. However, Uganda is hosting 1.6 million refugees presently. I was a co-convener of this global summit and there were a number of issues that came out; the dwindling resources that are supposed to be brought here because of other global challenges. Anyhow, we came up with resolutions.Mr Speaker, I request that the minister in charge of refugees be given space to come and give a report on what resolutions we agreed on in that global summit. People come to Uganda as refugees to save their dear lives. They are running away from problems and running into our country because we are secure and peaceful and we host them. We have a policy that allows our people or the neighbours, to enter freely into this country. And almost every month, I receive people who come to benchmark our policies in this country. There are a number of things that we need to put right-like I was in Isingiro recently - I am told that the MP from Isingiro talked about the conflict that existed between the host communities and the refugees but we went there and put that right. Some of the issues that are coming up in the report are administrative, and which we can handle. Otherwise, Uganda has a bigger position globally when it comes to refugees. (Applause)I request to end here but at a later time I am going to invite-because it is only Uganda that has got a minister in charge of refugees.  (Applause) That shows how committed our President and the government of NRM are when it comes to refugees. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr Chairperson and the committee for the report. I have read through it and indeed I saw that many elements of the report should have been left to the sectoral Committee on Presidential Affairs and so, you have focused on policies and principles that enhance equal opportunities as a standing committee. So, I refer the report back to the committee, go clean it up and then I will get for you more space.MS DORCAS ACEN: Thank you, very much. Most obliged, Mr Speaker.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON GOVERNMENT ASSURANCES AND IMPLEMENTATION ON THE PRESIDENTIAL PLEDGE TO EXTEND ELECTRICITY TO INDUSTRIAL PARKS, DIRECTLY FROM POWER GENERATION PLANTS3.44DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): I beg to lay the report of the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation on the presidential pledge to extend electricity to industrial parks directly from the power generation plants, and the minutes are attached. I beg to lay. The report I am presenting was presided over by the outgoing leadership of the Committee on Government Assurances, led by Hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke and Hon. Joseph Ssewungu. My work is simply to present this report, which is dated February 2023 but also to note that most likely, some of the assurance issues contained in this report may have received some implementation. Having said that, allow me to go through the report: the assurance under consideration, the National Development Plan III, which is aligned to the country’s vision of 2040 stipulates that access to affordable, reliable and stable power is critical to the industrialisation process. The plan puts emphasis on extending electricity supply to business and industrial parks in order to reduce the cost of electricity for 11885THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024manufacturers and increase the competitiveness of locally manufactured products within the region and beyond.The National industrial policy 2020 also seeks to build a fully integrated, competitive, high value and productive industrial sector through increased:1. value addition of the local materials and products with comparative advantage for social economic transformation;2. export of manufactured products by facilitating industries to increase production and match market demands in terms of both quality and quantity; 3. employment in the industrial sector through establishment and promotion of industries that create large-scale employment opportunities, ensuring inclusive growth and sustainable development; and 4. adoption of environmentally sustainable technologies by manufacturing subsectors. Currently, the Uganda Investment Authority (UIA) operates eight public industrial and business parks namely; Kampala, (Namanve), Luzira, Bweyogerere, Jinja, Soroti, Mbale, Kasese, and Mbarara Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Park. The authority also supports three operational private industrial parks namely; Liao Shen Kapeeka, MMP Industrial Park Buikwe and Tian Tang Mukono, thereby making it eleven industrial and business parks across the country. Accordingly, on 4 June 2021, His Excellency the President while addressing Parliament on the State-of-the-Nation promised to supply electricity to industrial parks directly from some of the Government dams in a bid to reduce the end-user cost of electricity for manufacturers and increase competitiveness of locally manufactured products. In particular, His Excellency the President stated, and I quote, “The  cost of electricity is distorted by mistakes committed by some of the actors without my knowledge… We shall see how to get out of this mistake. One solution that I have already ordered for the industrial parks is to supply power directly from some of the Government dams to them. I will not be deflected from that…”It is on this basis, and in line with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 2021, that the committee scrutinised the level of implementation of the aforementioned assurance and now presents this report to the august House. Mr Speaker, I am not going to read everything. The content of the report is uploaded so Members can read. I want to go direct to the scope. This report focuses on the following key areas: 1. implementation of the presidential directive; and 2. the state of power supply to the industrial parks. Methodology Documents were reviewed and they are stipulated in the report. There were meetings with the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development and there were field visits to selected industrial parks namely; 1. Mbale Industrial and Business Park;2. Soroti Industrial and Business Park; and 3. Jinja Industrial and Business Park. Committee findingsImplementation of the presidential directivesIn June 2021, His Excellency the President directed the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development that the cost of electricity manufactured had been reduced to $0.05 per unit and the industrial parks should get power directly from the Government operating hydro power stations of Karuma, Isimba, Nalubaale, Kira, without going through Umeme distribution network where it is technologically possible.11886STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTReducing the cost of electricity to the manufacturers Pursuant to the President’s promise, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development committed that by July 2022, all industrial consumers in industrial parks would be buying power directly from generation plants at a tariff of $0.05 per unit. An annual subsidy amounting to Shs 160.34 billion was needed to support this direct purchase. Details of the annual subsidy required by industrial park are indicated in Table 1 below. Members can read through the table.The committee further established that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development had commenced implementation of the $0.05 per unit as part of the January 2022 annual tariff review by the Electricity Regulatory Authority. However, this was done as a pilot targeting two industrial parks; Liao Shen Industrial Company Ltd in Kapeeka and MMP Industrial Park in Buikwe. According to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, this was to enable monitoring and evaluation of the impact of low tariff incentives on the industry’s productivity and competitiveness of the products with the associated demand response to inform the plan for full implementation of the directive of the manufacturers buying electricity at $0.05 per unit.It was projected that the implementation of this pilot would lead to a revenue shortfall of about Shs 11.89 billion in the energy sector for the period January to December 2022. Extension of power directly from the Government operating hydro stations Consequent to the directive on 18 June 2022, the Government completed the amendment of the Electricity Act, 1999, which provided for the need for regulation to prescribe the terms under which industrial consumers may purchase electricity directly from generation or transmission companies. The development of the regulations commenced and the following steps were being taken:THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Chairperson, may I interrupt you? I have four minutes. So, just go to page 10 to the observations and recommendations. The whole report will be captured on the Hansard . DR BWANIKA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Observations and recommendations The committee observed that the implementation of the $0.05 per unit implemented by the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development through a pilot did not foster the spirit of fair competition among industrial parks because it benefited only privately operated industrial parks like Liao Shen Industrial Park Company Ltd in Kapeeka and MMP Industrial Park in Buikwe.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should allocate the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development funds (subsidy) amounting to Shs 160.34 billion in the Budget for the Financial Year 2023/2024 to cater for full implementation of the presidential directive in all industrial parks to allow manufacturers purchase electricity at $0.05 per unit.Secondly, the committee observed that although His Excellency, the President directed the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to supply electricity to manufacturers directly from power generation plants, the execution of the directive had no supporting regulations in place, as required by the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2022.The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development should table before Parliament, within one month, proof of the regulations clearly prescribing the terms under which industrial consumers may purchase electricity directly from generation or transmission companies, and a clear roadmap/plan on how the Government intends to extend electricity to industrial parks, directly from power generation plants.[Dr Bwanika]11887THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024Conclusion His Excellency the President committed before Parliament to extend electricity to industrial parks directly from power generation plants and reduce the cost of electricity for manufacturers to $0.05 per unit. However, the committee’s findings clearly demonstrate that manufacturers continue to endure high costs of electricity, which undermines the country’s aspirations, as articulated in Vision 2040, the National Development Plan III and the National Industrial Policy. Thus, the committee duly established that the presidential pledge had not been fulfilled, as described in the table below. Members can read the table.Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, committee chairperson. Honourable colleagues, we are going into Prime Minister’s Time, under rule 41. We shall debate this report after. Thank you.STATEMENT BY THE RT HON. PRIME MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT BUSINESS FOR THE SUCCEEDING WEEK, 20 TO 22 FEBRUARY 2024, PURSUANT TO RULE 28 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister – (Ms Naluyima rose_)  - this is the time which I always want to protect. 4.00THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I present a statement on business for the succeeding week, under Rule 28 of our Rules of Procedure.  1. The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will present a statement on the boundary management of Mt Elgon National Park and Uganda Wildlife Authority to protect the boundary;2. The Minister of Water and Environment will present a statement on the status of water coverage for both rural and urban areas across the country; (Applause)3. The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will present a detailed statement on Uganda creating its own tea auction platform, instead of solely depending on the Mombasa Tea Auction Hub;4. Government will present action-taken reports on the following:(a)  The Auditor-General’s Special Audit report on the Namanve thermal power plant for the financial year that ended 30 June 2021;(b)  The erratic electricity supply in West Nile; (Applause)(c)  The Bujagali tax waiver;(d)  The emergency total shutdown of Isimba Hydro Plant;(e)  The Ministerial Policy Statement and budget estimates for the environment and natural resources sector for the Financial Year 2023/2024. 5.  The Minister of Energy and Mineral Development will present a comprehensive statement on the nationwide electricity connection projects. I beg to submit. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Next item. PRIME MINISTER’S TIMETHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us go for Prime Minister’s Time. I will allow issues later.4.03THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, Hon. Elijah Okupa, Member of Parliament for Kasilo County, Serere District – let me read his question.11888STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe Uganda Police helicopter (Aircraft Fixed Wing 5X PEF/P180 Piaggio Avanti Evo) was bought in June 2019 at a price of $7.48 million. However, it is now being sold at just $4 million. His prayer is: can the Prime Minister update the House on this matter? Mr Speaker, my response is that the Uganda Police Force has a police airwing whose function is to support policing within the country. It currently runs four aircrafts; three helicopters and that one: the Aircraft Fixed Wing aircraft. The aircrafts were intended, primarily, to assist in the maintenance of law and order by conducting aerial patrols and surveillance, aerial search and rescue, rapid response, force transportation and, sometimes, medical and casualty evacuation. When not required by the police for the stipulated duties, they may be used as a charter service by the Government, on payment of the prescribed fees. Mr Speaker, the fixed wing aircraft, which is a nine-seater aircraft, was acquired in June 2019 at a cost of $7.48 million and, since then, it has only flown for less than 200 hours. This is mainly due to its operational limitations, which includes designs that limit it to only paved or tarmacked runways, as well as high maintenance and operational costs. The aircraft is serviceable and has all the necessary requirements to operate.Mr Speaker, due to the above-mentioned limitations, Uganda Police Force management has been considering options of how the aircraft could be effectively and efficiently utilised in advancing the police mandate and, where possible, be linked to working domestically in the aviation industry, with a possibility of leasing it to the national carrier among other options. Disposal of the said aircraft has never been an option taken by police management as a way of ‘utilisation ’ of the side aircrafts. In any case, if any disposal was to be considered, the due process would be diligently followed by all key stakeholders regarding the disposal of such an asset and in that respect, value for money would certainly be a key consideration to take into account. The Hon. Eunice Otuko Apio, Member of Parliament of Oyam North raised a question on the exclusion of Oyam North in the distribution of water by National Water and Sewerage Corporation under the on-going projects in the districts of Gulu, Omoro and Oyam. Prayer:Can the Rt Hon. Prime Minister update the House on the matter? Response:The Integrated Water Management and Development Project is a follow-up project being jointly implemented by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) and the Ministry of Water and Environment. The scope of work under National Water and Sewerage Corporation entails the following:1.  Gulu Water Supply and Sanitation ProjectThis is jointly funded by the World Bank and a German development agency called KFW, implemented in two packages, (package 1 and package 2). Package 2 is financed by the World Bank and it involves laying of 70.2 kilometre DN-500 500 ductile iron transmission pipeline from Karuma to Gulu.2.  Mbale Water Supply and Sanitation ProjectThis project targets the population of Mbale and the neighbouring areas, including the towns of Butaleja, Busolwe, Kibuku, Kadama, Tirinyi, and Budaka. The project scope under National Water Sewage Corporation entails expansion of the production capacity of Bunghoko and Manafwa Water Treatment Plants from 4,000 cubic meters per day to 18,000 cubic meters PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Nabbanja]11889THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024per day, and 6,000 cubic meters per day to 9,000 cubic meters per day, respectively. The project also entails laying of 85 kilometres of pipe network, construction of a 2,000 cubic meter capacity reservoir, and the rehabilitation and expansion of the sewage system. The scope of work under the neighbouring towns is being implemented under the Ministry of Water and Environment. 3.  Adjumani Water Supply and Sanitation ProjectThis project targets Adjumani Town Council, Pakele, Zaipi and Ciforo, among others and involves the construction of water intake structure of capacity 12,000 cubic meters per day, water supply plant of capacity of 4,000 cubic meters per day, laying of 51.8 kilometre of water distribution network and installation of the water storage capacity of 1,150 cubic metres and construction of sanitation facilities.iv. Source protection measures in Arua, Gulu, Mbale and Bushenyi areasWorks under package two of the Gulu project are currently at 61 per cent and the project is expected to be completed by the end of October 2024. Contracts for Adjumani and Mbale were signed on 21 December 2023, and the contractor is currently mobilising to commence works; this is expected in March 2024. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) and Gulu City are jointly implementing the integrated program to improve living conditions in Gulu through grant financing from KFW. This program is being implemented in two phases. The works under phase 1 were completed in 2020 and the system is operational now. The scope of works included the following:1. Rehabilitation and expansion of Oyitino Dam, raw water intake and Gulu water treatment plant run raw water intake and good water treatment plant from 4,000 cubic metres per day to 10,000 cubic metres per day. This also included development of ground water capacity of 2,000 cubic metres per day;2. The rehabilitation and expansion of the sewage system;3. The construction of a faecal sludge treatment facility at Pece–Cubu;4. The construction of 20 water-borne toilet facilities in public places; and5. The construction of 30,000 cubic metres per day water intake in the River Nile at Karuma. The scope of work under phase 2 includes the following:1. Construction of a Water Treatment plant of capacity 10,000 cubic metre per day at Karuma;2. Construction of 5,000 cubic metre capacity reservoir at Customs Corner in Gulu City;3. Installation of reservoirs in the six small towns along Gulu Highway, namely Karuma, Kamdini, Minakulu, Bobi, Koro-Abili and Palenga; and4. The construction of a sludge storage facility at Pece-Cubu.Works under Phase 2 are at 43 per cent progress, and the project is expected to be completed by July, 2024. Ongoing projects scope includes only towns that are en-route to Gulu along the highway (Karuma, Kamdini, Minakulu, Bobi, Kolo-Abili, Palenga). Apparently Oyam North is not en-route and will only benefit from other National Water and Sewerage Cooperation (NWSC) budgetary arrangements that are gazetted by the Ministry of Water and Environment. The Hon. Gorreth Namugga, Member of Parliament, Mawogola South Ssembabule District, said: According to 3rd National 11890STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTDevelopment Plan, the Government selected 69 key projects, which it planned to fund. Among them is the creation of four science and technology parks as part of the Innovation Technology Development and Transfer Program and 40 Technology and Business Incubators (TBIs).Prayer: Can I update the House on the progress that has been registered in line with the construction of the Science and Technology parks, as well as the Technology and Business Incubators?The response is that I am pleased to inform the House that the Government has made significant progress regarding the establishment of Science and Technology Parks and Technology and Business Incubators. Below are the updates:1. Engineering Park in Rwebiteete: this park is the most advanced, and we anticipate its opening in May this year;2. Mobility Park, in Kayunga: land acquisition has been completed, a master plan has been developed and plans are underway to install utilities and attract investors to the park;3. Biosciences Park in Nakasongola: land has been acquired and a master plan is finalised. Construction has been contracted to National Enterprise Corporation (NEC) and will commence shortly; and4. Agro-Science Park, in Soroti. The master plan is currently under development and is expected to be completed by June 2024. Once finalised, we will seek funding for the construction. Mr Speaker, in addition to the Uganda Industrial Research Institute (UIRI), Uganda has completed the Construction Technology Innovation Business Incubation Centre at Namanve, which is complete and will be opened soon. Additional technology and business incubators are planned to be affiliated with each of the science parks to enable support for ventures and innovators. The Government remains committed to the development of these projects and will provide further updates as they progress. Question No.4This question came from Hon. Joy Waako, National Female Representative for Older Persons, and the question was that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development publicised the National Guidelines on Healthy Ageing, which were launched during the celebrations of the International Day of Older Persons on 1 October 2023, in Kyegegwa District. The guidelines are to be used by all persons, especially the older persons to manage their lives so as to attain optimum health, functioning and productivity. Under topic one of the guidelines on nutrition and toileting, it is observed that older persons have a tendency of restricting food, water and fruit consumption due to the fear of frequenting the toilet which sometimes are not user-friendly. This has negative consequences on healthy aging such as constipation and malnutrition.  PrayerWhich measures has the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development put in place to avail user-friendly toilet facilities for older persons, especially in public places?ResponseMr Speaker, the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, as a ministry in charge of disability affairs, is represented on the National Building Review Board (NBRB), whose functions include overseeing public buildings to cater for such matters of safety, health and inclusion. Mr Speaker, the ministry, through Occupational Safety and Health Department, is mandated to ensure workplace safety. This is done through undertaking occupational safety and health plan approval of public buildings and occupational safety and health inspections of all workplaces, including public buildings. Availability of facilities for people with disabilities and older persons are key components and part of the parameters or checklists that are used. [Ms Nabbanja]PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11891THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024Question No.5 From Hon. Agnes Kirabo, Youth Representative, Central Region. That Mulago National Referral Hospital has started a kidney transplant. However, free services have been given to a few people. The rest of the patients have to pay over Shs 46 million, which is too expensive for an ordinary Ugandan.PrayerWhat is the Government’s plan to ensure this service is available for all? ResponseMr Speaker, in December 2023, Mulago National Referral Hospital conducted Uganda’s first kidney transplant successfully, by a team of medical experts from Uganda with counterparts from Yashoda Hospital in India. Mr Speaker, the Government has allowed at least five patients with End-Stage Renal Failure who are on dialysis to have kidney transplants at Mulago National Referral Hospital, free of charge before the fee for the lifesaving procedure is determined for all patients to start paying. The costing of this procedure can then be deduced more accurately rather than estimating from a single or maiden renal transplant. Mr Speaker, Shs 46 million for a kidney transplant is a media-generated figure and not a Government position. The Government has not yet set the cost and our plan through, the Mulago team, is to determine the price after more transplants have been made to get the right picture of the cost implication.The cost of running specialised services is extremely expensive and such services have Ugandans over $18,000 on average, excluding costs of ticket and maintenance abroad. This cost does not include post-operative follow-up treatment which is also very expensive, especially in the first months. All investigations to prepare the patient for transplant were done in Uganda, except for Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA) typing where samples were sent to South Africa through Lancet Laboratories. This was more cost effective to do for now until we scale up organ transplant services. Mr Speaker, the success story of Mulago National Referral Hospital in correcting this health condition, will save Ugandans from travelling to India and other developed countries for kidney transplant. The Government of Uganda is committed to saving the lives of Ugandans through such innovations and lessons learned from Mulago. Therefore, after thorough assessment of all that entails the entire process of kidney transplant and full recovery of a patient, a reasonable figure shall be derived and Ugandans shall be informed accordingly.Question No.6From Hon. Dr. Abed Bwanika, Member of Parliament, Kimaanya- Kabonera Division, Masaka City. He says that on 28 April 2020, the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda approved the creation of 15 news cities and 10 became operational on 1 July 2020, including Jinja, Arua, Gulu, Lira, Soroti, Hoima, Fort portal, Mbarara, Masaka and Mbale. Section 188 of the Local Government Act, instructs that at the creation of a new local government unit, the minister shall assure the equitable sharing of property between the original and new governments. It is now three years since the operationalisation of the 10 cities without clear guidance on asset sharing. The Ministry of Local Government continues to handle ad hoc by engaging case by case, which has caused a lot of confusion and not desirable. This has negatively affected service delivery in the affected local governments. Some district leadership continue to insist on compensation out of the transfer of assets despite that these are public properties held in trust. 11892STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTPrayers:1. When is the Minister of Local Government concluding on the guidelines for asset sharing and laying the same on the Table in the Parliament of Uganda?2. How much provision has the Government provided to support establishment of new headquarters for districts that were affected by the creation of new cities?Mr Speaker, my response is that funding to finance the settlement of 10 districts of Masaka, Mbarara, Hoima, Arua, Gulu, Lira, Mbale, Fort portal, Soroti and Jinja that gave birth to cities was requested for by the Ministry of Local Government during the budgeting period for the current Financial Year 2023/2024. However, funds were not allocated and this remained as an unfunded priority. The matter has been presented to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for consideration in the next Financial year 2024/2025 Budget Call Circular. Prayer 2: When are the subcounties that host new district headquarters going to be gazetted as town councils as part of the Local Governments Act?The Ministry of Local Governments has compiled the necessary data from the eight district local governments which have already determined their new locations. We are still waiting for submission from two district local governments. Town councils will be gazetted once the Ministry of Local Governments has received all the information from the two remaining local governments. Prayer 3That since there are lacunas in the Local Governments Act about the governance of new cities, when is government coming up with a Bill on governance of new cities?My response is that the proposed Amendment Bill for Local Governments Act, Cap 243 has been prepared and will soon be submitted to Cabinet for consideration and approval, and then be brought here for approval. Mr Speaker, I beg to submit.  (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Honourable colleagues, you know rule 41, under Prime Minister’s time; no clarification or supplementary question.Unfortunately, these are your rules and that is what you gave me to ensure that it is implemented. Under this rule, we do not have procedure on Prime Minister’s time. Let us use it effectively.Now, we are getting to oral questions. I will start with Hon. Mamawi, Honourable member from Kiryandongo, Rakai, Tororo – that is Hon. Otaala, Youth Kabale, Hon. Nanyondo and Pan–African Parliament. Honourable colleagues, you know we have enough time. Just ensure that you shoot and do not go through a lot of – so that we can accommodate all of you. The Prime Minister usually gives us enough time. At 5.00 p.m., Prime Minister’s time will end then we will continue for another one hour on matters of national importance so that we can accommodate all of you. (Applause)4.32MR JAMES MAMAWI (NRM, Adjumani East County, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We thought it wise to raise this as a matter of national importance. The road from Adjumani to Obongi is cut off by flooding of the Zoka stream. Where this road is, we have a stream called Zoka, which joins River Nile. We wonder why engineers from Ministry of Works and Transport decided to make this road along this area?We would like to know from the Government, what they can do to help the people of Adjumani and Obongi to see that this road does not disturb our people every year? If there [Ms Nabbanja] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11893THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024are opportunities, we ask the Government to divert this road. We have seen many roads constructed in swampy areas, especially in Eastern Uganda. We have swamps which are over 500 metres away and the road can pass without any disturbance. Why can’t they do the same for this specific road?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Is it a UNRA road?MR MAMAWI:  It is a UNRA road joining Adjumani and Obongi districts. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this question had also been registered by Hon. Ababiku, Hon. Maneno, Hon. Bhoka and now Hon. Mamawi. So, one of you has presented it. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I will get the Ministry of Works and Transport through UNRA, and I will cause a meeting between those entities together with the Members of Parliament and we come up with a solution. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it seems to be a persistent issue every year like how you see the way River Katonga behaves. So, indeed, when you come in to support, you would have saved the community. 4.35MS HELEN KAHUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiryandongo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Some parts of the country are currently receiving heavy rainfall in this unusual month of February. We have not received an official report from the meteorological department, guiding our farmers on what to do with the rainfall. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you guide our farmers on what to do with the rainfall and inform us of any likely effects of such early rainfalls? Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Before we deploy rainmakers , Rt Hon. Prime Minister intervene. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, we already have a report, and the country is already aware. The report came out in January, but I think we need to do more by using the media. I urge Ugandans to start planting now. Yes, they should start planting because it is going to rain until May.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have been assured of receiving rainfall by the Prime Minister, at least until May. If you doubt -(Laughter)4.36MS JULIET KYINYAMATAMA (Independent, Woman Representative, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is about two projects that were supposed to be in Rakai that is the piped-water project and the tarmac from Ntuusi-Rakai to Isingiro. The reason as to why I am asking these questions is because the water projects took off in the designed areas of Lyantonde, Kiruhura and leaving out Rakai yet Rakai hosts the lake, which is the source of the piped water. Also, the tarmac project is now in Isingiro. Rakai was skipped, we do not know why it is left behind all the time and yet we have been faithful to this Government. Thank you.4.38THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, the road from Isingiro-Rakai up to Ntuusi is currently being designed from Isingiro-Rakai up to Ntuusi in Ssembabule. I would like to allay the fears of my sister that the project will cover every part. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The piped water? MS NABBANJA:  I have taken note. I do not know whether I have here any minister from the Ministry of Water and Environment. I saw her here.11894STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when we were passing the loan to connect water to Isingiro, we passed two loans that covered water in Isingiro, Ssembabule, Rakai and all those areas. Maybe the implementation needs a follow-up.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I will cross check with the ministry concerned and then report.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Sure, thank you. Yes, honourable member for Tororo.4.38DR EMMANUEL OTAALA (NRM, West Budama County South, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The question that I would like to raise to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is with respect to the construction of Pongolojo Bridge that was a presidential pledge, which has delayed for well over 15 years.When our people try to cross the downstream of River Malaba, they are often mauled by crocodiles. Every year, we lose about two people. The President, while campaigning in Busia during the bi-election there, assured us that this bridge would be constructed and he directed the Ministry of Works and Transport to find about Shs 3 billion but it has taken over 15 years. Right now, my people are scared because the crocodiles have become very many and it is hampering trade between Tororo and Bugiri. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when is this presidential pledge going to be actualised? Secondly, Mr Speaker -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, it is only one question.4.40THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s concern. I will definitely engage the Ministry of Works and Transport, especially the Directorate of Bridges to make sure, one, that the bridge is constructed and two, we shall also engage the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) to take these crocodiles where they belong so that they do not harm our people.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. I will continue thanking the honourable ministers who are here but urging the ones who are not here to always come and support the Prime Minister on Thursdays. It makes it very easy when a minister is around because the Prime Minister may not know each and everything spot on. 4.41DR CHRISTINE NDIWALANA (NUP, Bu -komansimbi North County, Bukomansim -bi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have a question for the Prime Minister concerning the infectious haemorrhage disease that is affecting children in my constituency, in Kitanda Sub-County. So far, seven children have passed on and ten are admitted. It affects children between the ages of eight to fifteen years and the affected child bleeds from any body part, including sweating blood.We have asked the Ministry of Health to intervene, but the reports we get say that it is just common Malaria, which I do not believe. My question is, how are you going to intervene because it is very infectious? According to the history I took from the residents, it looks to be a viral haemorrhagic fever, which is infectious. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister and former Minister of Health. 4.42THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, I am aware that close to seven children have died in Bukomansimbi and the disease is Malaria. Our children present with high fever, they sometimes urinate a blood-like substance and that is called black water. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11895THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024The teams of the Ministry of Health are already on the ground. We had a meeting - I believe that they are sensitising the communities to avoid exposing themselves to mosquitoes. Secondly, we are also going to provide bed nets for your people so that we can protect themselves from mosquito bites. That is all I can give. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Just before him, Dr Kamara, Hon. Nambooze here was telling me that during their work - 4.44MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Mr Speaker, I beg for your indulgence. During our field trip, as the Committee on Government Assurances and Implementation last year, we went to eastern Uganda and that disease has spread so wide. The doctor handling that particular sector of children told us that on average, up to seven children per family, have been lost.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Which parts of eastern Uganda?MS BETTY NAMBOOZE:  Mr Speaker, this is a very important matter of Black Water fever. Research has been made and each family had lost a child to it. I would like to request the Ministry of Health to take up this matter as a very urgent issue and bring a report because it now seems that this disease is spreading from Eastern Uganda to other parts of the country.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, during the months of July, August up to September last year, the same strange disease was reported by Hon. Namuyangu and Hon. Oboth to the Cabinet. A task force was formed and it discovered that Malaria what is in Bukomansimbi.In Budaka and Kibuku, district councils had refused to spray homes. (Interjection)  We had to come in, as Government, and do the enforcement. Mosquito nets were distributed. I think that task force was headed by Dr Kyobe, the Incident Commander at the Ministry of Health. The minister herself and the ministry’s Permanent Secretary, Ms Diana Atwiine all went there and the issue was malaria. Mr Speaker, as I speak, children no longer die. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Parliament is a platform you can always use to update the nation. I think when such happens, it is always important to utilise the platform of Parliament. A statement is brought here and we sensitise the nation or the leaders through Parliament instead of it coming just as a question from a Member. We shall beg for your indulgence, Rt Hon. Prime Minister that next time it happens, please - I do not know if you consider it important for the Minister of Health to bring a statement -(Applause)-  so the nation can get informed especially on the preventive measures for such diseases. Thank you. Yes, Dr Kamara.4.48DR NICHOLAS KAMARA (FDC, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the Prime Minister is about the erratic electricity supply in Kabale. You would be very lucky to be in a Kabale or Kabale Town, which I represent and have electricity supply for a whole day. Many people have talked about erratic electricity supply, one of the culprits being Arua in the West Nile region. Last week, to make matters worse, in a suburb called Bugonji where the Prime Minister is born, there was an upsurge of electricity which blew many electrical appliances including TVs, fridges, radios of people and they have not been compensated.The point I am trying to make is that the erratic electricity is in the whole country. It is not only in Kabale and West Nile. When we go to countries that surround us - I have been lucky to be in three countries so far – but we find the electricity is steady, cheaper and rarely goes off. 11896STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMy question to the Prime Minister is, do you know that the surrounding countries have better electricity supply than us and it is more stable? If you know this, what is your plan as Government? When do you think we are going to have stable electricity as a country? (Applause) Thank you so much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, this is an issue which has been answered two times here. Hon. Kamara, you have been told here by the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development that come September, the substation that is being put in Kabale will stabilise electricity for the whole of Kigezi. It has been answered two times.I am trying to avoid questions which keep coming and taking up time. The minister has assured us properly here that come this September - and you know the line is being built. I was in Kabale.  I visited that area. So, I do not want to disturb the Prime Minister with that because we just received it two times. Member for Mukono and then Youth Representative, Northern -4.50MS HANIFA NABUKEERA (NUP, Woman Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is about the water ambulance that was given to Mukono to traverse Koome Islands. To my dismay, since we launched the ambulance, it is parked at Luzira Port Bell. Whenever we request for the ambulance, they tell us it has no fuel. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I request for your indulgence. At least it should be parked at Katosi Landing Site such that we can fuel it and our fishermen can access the ambulance. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, this is purely administrative. I am going to pick up the matter. I request that we team up with the Member and I know we have solved several issues together. On lack of fuel, the ministry is supposed to provide fuel the same way it is providing fuel of Shs 1,000,000 per the ambulances that we have been given. It is just purely administrative so we shall handle.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Youth Representative, Northern.4.52MR BONIFACE OKOT (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. On 25th January this year, Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) released the results for Primary Leaving Examination (PLE) 2023 and the results indicated that 750,000 pupils sat for the examinations. However, the 2023 Primary Seven (P.7) cohort were enrolled in 2017 in Primary One (P1) with a total enrolment of 2,000,000 pupils. This indicates that through the seven-year period, 1,200,000 pupils dropped out. Mr Speaker, in this era of policies on free compulsory primary education, can the Government account for this very high dropout and share comprehensive plans to mitigate this crisis permanently?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Yes, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the policy on free education is a good one which started in 1996. Even recently, you had the President during the Tarehe Sita urging leaders and school administrators to stop charging fees in Government-aided schools. The school administrations continue to charge exorbitant fees making it very difficult for children from poor families to access education.The Ministry of Education and Sports came up with several solutions namely. One of them is an audit, which has been done. The major reason the school administration continues to charge our poor families is because they do not have enough teachers Two, that because they are doing exams and three - the Minister of Education and Sports [Dr Kamara] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11897THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024is here. I think she can add. The fact is that Parliament of Uganda and the Government should put their feet down and say no to these charges.The other option that Government is putting in place is to increase, if need be, the capitation grant in the near future so that the money is enough for them to run these schools. 4.55THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to begin by commending and asking the House to commend the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in the manner in which she is answering these questions. I think she deserves a clap. (Applause)Secondly, I want to thank Hon. Okot for asking such a very beautiful question. I have the following to answer. One, it is true that under the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have carried out an audit and realised that for our children who begin education at Primary One, by the time they reach Primary Seven, the number keeps on reducing. No wonder, if you look at those who sit Primary Seven vis-à-vis  those who began at Primary One, there is a big gap. Where are the issues?You and I have the responsibility of addressing the problem because we all represent various constituencies. As the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Government, we have identified some of the critical areas, which, in our considered opinion, we are coming here to ask for your support, specifically, to begin to increase the budget line for the Ministry of Education and Sports in the following areas:1. Like the Prime Minister has clearly stated here, we have a challenge where School Management Committees and Parents and Teachers Associations are beginning to charge illegal fees, in their considered opinion, to cater for the following items:They pretend that the Government is not able to post enough teachers –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I usually have one minute for a response. Okay? The whole time I am remaining with is going to be taken up by this yet on Tuesday, you are bringing a detailed statement on this same topic. So, I would say that we hold fire on that question so that a statement comes and we have an extensive debate on this matter on Tuesday. Okay? (Applause)I had already picked Hon. Eric Musana. (Members rose_)  Honourable colleagues, all of you should be patient. Most of you want to ask and run away. We are remaining here together. You cannot leave me alone here. (Laughter)  So, do not make a sign for me to pick you quickly. I need company here. (Laughter)4.59MR ERIC MUSANA (Independent, Buyaga East County, Kagadi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. My question goes to the Prime Minister. This morning, about 12 women from my constituency staged a demonstration at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development because they had supplied coffee seedlings to the Government and the Government had promised to pay them.Mr Speaker, you have been the champion of this. You have helped these women to coordinate with Parliament and Parliament had pronounced itself on this matter.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what is there for these women? They got loans to operate these nursery beds and, now, banks are on their heads. They cannot take their children to school. Interest on the loans are increasing and they are asking themselves: what is the Government doing to make sure they are paid?MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, you will recall that last year, we agreed, in this House, that we had nursery operators across the country who had seedlings, yet there was a policy shift. Remember that when we came 11898STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTup with the Parish Development Model, the Government stopped buying seedlings under the Uganda Coffee Development Authority. So, we all agreed to give them a chance but that the Government would pay in a phased manner because we had not budgeted for this. We agreed that in Financial Year 2023/2024, we would pay a few and in Financial Year 2025/2026, we would pay another cohort.I think those fall under those cohorts. We shall pay. Gavumenti tenyaga .THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, make it easier for us to capture the record of Parliament – using the official language. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, what I meant is that the NRM Government is a trusted government: it will definitely pay. They should stay put.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, please, we have to close Prime Minister’s Time. (Members rose_)  Listen, the rules say it shall not exceed one hour, yet we have a component for the Leader of the Opposition to either reply or comment. After that, we can resume our matters of national importance, but when we have officially complied with the rules. (Applause)  The Prime Minister is still with us. It is just a matter of complying with the rules.Leader of the Opposition?5.02THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is one of those times that I get to agree with colleagues on the other end. I would like to agree with Hon. Peter Ogwang that the Prime Minister’s response is becoming impressive. (Applause)  However –(Interjections) -  I would like to encourage that we move away from the good responses to actions. It is one thing to have a good response to a Member’s concern but let there be action because that is what the Members are interested in.I will make three quick comments, Mr Speaker. On the issue of the Uganda Police Force helicopter, I am bothered that we can purchase such equipment at $7.48 million and along the way, to quote the Prime Minister’s response, it has got operational limitations, which includes designs that limit it to only paved tarmacked runways, as well as high maintenance and operational costs and so on. How come we did not see this coming? We are saying we acquired this for forces transportation, search and rescue and, sometimes, medical and casualty evacuation, meaning it was not only going to operate in areas that are tarmacked. Let us stop shooting first and aiming later so that we get equipment that is fit for purpose. Now, we are stuck with this equipment, which is very expensive and the Prime Minister is telling us that they are trying to see if it can be leased to the national carrier, which has its challenges and so on. We seem to be stuck with it. Let us first aim and, then, shoot.As an example, Mr Speaker, when I was still chairing the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authority and State Enterprises), we presented a report, which was unanimously adopted by the House here. Uganda Railways Corporation acquired locomotives at Shs 48 billion. Mark you, the recommended locomotives were at Shs 36 billion and they were fairly newer. They bought older locomotives more expensively. When they brought them here, they had to begin to make changes to the railway. So, they were not even fit for purpose. Luckily, as a result of our report, the Managing Director and the entire board were fired. I am hoping there is sanity in that area. However, the point is that we waste taxpayers’ money when we do not plan appropriately.The other comment, Mr Speaker, regards public toilet facilities. It was a concern that the older persons cannot access them. We need to make sure that there are accessible public toilet facilities for older persons, persons with disabilities (PWDs) and the general public. This is because even for some that [Mr Musana] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11899THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024exist, ordinary folks that are not as vulnerable as older persons cannot access them; they are problematic. So, in my view, we need to address this comprehensively so that the older folks, PWDs and the able-bodied persons can all access them.Finally, Mr Speaker, the kidney transplants that are happening at Mulago are a welcome move. That is where we should be headed. Can I suggest then, this money that we seem to be blowing on Lubowa Hospital, billions every year, why don’t we inject this money into Mulago Hospital, which we can now see is happening? This is because the concern is, while it is happening, it is very costly, costing about Shs 46 million. You said that is something that has been conjured up by folks out there but the point is, it is very costly. When we inject this money there, it will be a lot more accessible to ordinary people because we said, “let us have Lubowa Hospital so that we limit, as we call it, ‘medical tourism’.” You have quoted the right figures, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. It is $18,000 on average, per person going abroad, excluding the air tickets, maintenance and so on. Therefore, when you add that, it becomes a lot more. However, for Lubowa Hospital, we do not know what is happening and why things are not moving. Members of Parliament tried to access that place and they were barred, perhaps because there is nothing happening there. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, maybe that is where we should be injecting money. Move it from Lubowa Hospital that does not seem to be moving, inject it in Mulago Hospital so that people can access these services. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Matters of national importance, Hon. Kinobere, Hon. Komol, Hon. Nambooze, Hon. Dr Ayume. 5.07MR HERBERT KINOBERE (NRM, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue that I want to put forward is, on 3rd January, there was a terrible disaster in Kibuku Constituency, Nankodo Subcounty, Buganza village. I notified the Prime Minister about the issue. The Prime Minister assured me that these people would be helped. These people have been staying at a primary school called the Kapyani Primary School. When I talk about Kapyani Primary School, you landed in that school when you came. Now that the children have reported to school, these families - there are 55 families who were displaced- they are back. Most of them are staying under the trees. I managed to accommodate those I could. Others are staying in the neighbourhood. My prayer is for the Prime Minister to urgently respond to the letter that came from the district disaster committee because there was an emergency. The District Disaster Committee sat and the letter was sent to the Prime Minister’s Office. To-date, we have not got any response from January. People are suffering; there is no food, they are sleeping like animals – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister - The Prime Minister would like to know what happened exactly. MR KINOBERE: There was heavy rain, most people lost their houses and these days, people keep food in their houses. Those days, they used to keep food in the granary, and in case the house had an issue, they had somewhere to run. They lost their food, houses and property. There is nothing they have – (Interjections)–  That is where I come from and I request the Prime Minister to, please, give attention to the people of Kibuku. These families have suffered for one month and five days now. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister - Luckily, there is a District Disaster Committee report, according to the Member, which you can refer to. 11900STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5.10THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, we are going to dispatch a team from the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, to go and verify the extent of damage, and then the Government will act accordingly. 5.10MR JOSEPH KOMOL (NRM, Dodoth North County, Kaabong): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the continued shortage and delayed supply of drugs in Kaabong District Hospital and other health facilities in the district. Mr Speaker, from November 2023 to-date, the National Medical Stores (NMS) has not delivered essential medicines and health supplies to Kaabong District and health facilities, being the main reason for shortage of drugs. Mr Speaker, even when NMS delivers the drugs, they deliver less supplies against the health facility orders. The NMS also delivers what is not required. Instead, they deliver condoms in quantities, gloves and syringes against the orders of the health facilities. Another reason, Mr Speaker, for shortage of drugs – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you cannot give reasons for shortage of medicine and all that. Just ask so that the Prime Minister responds. MR KOMOL: Okay. Mr Speaker, people are suffering, there is no Panadol and anti-malaria medicines. This has resulted in the death of some people. My prayers are that the two cycles of the drug supplies that have not been given from November to February need to urgently be supplied because there is no medicine in any health facility. Secondly, NMS should streamline the supply and distribution of the drugs. They should stick to the order of the health facility, instead of bringing supplies, which are not required for the health centre. The NMS needs to streamline strategies so that this kind of delay should not continue. Thank you very much. 5.13THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, the policy under the Ministry of Health to supply drugs is known. They are supposed to supply them depending on the lines. They are four; each quarter we supply. Every two months, that is the way it is supposed to be. Mr Speaker, we agreed when I was still in the Ministry of Health that once supplies are given to facilities, Members of Parliament should be given information on their phones. (Interjections)-  The purpose of that is for you to monitor and help the Government to streamline where there are issues. For Kaabong, we shall cause a meeting with NMS and find out the reason why the supplies are delayed, and I will get in touch with the Member. 5.14DR CHARLES AYUME (NRM, Koboko Municipality, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As the country prepares for the Pamoja-African Cup of Nations bid (AFCON), I am aware that the stadiums have already been selected and we are in the process of budgeting for them. However, there is a private investor in West Nile, Arua City, who is developing a stadium. He took out a lease from the city authorities and it is a 20,000-seater capacity stadium, probably at 40 per cent. Mr Speaker, my prayers are if the Government could reach out to this private developer, as is the norm when we are hosting international events, to see if they can infuse him with some PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11901THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024support, and see if this stadium can be complete through maybe buying shares, equity and so forth. This is because we are 400 kilometres from where the action will take place, and that will be a legacy for us to enjoy the football from the stadium virtually. 5.15THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  Mr Speaker, you led the team to Cairo for the purposes of us getting the hosting rights of AFCON 2027. I thank my colleague, Dr Ayume. I will be interested in finding out the contacts of the private investor and see how we could be able to begin to look at the cooperation between the Government and the private investor and we see how we can begin to look at the possible cooperation because what we need is to encourage many to invest in sports infrastructure. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Betty Nambooze - 5.16MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (NUP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Mr Speaker, through documents from the Ministry of Internal Affairs given to this Parliament, the Uganda Police Force has a plan of recruiting and training 2,500 personnel this year. According to the National Budget Framework Paper, Shs 21 billion had been planned to facilitate the wages of the proposed recruitment of police officers. However, Shs 12.3 billion was provided, leaving a shortfall of Shs 8.6 billion.I have seen advertisements by the Uganda Police Force, in the newspapers, announcing 5,000 vacancies, 500 of them being vacancies for Assistant Inspectors of Police, and 4,500 for Police Constables. The inconsistency between the two figures is very big and enough to cause a matter of great national importance. For example, Mr Speaker, according to the budget provisions, we are not even able to facilitate the recruitment of 2,500 police officers.The Uganda Police Force is announcing 4,500 Constables plus 500 Assistant Inspectors of Police. My questions are: where does the Police expect to get money to pay these officers when even the budget provisions are not enough to pay for 2,500 as planned? Why would police advertise for more vacancies than those it disclosed to this House?Mr Speaker, we are already having a problem with housing for the police officers and poor pay. Would it not be prudent, first of all, to consolidate and be able to house and facilitate the police officers we have other than –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, or any minister can support the Prime Minister. MS NABBANJA:  The Minister of Defence was trying to defend me. Mr Speaker and colleagues, the matter the Member is raising is important. I want to request my sister, Hon. Nambooze, these days she has a lot of love for the police. Every week she is asking-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   She is the Shadow Minister of Internal Affairs.MS NABBANJA: Oh, I request that she puts that matter in writing such that I can come up with a comprehensive answer next week.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon, your team can capture it. Frame it very well and - but Hon. Nambooze, you can write so that it is -I am told you have a very good handwriting. [Member: “Procedure]  Please, honourable colleagues, when I am in this period, I do not need points of procedure; I know I am proceeding well.  Hon. Kamuntu Moses, Hon. Ndiwalana Christine, Hon. Okumu Gabriel -  honourable colleagues, these Members came and registered these issues. I do not want any of them to blame me, that you never called me, okay? Hon. Ngompek Linos, Hon. Sendawula Christine Bukenya.11902STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5.21MS CHRISTINE SENDAWULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I received a petition from the primary societies, which constitute Wamala Growers Cooperative Union, and they had written to the Commissioner of Cooperatives, requesting him to intervene in their issues, which are already written in this petition. However, since last year, they have never been helped.To my dismay, the issues these people are raising are the same issues they are bringing up now. There is mismanagement of finances in the union and general administration. My prayer is that the minister concerned should come up and help these people.  It is as if they have been neglected. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the members requested to be allowed to have a general meeting but they were not allowed. Even a special meeting was not allowed. Now the executive, which they accuse has been allowed by the minister to have a general meeting. So, what the member wants is for you to listen to the voices of the people because even in the Parliamentary committee report, it was faulting the leadership in as far as utilisation of the funds of the cooperative society was concerned.5.22THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): The Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives last year moved across the country and found out that it is true, there was some mismanagement of the co-operators funds. I believe a report was brought here and the recommendations of this House are very clear. We shall implement the recommendations in the Parliamentary committee report. Mr Speaker, I request that you allow me to prevail over the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, to at least come here in one or two weeks, with a comprehensive report on the actions that have been taken. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, they are saying this meeting is happening on the 5th, so what you could do is talk to the Minister in charge of Cooperatives to intervene in this matter and see a way of helping this community. That will be very important. Thank you.Hon. Lucy Akello, Hon. Kwizera Eddie, Hon. Atima Jackson and Hon. Sarah Opendi. 5.24MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro): Mr Speaker, I would like to raise an issue of national importance that deals with the pay structure in Government. Here in Government, we are supposed to follow the pay system that looks at the hierarchy, protocol and the cost of error. When we are deciding a pay, these are the scientific measures we follow. When you go to our districts, you will find that the Chief Administrative Officer is paid a net of Shs 1.8 million and the Engineer who is a junior staff is paid Shs 6 million. This is causing some conflict. Secondly, you find the Chairperson of LC V who has campaigned in the whole district, is also paid Shs 2 less than the people they supervise. When you go to some secondary schools, the head teacher is paid less than the class teacher. This has resulted into conflicts and it has affected service delivery. It is unfortunate for the Government not to listen to the reality that those people should be paid because if the CAO makes any error, it means corruption will be escalated. In the same vein, since the President increased the salaries of the Permanent Secretaries to Shs 15.4 million, in a way of reducing corruption in Public Service, my prayer is that can’t the Government look into the pay system of the LCs V and the CAOs and those people heading secondary schools to avoid conflicts?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers?PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11903THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024MR EDDIE KWIZERA:  My prayer is that the Government should establish a system that is fair and that equitable pay is made in accordance with hierarchy and protocol. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister of Public Service -5.27THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Mukasa Muruli):  Thank you, Mr Speaker and my colleague, Hon. Eddie Kwizera, for raising this point. Indeed, a fair system that follows all those good points that my friend raised has been established. The pay is calculated and set according to a set of criteria, which is scientific. What we are following now is within the recommendation of the Public Service Sector Review Commission and the pay principles, which we agreed on in Cabinet in 2018. I think at one time, we occasioned the Minister of Public Service to come on the Floor of Parliament to elaborate on those pay principles. We agreed, as a way forward, because of the smallness of our purse and because of conflicting priorities, we would pay in phases according to an agreed-on system - that is what exactly we are doing. We are paying in phases and we have looked at certain sectors of the service, and paid them. We are continuing and we are not going to go back to this until everybody has finally been paid according to those very good principles of protocol, hierarchy and so on. Definitely money permitting, we are going to go that way, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, would you like to add something? 5.29THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, you will recall that in 2020/2021, time came when the whole world was frozen, whether you were big, whether you had the money or not, you had to be treated by scientists in the country. (Applause)In order to attract the best brains of the scientists in the country, we agreed so that these best brains do not go out of the country and some of them have come back. That is how we came up with a policy to start with the scientists. After scientists, we are going in a phased manner like the minister has stated. Hon. Eddie Kwizera, you were part of this. Therefore, just explain to the CAO that the Government is phasing out payments of servants, and so, we shall definitely come to the LC V and CAO. Thank you. 5.30MR JACKSON ATIMA (NRM, Arua Central Division, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the lack of firefighting trucks or equipment, in almost all the police stations in West Nile, heightened by numerous fire outbreaks within the region.On a sad note, an incident occurred yesterday, 14 February 2024, where a Nile Star Company bus was burnt into ashes next to Pakwach Police Station. This incident could not be rescued simply because the police station did not have any firefighting equipment. This is one of the many similar incidents that have happened across the country.My prayer is that:First, since we are in the budgeting process, can the Ministry of Internal Affairs budget for firefighting trucks for upcountry police stations, especially those on highways, so that in such an occurrence, rescue can be handled quickly. Second, can the Directorate of Police, Fire Prevention and Rescue Services be financed to undertake its mandate of prevention of fire through inspection, investigation, education and media campaigns on rescue of life and property? 11904STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTLastly, can police work together with local leaders and investors in all sectors to have fire extinguishing equipment, aboard public transport, schools, markets, worship places, et cetera, and skill them? Thank you, I beg to submit. 5.32THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja ): Mr Speaker, I thank the Member for the question. All the recommendations he is making are correct. It is just a matter of budgeting. I request that together with Members of Parliament, especially those who sit on that committee, we need to budget accordingly so that we save lives. 5.32MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  This is something, which the Committee on Internal Affairs should follow up. MS OPENDI:  Mr Speaker, the Electoral Commission has released the roadmap for the by-elections to replace our dear sister, the late Hon. Cecilia Ogwal.According to this roadmap, the nominations are supposed to be on 11 and 12 March 2024, and campaigns are supposed to be from 13 to 19, which is just seven days. This is a seat for a woman Member of Parliament who ideally covers the entire district. This district has more than 14 subcounties; it has over 60 parishes and over 400 something villages. Is it fair to expect these aspirants who are going to be nominated, to run through the districts in seven days and reach down to the people? Or are we just doing this as a ritual? Mr Speaker, I need – 5.35THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue raised by the honourable member has been noted. We shall communicate your concern to the Electoral Commission but the Executive dare not direct the Electoral Commission on how to conduct elections in this country. It is a matter of the Constitution. However, we shall pass on the message. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The issue is that it is rushed. When the Member came to me, I felt it was a very valid concern. If it is within 60 days, we can maximise on them. 5.36MS HOPE NAKAZIBWE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, this is a matter of national importance, regarding a swamp that lies along a road that connects Buwekula South and Mubende Municipality.The Rt Hon. Prime Minister is well aware of this swamp and at some point, she even gave me engineers that went to look at the magnitude of the work that needs to be done. The engineers affirmed that the magnitude of the work is enormous and could not be easily handled by the local governments. When I visited the technical people at the Ministry of Works and Transport, they indicated that there were no funds in the Government to work on this bridge or swamp. They stated that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development did not release funds, which could help them handle such emergency and critical roads. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, it is good for us to urge the Government to task the Ministry of Finance to release funds to the Minister of Works to work for this swamp because it is a very busy and economic road that transports goods and crops from Buwekula South to Mubende Municipality, where we all know that our people find market.My prayer is that the Ministry of Finance releases money to the Ministry of Works to work on this road or sends money that is commensurate with the work that needs to be done to the district, for the swamp to be worked on or be bridged. Thank you.[Mr Atima]PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11905THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 20245.38THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, last month, we sent engineers to the swamp she is talking about. The Ministry of Works and Transport said they could not manage to work on that swamp within the budgetary conditions they were in. I am also a Member of Parliament and I request that you allow me to speak as a Member of Parliament – (Interjections)  - I am requesting this, so that-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My Honourable Member, speak. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: Members, this is a platform for all of us. There is a bridge between Mubende and Kakumiro at a place called Kihimbira. The river is called Nyamuhuguza. On 4th November, the river swept away all the culverts. One person died and a number of motorcycles belonging to the people from Mubende were washed away. My colleagues, the Members of Parliament and I reported this matter to my office; now, as the Prime Minister. (Laughter) Engineers were sent on site; they came up with specifications and a big budget of Shs 11 billion to work on the bridge. They do not even have any money to work on it. That bridge is where the President passed when he was going for the trek. Some of you accompanied the President during that trek between Butorogo and Kakumiro to Birembo. I caused a meeting between the Ministry of Works and my colleagues, members of Parliament, in my office –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As the Prime Minister now?MS NABBANJA: At that time, I was the Prime Minister. (Laughter)  Honourable colleagues, I want to give you this story so that you can agree with me on how to move. We did not have the Shs 11 billion as Government and so, we resolved to use the Public Private Partnership approach. The Ministry of Works told us that they could give us the engineers and as of now, Eng. Odong is on site. They gave us an excavator, which we fuelled as Members of Parliament. Honourable Member from Mubende, I remember you brought your Shs 5 million and Hon. Pascal Mbabazi contributed 50 iron bars of 16 millimetres. The culverts were provided by the Ministry of Works and Hon. Aisa Agaba also contributed 50 iron bars, I believe she might be here. I also did my part and the community contributed hardcore stones to a tune of 180 trucks. The districts contributed trucks; Mubende brought two trucks and Kakumiro brought two trucks. As I speak now, the bridge has cost us an average of Shs 400 million, it is done and we have cast concrete. Sometimes, our engineers exaggerate – (Interjections) - No, let me speak, I told you that I am speaking as a Member of Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, my honourable MP needs to be protected.MS NABBANJA: Honourable colleagues, I wanted to speak like this so that we know and see how to save the Government. The engineers wanted to work on that bridge at a cost of Shs 11 billion. When you count the amount of support that the community, the Ministry of Works and the districts have come up with, plus the amount of support we, Members of Parliament have contributed, it totals to Shs 400 million. So, we have saved Shs 10.6 billion for the Government. (Applause)The Committee on Physical Infrastructure can go on site to see the scope of work that we have done with that little money. Members, as the Prime Minister of this country, I want to take action:  To see how best we can regulate these officers who exorbitantly charge – (Interjections) - this time around, I will allow information. (Laughter)11906STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMS BETTY NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to inform the Honourable MP for Kakumiro, who also happens to be our good Prime Minister that there is a lot of connivance; even at local government level between contractors and our civil servants. In Mukono, we had a bridge at Lweza village that the Municipal Engineer costed at Shs 650 million for reconstruction. However, because the money was not readily available, we locally organised to fundraise and do that work through the Uganda system of bulungi bwansi . The same work cost us Shs 68 million. Mr Speaker, the money we sent, although little, would have earned us bigger work than what we finally got. Recently, in my municipality, they constructed less than 1 kilometre of tarmac at Shs 625 million. Early this week, the Municipal Engineer and Town Clerk approved a contract of Shs 700 million from the money that was sent from the Shs 1 billion maintenance fund to maintain the 1 kilometre that had been constructed using Shs 625 million. I stand here to inform my honourable colleague and also to support her that the country is being taken for a ride by these engineers through the contracts committees. They overprice work and most probably, share this money between our workers and the contractors. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, what I would suggest is that you can only do this through guidelines. So, once you have developed these guidelines and issued them to the different MDAs, come share them with us here so that we can get real information and the country knows because our Members are members of the district road committees so they will use these guidelines to go and ensure that the right thing is being done. Thank you. (Mr Jonathan Odur rose_) Motion – let me listen to Hon. Odur.5.48MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Mr Speaker, I would like to move a motion without notice. The information that the Prime Minister has given to this House is a very serious matter to the extent that for very many years this administration has been presiding over technocrats and civil servants within the Ministry of Works and other ministries that have been inflating and exaggerating costs appropriated by this Parliament. The Prime Minister said that on record. Under Article 163(7)(7) the President may be advised by Cabinet to cause a special audit on funds appropriated by this Parliament for the various projects and these monies can be recovered. I now beg to move a motion that the President be advised by the Cabinet to cause a special audit of the road projects - bridges and roads for the last five years including the Shs 1 billion that we recently sent so that we serve the country money and resources are available to do work. I beg to move.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable colleagues, Parliament advises the Cabinet to advise the President. My thinking is, Hon. Jonathan, that since this has been revealed by the Prime Minister and she is working on it, you could see the passion with which she has spoken about this issue.It cuts across, we give her time and instead, we promise to support her when she comes with this. We shall support you Rt Hon. Prime Minister on any measures you are going to put in place to reduce the cost of Government projects, especially with the perceived corruption that comes with them. This is time for Members’ issues. I have Members who are lining up, with their urgent matters, if you could allow us to give them a chance. I had allowed Hon. Asaba, Hon. Max, and then Hon. Feta. 5.51MR PAUL ASABA (NRM, Kyaka North County, Kyegegwa):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity and I thank the Government for having considered the road from Kazo, Bulemba, Kabagode up to Kyegegwa that is soon to be upgraded from gravel to paved standard. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11907THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024This road, according to the work plan, is going to stop in Kyegegwa and when the President was campaigning, he was in Kyaka North constituency and assured the people of Kyegegwa and Kyaka North specifically that the road would go up to Hapuyo. When the road stops in Kyegegwa, they will have considered only two constituencies, Kyaka South and Kyaka Central. When they are only six kilometres from Kyegegwa to where the President stood while promising this road, people will say, Kyaka North, our honourable is not representing us because the road is stopping 5 kilometres to reach where the President stood in my constituency. My prayer is that the 5 or 6 kilometres can also be included so that Kyaka North is considered, so that people from my constituency do not think that I am abandoning them and not saying anything. For the Government to go back and work on only the 6 kilometres, it will take other years and for sure, these coming elections, I will face it rough. That is my issue. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you have pleaded for your case.5.52THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, as you are aware, the NRM Government is a listening Government. We shall, together with the concerned MDAs, that is the UNRA, the Ministry of Works and the Member, together with the local government, meet and agree on how to include those areas that were left. After all, they are a few kilometres. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Max Ochai –5.54MR MAXIMUS OCHAI (NRM, West Budama North, Tororo):   Mr Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity. In Uganda, all old municipalities, save for Tororo Municipality, have been upgraded to a city status – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we listen to Hon. Max? If you could repeat that? MR OCHAI:  Mr Speaker, thank you and I want to say this very slowly. In Uganda today, all old municipalities, save for Tororo, have been upgraded to cities. Cities are associated with industrialisation, which brings in jobs, that enhance income, enhanced trade, with urbanisation, and also cities tend to enhance fiscal transfers from the centre. Tororo municipality is situated in the Bukedi subregion, which contributes 10.4 per cent of the poor in this country. According to the NDP, we should have by now formulated a regional development programme for the Bukedi subregion. Like for the case of Busoga, Karamoja, Bunyoro and West Nile. Unfortunately, the affirmative action envisaged in the NDP III has not come to pass. It is my prayer, therefore, that the Rt Hon. Prime Minister updates us on the position of the Executive on upgrading Tororo Municipality to a city status.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we need an upgrade. (Laughter) You have been upgraded from MP to Prime Minister. (Laughter)5.56THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, sometimes, we have to behave as patriots and nationalists. It is under that, that I felt I needed to inform this House, as an NRM cadre and nationalist. For the cities, especially the issue of Tororo, you are aware that the law that creates administrative units is very clear. We can only talk about this in 2025. Therefore, I request the Member to position himself during that time. (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Feta -11908STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT5.57MR GEOFREY FETA (NRM, Ayivu Division East, Arua City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Two weeks ago, Mr Govule Richard, a known farmer and businessman, passed on. He joined many other farmers who have passed on because they could not afford treatment and pay their bank loans. This is a matter of the Shs 9.7 billion of farmers’ money that the Prime Minister is very much familiar with. Last year, the Minister for Finance made a written commitment to budget for that money in the current financial year that did not come to see the light of day. Each time there is a public function where senior government officers come to West Nile, we get embarrassed. The farmers come to demonstrate their anger because they are now losing faith in their Members of Parliament.This is increasing the grudge between the farmers and their leaders. The Prime Minister is NRM. Most of the Members from West Nile are NRM. I do not know if the Prime Minister will be happy to see all NRM MPs from West Nile voted out because of the Shs 9.7 billion. My Prayer is that the Prime Minister commits that this money be put in the budget of Financial Year 2024/2025 so that these farmers are paid, banks stop selling their property and they stop dying because they cannot afford basic treatment in an ordinary facility. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister?5.58THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):   Mr Speaker, in 2018, the President directed that the tobacco farmers - that time, Bunyoro – be compensated after the company that bought their tobacco had failed to pay them. Members of Parliament from West Nile, in 2021, came to my office when I had just been appointed Prime Minister. During that year, the Ministry for Finance had only budgeted for the money to pay those tobacco farmers in Bunyoro. In Financial Year 2022/2023 and now Financial Year 2023/2024, the money provided for in the budget. I request that Members of Parliament from West Nile, together with the Parliament of Uganda, when it comes to budgeting this time round, let us be on the same page and help our brothers and sisters in West Nile. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us have Hon. Itungo, Hon. Muwuma, Hon. Nakut and Hon. Susan from Buvuma. 6.00MR NATHAN TWESIGYE (Independent, Kashari South County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two pending evictions in my constituency. One of them is in Bukiro Subcounty and that is the area where there is a Government Seed School. Another area is Rwera Barisa Cooperative that covers five villages. For these two areas, the owners have original land titles, but some people, through whatever means, went and acquired special titles. Now, they have been given eviction notices.When you check on the records, the reason why they processed the special titles is that the original titles got lost. We have two original titles from these two farmers. Mr Speaker, now that the civilian general in the name of Attorney-General is here – because in the process of getting a land title, you go through surveyors and committees at the subcounty and district levels, until the title is processed. However, for someone to sit on a computer in an office and just make a special title without verification, I think, is very unfortunate. Therefore, my prayer is that the Attorney-General guides and makes a statement on how these special titles are obtained and what should happen. These farmers have approached the office of the minister here and they are telling them “we are going to organise a public hearing and call the stakeholders”. My concern is: when you were issuing a special title, why didn’t you call a public hearing and why didn’t you consult the stakeholders? PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11909THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024Mr Speaker, can the Attorney-General guide us on these matters of special titles? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. You also need help. It is not just about guiding. We need the intervention of the Government urgently. 6.02THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. In law, the first title is right. The second title, which was issued over an existing title, must be cancelled but there is a process that they go through in the lands office to do that. What Hon. Itungo needs to do is to give us the details of that matter so we can follow it up. I have actually written an advisory to the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, not recently, but about a year ago, advising that for any registrar who issues a title over an existing title, for which the Government becomes liable in damages, we will join that registrar as a party to the suit and the Government will not meet those costs, because the Government does not pay registrars to do the wrong thing . (Applause)I have that communication; it is in writing. I have rendered that advisory to the Ministry for Lands and I know that the Commissioner for Lands has communicated to all the registrars. So, what we can assure you is that the process will have to be undertaken. Unfortunately, it is long and tedious. We shall share and follow it up for you. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Let us have Hon. Muwuma, Hon. Nakut and Hon. Susan.6.04MS MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga):  Mr Speaker, my matter of concern to the Prime Minister is to do with the operationalisation of a public university in Busoga subregion. It is on record that among the traditional administrative subregions in Uganda, Busoga is one of the few that do not have a public university.In the NRM manifesto of 2021, Mountains of the Moon and Busoga universities were pegged together. The Prime Minister was on record last year that this year, we shall have a functional university. The UACE results are about to be released. Can we know, or may we know, from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when we shall have this university granted and operational? Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister -6.05THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  It is true, Mr Speaker and colleagues. I have held a number of meetings concerning Busoga University. The owner, - those who had -  the proprietors of that university, wanted to give the Government a lease, but the cost of that university takeover was very high. Therefore, the President guided that the Office of the Attorney-General - now that he is here, he can add, and the Minister of Education and Sports is here;he can update us on the status. However, the fact is that the proprietors of that university wanted to give the Government lease of that title and nowadays, without a freehold land title in the names of our Government and in the names of the institution, we cannot take over. That is what has caused the delay. However, I can request the Minister of Education and Sports or the Attorney-General, because we have been together in this.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Attorney-General -6.06THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The acquisition of Busoga University by the Government was started, the agreements were signed, the task force was put in place, the process of taking over the assets was started, we even made some payments in respect to the acquisition of the assets. We only had one challenge, which is stalling this process. 11910STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe titles that were being given to the Government were not in perpetual ownership. The Government was concerned that after investing in this, after a couple of years, another person will come because the Government does not intend for Busoga University to move away from where it is. That is where we are but we can share with you all this information and we will appreciate your support in helping us get over this impasse; but the process is ongoing. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Attorney-General and minister, please, meet with the Members of Parliament from Busoga and give them this information because you never know the role they can play in talking to the proprietors and saying you are seated on our opportunity. Honourable minister, would you like to add on?6.07THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Mr Speaker, the information that the Attorney-General and the Prime Minister have given is correct. Maybe for the purpose of the record, as the Minister of Education and Sports, we will be ready to meet the Members of Parliament from the Busoga subregion to give them updated information in as far as Busoga University is concerned. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. As the chairperson, Hon. Hajji Iddi will help with that and they are usually quick in terms of response. So, call them and we will go through this. Hon. Nakut Faith -6.08MS FAITH NAKUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. You heard the Prime Minister telling us to utilise the rain and I wish to report to this House that on the 2 January 2024, my colleagues and I from Napak District decided to mobilise our people to cultivate immediately. So, they started ploughing as early as 2 January 2024, even when we are not seeing any rain. They had cultivated - they ploughed but the only challenge that we have, is the issue of the seeds. This time I do not want to beg you for food because I am tired of begging for food for our people who have continued being food insecure. We have taken it upon ourselves to mobilise the people to grow their own food, because the food they grow for themselves is the one that can sustain them. We appreciate the Government for the food it gives but usually that takes about two weeks.Now, I am aware of the policy shift that we longer give seeds; we give Parish Development Model cash (PDM)instead. The people of Napak received PDM, we were among the first districts to distribute but the PDM money that came in -  we distributed in September and in October. Unfortunately, it is not there now for buying seeds. Besides, it did not reach every household. More than 60 per cent of the households are waiting for their next batch, which will come in the next financial year because of the numbers - there are more than 100 households in a parish. They do not have the money to buy the seeds, even though we have told them to increase the size of their acreage.Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can you consider using your very powerful, esteemed office to give an exception for food insecure areas like mine so that seeds can be supplied by the Government alongside the PDM?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister?6.10THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker and colleagues, under the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs, we budgeted for seeds for that area –(Interjections)-  Yes, Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11911THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024under the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs. I will request the Members, as we usually meet, to get a day, maybe next week on Tuesday, so that you come and we ask the ministry concerned on how far they have gone with the supply of seeds to Karamoja. It is not sustainable for us to continue feeding Karamoja on the Government money and so the Government has come up with a number of measures; one, is a mechanisation strategy, which Members of Parliament from that region know. We are also constructing dams for irrigation, such that our people can irrigate their land and crops throughout the year because they get one rainfall season in a year and I believe this is the season. From August, September, October up to January, those people will not have rain and so, it is better we use irrigation. So, there are a number of measures and for Karamoja, under the affirmative action, the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs, will be given fast-growing seeds.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Buvuma -6.12MS SUSAN MUGABI (NUP, Woman Representative, Buvuma):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My matter of national importance is about the palm oil project affected persons in Buvuma. These people gave their land to the Government or to this project for commencement, but it is seven years down the road and they have not yet been compensated and they now do not have land for farming, are homeless all because they gave their land for this project. On Monday this week, they wanted to demonstrate by cutting down these palm oil trees because they now want their land to do farming since they no longer have land for farming to get food. My prayer is that the Government quickly compensates them because they gave their land in peace, but it is now becoming a war and they are being mistreated; the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) is torturing them by putting them on gunpoint so that they do not talk about it. Therefore, this Government should quickly intervene by compensating them. I request the Prime Minister to inform this House about when payment is commencing. The other point is that the honourable – this Government should consider revaluing and reassessing these people’s lands. Thank you, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister.6.14THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker and colleagues, I have heard about the Buvuma Palm Oil Project and I am aware that the Government is supposed to compensate those who provided the land for the project to commence. What I request the Member to do is to - if it were possible - this question is big so that I come up with a concrete answer - I request that you put it in writing so that we can consult and come up with a better answer on the Floor of Parliament.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Aeku, Hon. Balimwezo, Hon. Namugga and Hon. Aisha.6.15MR PATRICK AEKU (NRM, Soroti County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. My matter of national importance refers to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, on Monday, I was honoured to be a guest of honour receiving a donation that came from the United States (US) to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital. For the record, Soroti Regional Referral Hospital is the only regional hospital; the rest, Mbale, Lira, Gulu, and Mbarara, among others, that has never got a facelift. It has buildings from 1944, a lot of congestion, and a lot of limited infrastructure in terms of even medical equipment. However, the problem was land. I would like to inform the Rt Hon. Prime Minister and 11912STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe House that Soroti University -  during the handover of this equipment, I was able to see not just an allocation but a process of title of land given to Soroti Regional Referral Hospital; 65 acres of land at Soroti University. My prayer is that – I have already prepared to give these documents to you – now as you advise the Cabinet, we can construct a new fully-fledged hospital. We could let Soroti Regional Referral Hospital become a city hospital. 65 acres is quite an amount of land which means that we could even have a national referral hospital in that area which can accommodate the regions of Lango, Karamoja, Bugisu and everywhere. This land is available. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister?  6.18THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, I have taken note of the Member’s concern. We shall come up with an agreed position on whether to work on the already existing hospital and revamp it. However, as you have said, there is limited land in the city. I think we need to involve the ministry very closely; you and I, so that we can sit and make a better decision for the good of the people in that region.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Balimwezo – 6.18MR RONALD BALIMWEZO (NUP, Nakawa Division East, Kampala City):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The police traffic report reveals that quite a number of accidents are happening. In December alone, last year we lost over 87 people, the majority of whom were boda boda riders. This is attributed to a lack of training and also testing. The boda boda riders claim that the cost of testing is quite high as well as the riding permits. You know that the industry has over one million riders. Mr Speaker, we recently – Hon. Dr Bwanika raised a point here where the minister was asked to make a statement to this Parliament. We are in the budgeting process, isn’t it possible for us to cut the cost of the riders’ permits by at least 50 per cent so that our boda  boda riders can be able to be tested and those that pass the test be given permits that are cheaper than they are now because –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Right Honourable – 6.20THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, in the year 2023/2024, the Office of the Prime Minister coordinated the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs to see how best we can help the boda boda riders. We all agreed that the boda boda  riders needed to be regulated to avoid accidents. If you go to Mulago National Referral Hospital and others, 80 or 90 per cent of the accident patients are due to boda boda accidents. Therefore, the earlier we regulate this industry the better.We involved the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA), the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the Ministry of Kampala Capital City and Metropolitan Affairs and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. We came up with a number of resolutions, which were taken to the Cabinet. We are yet to conclude on the matter. Mr Speaker, once the Cabinet makes a decision, we have to move and have a better fee for our people so that they can access these riding permits. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  And we shall be grateful if you update this House. Thank you. Hon. Namugga – 6.22MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule):  Thank you, Mr Speaker – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, we are doing well and I am about to finish all of you.PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Aeku]11913THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024MS NAMUGGA:  Mr Speaker, my issue is on the side of revenue regarding the conduct of URA. Right Honourable Prime Minister, we believe that the country has not been doing well on the side of revenue but there is serious harassment of Ugandan citizens by URA. The way the assessment of taxes, right from rent, business, and shops is extremely high. URA does not have details. They just send assessment notices to people without getting the details of how these businesses have been earning. Mr Speaker, businesses are going to close. The Government promised, I think it was during the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, that they were going to lay a domestic revenue mobilisation strategy. We have never seen it. Much as we are aware that the revenue side is dwindling, we cannot harass Ugandan citizens. Mr Speaker, the Prime Minister needs to put more interest in the area of revenue assessment on the side of the citizens. Otherwise, the harassment is too high and businesses are closing day and night. People will collapse. I beg to submit, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Right Honourable Prime Minister – 6.23THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, the issue of taxes is a matter of law. Every year we pass tax laws here to regulate the way taxes are collected so that we can serve Ugandans. I request the honourable members of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Budget Committee that when it comes to handling these tax laws scrutinise and see how best we can serve Ugandans collectively.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, honourable colleagues, allow me to comment on this. You know the issues of tax; I can guarantee you the problem we are facing is that most of our businesses have not been paying taxes. Tax is never your money, it is Government money. Now, you used to hear stories that someone brings a trailer of goods in Kikuubo and sells them in five minutes. Why? It is because he has not paid the tax. How come people are rushing for your goods? Where did you get them from? How come you are discounting 20 per cent, and yet you are not a manufacturer, you are also an importer? I have talked to many business people who have visited me because I know many of them. The most profitable branches of all banks in this country were in Kikuubo, but the amount of tax coming out of them is nearly zero. That is why when the Government started tightening on tax, most of them had even abandoned the business. I know tax is painful. Maybe the transition process – a very good example, is when the Government gave amnesty some time back. We should be asking for a report of that amnesty. When you gave amnesty, how many people complied? How many people said, well, I have not been paying tax. Since you forgave me on interest and you said I pay the principal, I have paid. However, has it benefited so that we run it and transition very well? Personally, if I may confess, I have ever paid a huge penalty close to Shs 1 billion. Since then, I learnt a lesson. Issues of compliance in this country are a problem. I went with you, honourable colleagues, to Rwanda for sports. Each one of you would see the discipline of boda boda. Back here, if you touch boda bodas , Members of Parliament say you are harassing our voters. We were talking about cleanliness and accidents, you drive beyond 80 kilometres per hour, you are in. Back here, when you fine us, someone says I am a Member of Parliament. You cannot touch me. I have received some calls. One honourable colleague called me saying that he had locked himself in a car just here on Jinja Road. Why? He was caught committing a traffic offence and he said, “I am a Member of Parliament, you cannot touch me”. He locked himself in the car and said I should call the Speaker. He committed an offence; I said, “No, sort your issues. I cannot help you on this.” 11914STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTHonourable colleagues, compliance is very painful. My advice is very simple. First, if you are given a wrong assessment, you can challenge it successfully. We have always been given wrong assessments and we challenge them.Secondly, the only way you can run a sustainable business is to ensure that you focus on compliance. The moment your business meets compliance requirements, you will do well. However, that does not mean that people are harassed, the way you are talking about. They can have a more friendly approach.Hon. Ekanya, do you want to say something about that? I am sorry; I did not want to provoke a debate. I just wanted to give an honest opinion as a person who has been doing business.6.28MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, and the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I think we have a huge budget demand. Some people are not paying taxes. Last year, we passed a Bill here to allow digitalizing the E-receipt system. Our rules allow the Commissioner General to be invited and sit in a bar and address Parliament to explain. The requirement is that all restaurants, hardware and shops are supposed to issue you a digital receipt. However, honourable colleagues, you go and eat in Sheraton or other hotels and they give you bills; they do not pay tax, they evade V AT while my people at the border are being harassed every day. Mr Speaker, it is high time, these people were fined. Today I called the Commissioner-General and told him that people must be fined daily.  Mr Speaker, I request that you invoke your powers under the rules and allow the Commissioner-General to come through the bar and address Parliament so that we discuss this matter. I cannot allow the people of Tororo to be arrested every day. We only bring sugar or cooking oil and then my people are arrested, while in Kampala, people are not paying taxes. (Laughter) The proposal of digital receipt can help us to raise Shs 5 trillion if it is enforced. This would help us to support our budget. In addition, our people at the border would be allowed to do cross-border trade. I beg to submit. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Betty Nambooze, do you want to give me information?MS NAMBOOZE:  Mr Speaker, there are two things which must be addressed. One, it is true as in all sectors in Uganda, that there are some corrupt people in URA who might use the opportunity to harass our people just because they want to pick bribes. Away from that, Mr Speaker, allow me through you to inform Members - I had a similar problem in my area; Mukono Municipality. However, when I approached the URA public relations office, you could take them to your constituency to organise meetings with your traders. In Mukono, it has become an annual event whereby I organise my business community and URA comes to address them. They even give allowances to your leaders who organise the meetings. At one point, they sent messages to my traders demanding for millions of shillings. Eventually, when they came to Mukono and met these people, everyone walked out of that meeting a winner.I advise honourable colleagues to approach URA. I appreciate URA for this type of system. I request colleagues to utilise it, Mr Speaker. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Aisha. LOP, I will give you a chance.6.32 MS AISHA KABANDA (NUP, Woman Representative, Butambala):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Allow me to start with the matter on which I wanted to seek your guidance. Last Thursday, I had a question for the Prime [The Deputy Speaker] PRIME MINISTER’S TIME11915THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024Minister and she said she would respond to it today, but it was not responded to. Can I re-echo it in a minute? Rt Hon. Prime Minister, may I know why the Government has chosen to preside over thuggery by commercial banks charging double insurance over money that attributes no risk at all? I asked the minister that question in March last year and it has not been answered for a year. I request you to answer. Allow me to ask today’s question, I was re-echoing the question for last week, which was not answered. In –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I have the attention of the Prime Minister, they are asking a question. MS AISHA KABANDA: She has heard the first question. Secondly, we have a swamp in my constituency called Kikubamutwe. I would like to inform the honourable Minister of Education and Sports that charging money for students is not the only reason why pupils or students fall out of school; there are several reasons.For a year plus, a full parish has been disconnected in my constituency from a school where children are supposed to study and also from a health centre. We approached the ministry and they agreed to take over this swamp, surveying was done, a contract was awarded and finally, it was not signed and people have been waiting. The road and the swamp are impassable. Not even my car can pass that area. We went for district road supervision and monitoring, and as a team, we failed to pass. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, can my people be served? Women cannot go to a health centre because Kikubamutwe has locked off the people of Kakubo and the surrounding villages. The finance ministry knows about this issue because a contract was awarded and finally not signed –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. Attorney-General? 6.34THE ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka): Mr Speaker, for the first question I must sincerely apologise. It was directed to my office from the Prime Minister’s Office. I studied the matter and I realised that it was a matter for Bank of Uganda and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, so I sent. I will follow up and ensure that it is brought here. I sincerely apologise for that. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Attorney-General. Prime Minister on the swamp? 6.35THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, regarding the swamp of Kikubamutwe and the contract that was awarded and no work has been done, I request that you allow me time to convene a meeting with the concerned ministry; including your district, so that we can find out. She knows that we have done a lot together in her constituency. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable colleagues, I am first picking Members who have not spoken today. However, I have a list of Members who have been seated here for long, so I will start with those. 6.35MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for giving this House enough time to attend to matters of national importance. We are blessed to have the state minister responsible for Education, Hon. Ogwang and the Prime Minister here. V ote 166 – The National Council of Sports is responsible for the sports sector. Uganda is supposed to be participating in major international games and we have got to prepare as a country. We have got the All Africa Games, the East African Community Games, the 11916STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTOlympic and Para-Olympic games and several international qualifiers for various disciplines. However, all this requires a lot of money, I sit on the Committee of Education and Sports, and there is an indication that the National Council of Sports has not got money up to the tune of around Shs 4.7 billion, yet we are running out of time. If we do not participate in the All Africa Games, it means that we may not have several disciplines qualify for the Olympics. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, prayers. MR AOGON:  My prayer is that the minister comes to the microphone and after that, the Prime Minister comes to the microphone to tell us when you are giving us this money. This is little money. We should not get embarrassed as Uganda – (Laughter)–  we have done a lot and should not be disabled now. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Honourable, in Parliament, you say that they should come on the Floor. The minister will be enough. 6.37THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Sports) (Mr Peter Ogwang):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. First, I would like to confirm that the vote he has mentioned, the National Council of Sports, has a budget line of about Shs 48.8 billion. Within that budget line, there is money that was specifically earmarked for these games. The question of releases is maybe where there is a problem. Madam Prime Minister, maybe we should urge the Ministry of Finance to make sure that this money is released to facilitate our teams for these international competitions because they were all budgeted for. Thank you, very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Please coordinate this so that indeed we have our people participating. MR OGWANG:  Most obliged.6.38DR MUSA NOAH (Independent, Koboko North, Koboko):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Uganda Communications Commission (UCC) under Section 3(g) of the Act, 2013, established the Uganda Communications Universal Services and Access Fund to develop communications in rural areas where private operators cannot go. UCC in licensing these operators provides that 90 per cent of the country should be covered. However, in my constituency of Koboko North, about 60 per cent of the area does not have a stable mobile network. I have engaged the private provider, MTN. They assessed and agreed that there is a need to establish a mast. However, it has been two years now and they have not returned. I engaged UCC, I thought they were going to support me under the fund. However, they wrote to private providers and then Airtel responded saying that they would consider it in their development. However, about seven years ago, Airtel decommissioned a mast in my constituency. I would like to know how you would help the people of Koboko North in addressing the challenge of communication, as you know that communication is now a lynchpin in all our development efforts. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Peter Ogwang, your former minister of State for ICT, is offering to support you.6.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Sports) (Mr Peter Ogwang): Mr Speaker, as Government and specifically, because I am giving useful information, there is what we call the broadband policy, which allows networks to share the service in an area where there is no existing network. For instance, if there is an Airtel network in that area, this policy allows MTN to use the same PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Aogon]11917THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024network for purposes of communication. The Government needs to implement the existing policy to allow the country to be able to access the network at all times. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Kindly help the Member so that he can get a mast. I know you have the connections and I will work with you Honourable. MR OGWANG:  No problem. Thank you, very much, Mr Speaker. 6.41MR BENARD SEKYANZI (NRM, Budyebo County, Nakasongola):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is going directly to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister but it is being – Okay – Rt Hon. Prime Minister, when we were in Kyankwanzi, we looked under – (Laughter)-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable, I do not have much time.MR SEKYANZI:  The NRM Government has a project for water transfer from Nakasongola to Nakaseke and Ngoma. This project was started in 2021 and it was to be done in three phases. The second phase was to start in 2022. However, up to now, the second phase has not kickstarted. People from Budyebo County and Nakasongola Constituency are asking us many questions because they were assured that by the end of 2022, they would get water supply from this project. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Prayers?MR SEKYANZI:  I pray that the ministry concerned, that is the Ministry of Water and Environment kickstarts the second phase of this project so that these other areas get water supply by the end of this year and if they –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. 6.43THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, what I can assure the Member is that the Nakasongola water project, as I submitted during the Prime Minister’s Time, is on course. Your people will get the water.6.43MR SOWEDI KITANYWA (NRM, Busongora North County, Kasese):  Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. My matter of national importance concerns Mubuku Youth Institute, which is located in my constituency. The institute is under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and was in operation until 1984. It closed when the NRA then which is now the UPDF camped and up to now, the institute is not in operation.The Ministry of Gender has often renovated this institute. Unfortunately, it has not been opened to skill the youth. My prayer, Mr Speaker, is that the Prime Minister should inform the people of the constituency I represent and the region at large when the ministry is coming to open up this institute again. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. She could be a chief guest at the reopening. Rt Hon. Prime Minister? MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, now that the institute is already renovated and that we are awaiting commissioning, I will prevail over the gender ministry to make sure that this is acted upon. 6.45MR EV ANS KANYIKE (NUP, Bukoto County East, Masaka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the unregulated construction of fuel stations in the Kampala Metropolitan Area. Mr Speaker, millions of citizens working and living in the Kampala Metropolitan Area could be living on the edge without knowing that 11918STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthese fuel stations are a problem to them. This is because a number of fuel stations are situated side by side with the residential areas and near busy shopping malls. Generally, many fuel stations have been established in total disregard of the existing laws and land use due to a lack of a coordination mechanism between Government institutions. Mr Speaker, fuel stations must be strategically and cautiously located to minimise their impact on humans and other immediate challenges. Prayers, Rt Hon. Speaker - First, the Prime Minister should give us the criteria followed while approving sites and structural plans for the establishment of fuel stations. Secondly, what are the mechanisms in place to revise the penalties for the breach of regulations regarding the construction of fuel stations? This is because you see some of the – (Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister? Colleagues, I am trying to ensure that by the top of the hour, I have at least picked most of you. The Prime Minister has been with us for three hours. (Applause)6.47THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja):  Mr Speaker, thank you so much. What my brother is talking about is the truth by all standards. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and all MDAs that are concerned – this is because the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) issues the environmental impact assessment, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development which regulates that industry, does the licensing and many others. There is a breach as you have said. Therefore, colleagues, I request that you allow me to take on this question and come up with an answer next week. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That one requires a wide answer. Hon. Taaka and then Hon. Kakembo6.48MS AGNES TAAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bugiri): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. Today, the Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) released the Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) examination results and the Uganda Police Force advertised for recruitment with a deadline of 18 February. The young people have called and requested for an extension of the deadline so that those who have passed and qualify, get the opportunity to apply and compete in the police force. Mr Speaker, I, therefore, raise their voice to the Prime Minister, to listen and extend that deadline. I thank you. 6.49THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): Mr Speaker, I request the Member to give me up to Monday because tomorrow is a public holiday. I do not know when – is the 18th a Sunday? Today is the 15th and tomorrow is the 16th. Oh! I do not want to give an answer that cannot work – (Interjections) . If tomorrow was a working day, I would cause an urgent meeting, but it is not possible - THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Prime Minister, I can see positivity in you. Try what you can. MS NABBANJA: Let me find out from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and then I will call Hon. Taaka. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am trying to maximise the time so that colleagues who have not spoken do so. Hon. Kakembo and Hon. Gabriel - 6.51MR MICHAEL KAKEMBO (NUP, Entebbe Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding Umeme Limited’s reluctance to fulfil its mandate. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Mr Kanyike]11919THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024Mr Speaker, it is becoming very serious. Umeme no longer maintains and repairs the power infrastructure we have in this country. I do not know if it is because their contract is nearing the end. Most of the villages are in darkness. Transformers have been removed and they are not bringing them back. A case in point is a village near Katikamu SDA in Wobulenzi, Katikamu, where I happen to stay. A vehicle travelling to Kikyusa knocked down two electric poles and up to today, it is now two weeks and two villages are in total darkness. My prayer is that the Prime Minister helps us force Umeme to fulfil its mandate as per the agreement because that is what they signed. Within their areas of jurisdiction, they have to maintain and repair allour power infrastructure in this country. 6.52THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Ms Robinah Nabbanja): I request the Member to give us details of all these areas that are in darkness. We shall prevail over Umeme. 6.52MR GABRIEL OKUMU (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I take this opportunity to thank you for hosting Rev. Raphael p’Mony Wokorach of Nebbi Catholic Diocese. I also thank the honourable members who were there yesterday. My question is, the Speaker said we shall handle the question today and it is about health centres to be upgraded from health centres III to health centres IV . When Parliament appropriated Shs 20 billion for that purpose, 17 out of the 31 health centres III got the money, and the work is ongoing; they were upgraded. However, about 14 where Paidha Health Centre III is included, the funds have not been given to the district. I would also like to thank the Government for the ambulance. When the ambulance came, it was taken to Health Centre III and stakeholders are concerned. My prayer is, Mr Speaker, Government, through your able leadership, should help the people of Zombo District by fast tracking the release of the funds to enable Paidha Health Centre III to be upgraded to the level of health centre IV , as per the Government’s plan. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, I am aware of the Member’s concern.  That question was supposed to - remember last week? We consulted with the ministry and they are consulting the ministry for finance on why there is this delay. So, the answer will come. Let us keep in touch. You have my number and I have yours. 6.55MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, when will the electric fencing in Dufile Subcounty, Moyo District commence? The place is being terrorised by elephants, which are destroying the property and houses of the people. Thank you very much. MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities will come and inform us next week. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. They should update us on the electric fencing projects going on in the country. 6.56MS AGNES ACIBU (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I have an issue of concern about a maternity ward that was to be built in Ossi Parish in Parombo Subcounty. The work for this maternity ward was given to the UPDF Engineering Brigade and the project was supposed to have been completed in three years. It was supposed to be done in three phases, from Financial Year 2021/2022 to Financial Year 2023/2024. 11920STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMy prayers are that;1. The UPDF Engineering Brigade should speed up the process because we are still at the slabbing level. 2. The engineering brigade should do the fencing of Jupanziri Health Centre III because the money was paid.Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Minister for defence?6.57THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the concern of the Member. I may not have the reason why because it is unusual for the UPDF Engineering Brigade to keep it at slab level for several months. That is her story. Allow me to verify with the commandant and then we link up with the Member. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Please, that would be great. 6.58DR EMELY KUGONZA (NRM, Buyanja East County, Kibaale):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Last weekend, a school called St Margaret in a village called Busesa, Buyanja East in Kibaale District, was gutted by fire. Thankfully, nobody was hurt. However, the entire premise was burnt down. The district security team responded, but they did not have the required equipment. Even the neighbouring districts of Kakumiro and Kagadi did not have a fire engine that could come in to help. My prayer and request is that the Government puts in place a fire engine, at least in the district, to be able to help. Now that we have got the extension of electricity to a number of villages, we are likely to have a lot of such calamities and we may not be helped in time. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:   The answer given to Hon. Atima’s question applies to that. Okay?6.59MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister gave the correct information here concerning the continuous rains. In Bugisu Subregion, it has been worse. However, this takes us to the commitment that the Government made in July 2022. There was a lot of rain that led to loss of lives and there was a commitment to do infrastructure of about Shs 200 billion. To date, it has not been seen. This was public information and, as representatives of the people, each moment, we are being hit and asked to provide answers. My prayers are that the Prime Minister does not tire but calls us, as leaders of the region, so that we are given an update that we can take back to the people who are, all the time, looking for a solution to this issue. Secondly –(Member timed out.)MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker, my colleague from Bungokho knows that we have had a number of meetings. I will cause another meeting. I cannot get tired.7.01MR JIMBRICKY OCHERO (NRM, Labwor County, Abim):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. Last year I did raise on the Floor of this House the fact that elephants ransacked and destroyed gardens in five subcounties of my district. The Government successfully promised that they would compensate, give food to the victims and chase away the elephants. However, nothing has happened since last year.Mr Speaker, it looks like I made a mistake by reporting the elephants in this House. (Laughter)  This is because two days ago, 38 elephants stormed the village. (Laughter)  Yes, it looks like I made a big mistake. They have PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [Ms Acibu]11921THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024now lost their temper. They even came in bigger numbers. (Laughter)Thirty-eight of them came and displaced the whole parish. I have refugees out of elephants now. Some people have refugees from South Sudan, but my refugees are as a result of elephants. Mr Speaker, Sir, I have a new prayer – for the old one, the Prime Minister will tell me something. For the new prayer, Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you are very able; you have always been active and on point. I want to invite you officially to Abim District to assess on your own, not to chase away the elephants, but to find a solution. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think you have learnt a lesson; you will not report the elephants again. (Laughter)MS NABBANJA: Mr Speaker, the fear of the Member about the elephants coming in big numbers, which they have reported here, is a false one. It is not true that we have not provided anything to Abim. He is aware the Office of the Prime Minister provided support to the district. Mr Speaker, I have been to Abim twice – he is aware – and I will be happy to go back because Abim is part of Uganda. (Applause)  I promise to go and we handle this issue together.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Now, that is the real Hon.  Noman. For us who knew him when he was the chairperson LC V of Abim, that is how he presents his issues . (Laughter)7.03MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Ministry of Water and Environment has been implementing rural water projects under the Integrated Water Management and Development Project. In my constituency, they had considered three areas and, in all these areas, the water sources were drilled. That is in Rodo, in Lobe Town Council, and Awoba. Last week when I went to the district, the information I got from the water department was that the ministry had said that they were only going to work on one water source at Lobe. Yet, in Awoba, there is Kei Seed Secondary School; where there is only one borehole, which the secondary, the primary, and the community share. Also at Rodo, there is only one borehole, which is also shared by a Health Centre III, the community, and the Kei Primary School. I want to know if there will be any other program under which these other two sources which were already drilled, which were supposed to be worked under this particular project, which is expiring this year, can be taken care of. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister –MS NABBANJA:  Mr Speaker and colleagues, regarding these specific issues in the water ministry and other ministries, I wish the Members would write so that we get accurate answers for the same. Therefore, I request Hon. Onzima, being a senior Member here, let him write, and then we see how best we can give him a better answer and also act on his issue. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Ogwal Moses. 7.05MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a Member of Parliament, I have been trying my best to support my people with a lot to grow cassava. I have got a market to sell it. However, the challenge I am having, is that we are now in the process of drying cassava, and we ask the Prime Minister, to help us; we had predicted that there would be no rain and now there is a lot of rain. Is there some intermediary support that can help my people? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Rt Hon. Prime Minister – I think what is very important, honourable, this is something which you 11922STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTshould write to the Prime Minister, you present the project you are doing with details, show the beneficiaries and then the Prime Minister can go into the Government circles and see whether they can chip in and give you support. I think it would be better. Rt Hon. Prime Minister. MS NABBANJA: The Government of Uganda came up with a number of interventions to help our people access cheap funding. Under the agriculture cluster program, one can access money ranging from Shs 20 million to a billion. Uganda Development Bank (UDB) has money for a certain category of people, especially his category. UDC has some money, the Microfinance Support Centre, and many others. The Member can be advised on which product to take. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would urge you to give Hon. Moses Ogwal time and meet him. He was one of our experts at Uganda Private Sector Foundation who designed many of the projects that the Government has benefited from.He knows all these kinds of projects by the time he asks you, there might be something. Therefore, I would request you meet him. He is one of those people whom I believe can share with you a lot of information. At least I met him some time back. I know him very well. Honourable colleagues, even if I think even God, wants to serve everybody, he cannot succeed. However, what I have done, I have tried, to pick on Members. I know I have missed some Members who had very serious issues, but I had given them an opportunity earlier on to speak. I have Members who were here from 2 p.m. I have tried to ensure that I pick. I know some came in and moved out so I have been watching and monitoring properly. When you move and – I always know - Yes, Hon. Oboth –MR OBOTH:  It is not my nature, Mr Speaker, but a simple procedural question. This House is fully constituted, but surprisingly on your right are the Members more committed than the left? (Applause)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition can answer that. (Laughter) 7.09MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Mr Speaker, first of all, I want to thank every Member of Parliament who has remained in this House and has contributed through the questions and the debate that we have had. On our side, we are committed and I am here representing my able leader of the opposition. Mr Speaker, we had agreed with you that at the end, I would make some brief comments on the matter, and if you allow I can do it now since we are wrapping up. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  The Leader of the Opposition did that under rule 41. Maybe on these other matters of national importance, usually, we do not have comments from the Leader of the Opposition or in general, but if you have a comment, certainly. MR ODUR: Mr Speaker, the rule allows me. First, I want to raise an urgent matter that was captured by the Daily Monitor today. An amount of Shs 85 trillion is reported through the audit done by the Judiciary to be held up in commercial disputes before the courts of law. I want to take advantage of the presence of the Attorney-General to pray:  first, if this audit report exists, let it be laid here to help the House make a pronouncement on how to proceed on it.  Secondly, I pray to the Attorney-General to find mechanisms within the Government on how these commercial disputes can be settled quickly and this money is released to the economy. Eighty five trillion is nearly twice our national budget, and some of the economic hardships that we see our people going through, including foreclosures by the banks, businesses collapsing and others winding up, are because of this money held up in the economy. PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Deputy Speaker]11923THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA THURSDAY , 15 FEBRUARY 2024Relatedly, the Government has been litigating and citizens have been litigating against the Government have also taken action. Courts have made pronouncements and orders that the Government should, as a losing party, pay the litigants. The same courts have also made orders that the citizens who have lost should pay the Government and both sides have been reluctant, the Government enforcing and executing these orders, but also the Government paying citizens. I have numerous cases that I could cite. In Northern Uganda, the Attorney-General knows of the case of the former employees of the Uganda spinning mill that was settled by the court, former employees of UEB and many others. My prayer to the Attorney-General and the Government is one, to exercise goodwill and respect the courts of law and extend that courtesy to the Judiciary by honouring these orders from courts. Secondly, to also come and lay before this House the list of court cases for and against the Government that have been settled for execution. I so pray, Mr Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General – Thank you, LOP.7.13THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is no such audit - I can say without fear of contradiction - which says that there was Shs 85 trillion stuck in the Commercial Court. Therefore, you can rest. However, there are quite a good number of cases stuck in the Commercial Court and we shall share them with you. Mr Speaker and Members, I will be happy to deliver that here the last report at the opening of the new Law Year, on the status of the Judiciary.On court cases, we only pay money, which is appropriated, for payment of court awards. When I receive the budget from the Government and Parliament, the amount of money that has been made available for payment of court awards is what we pay in that financial year.We are unable to pay all these bills but we acknowledge the indebtedness. I can assure you that even as we speak now, I know that quite an amount of money for pensions for UEB and UTL has been paid. Government continuously pays those, as and when money is made available. We will be happy to share with you the records and actually, it will be an opportunity for me to come here and show how much money we have saved for the Government, as Attorney-General’s chamber. We will share that. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney-General, the Floor is always open for you. Any time you want to make a statement or update the House, we are always available. The sectoral committee should follow up on this matter with the Attorney-General.Honourable colleagues, we received a report from the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation on the presidential pledge to extend electricity to industrial parks. This was a very clear report, referring to what the President pledged and saying, “Please, implement.” That is our recommendation. I feel this is a report on which I can put the question right away so that the Government can do so and we know that Parliament is supporting the President on this issue.I now put the question that the report of the Committee on Government Assurance and Implementation on the presidential pledge to extend electricity to industrial parks directly from power generation plants be adopted.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable colleagues, I wish you a happy Janani Luwum 11924STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTDay. I hope we will join the Church of Uganda and other dignitaries in Kitgum, for the celebrations. I also wish you a happy weekend.The House adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 20 February 2024 at 2.00 p.m.)PRIME MINISTER’S TIME [The Deputy Speaker]