


Wednesday, 7 February 2018

Parliament met at 2.44 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I would like to argue you to work expeditiously to ensure that we conclude the work on the Order Paper today and tomorrow.

In the meantime there were a few members with issues of national concern and I would like to invite the hon. Isaac Etuka. Two minutes.

2.48
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): I rise on a matter of national importance relating to uncontrolled movement of soldiers with firearms. 

On the 31st of January this year, a soldier from Bondo Army Barracks attached to the 503 Brigade left the barracks with a gun and shot three people of whom two died instantly.

Nicholas Drando was shot six times in his compound. His wife was also shot and is currently admitted to Arua Regional Referral Hospital. The soldier left the barracks at around 3.00 a.m. and went on rampage shooting people.

After killing the first person who was a mason, the soldier attempted to break into the house of the LCI chairperson but failed. He went further to the house in the neighbourhood and fired 18 bullets into a one Peter’s house. Fortunately, nobody was injured.

My prayer is that the brigade commander, who according to the LC1 chairperson and the local security committee does not cooperate with them, should be transferred. From the time he came, he gave the opportunity to soldiers to move with the firearms without any control.

Ahead of this incidence, California Bus Company was robbed by a gang. The bus was stopped around the barracks and all passengers were ordered to move out before everything was removed.

I further pray that this soldier’s actions, even if he later committed suicide, should be investigated by the Minister for Security because it is under his docket that this happened.

I also pray that the UPDF should foot the burial costs incurred by these families whose members were innocently killed. For example, Nicholas Drando is survived by 14 children, three dependents and the widow who is currently hospitalised. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: We direct the Minister for Defence and Veteran Affairs to take an interest in that issue and give us a report. However, also take into account the need to support the families during burial.

2.52
MS GRACE NAMUKHULA (NRM, Woman Representative, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on three issues of national importance. The first is that Namisindwa District hosts a national forest reserve and a number of people have been displaced by the Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA).  

These people had already been to the courts and there was an injunction which guided that the people should continue to use the piece of land. Now we have over 6,000 Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) who have been farming on this land. I would like to call upon the minister to help and have these people continue farming until it is declared otherwise. 

Secondly, the Government is withdrawing support from private schools. Namisindwa, as a new district has 17 secondary schools and 10 are privately owned; they had signed an agreement with Government. 

The owners of these private schools have erected structures - I do not know whether Government has now put up enough structures to be able to accommodate the children of the poor who have been going to these private schools running the Universal Secondary Education programme.

As I speak, the O’level results have been released and of the 22 first grades in Namisindwa, over 15 of them are from these private schools – the implication is that we are closing the door to the poor who have been getting support from these schools.

Finally, the issue of payment of salaries especially to the teachers. Since the district started in July, over 350 teachers and other non-teaching staff have not earned their salary. We have tried to move to various offices but we have failed to make progress. I would like to implore the Minister of Local Government that when we create districts, we need to coordinate with the ministries of education, public service and finance and stabilise them before we abandon them.

I am glad the finance minister is here. We are not earning salaries and I request that he supports us. Thank you. (A Member rose.)

THE SPEAKER: No, do not interrupt. That is her maiden speech. No information or anything. (Laughter)

MS NAMUKHULA: Madam Speaker, thank you for protecting me. My prayers are that the concerned ministries come in to support the new districts especially on salaries. Namisindwa is the food basket for eastern Uganda and we need to be protected and supported to continue growing so that all of you can have enough food. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, before I call on the next Member, join me in welcoming students from the United States of America who are on a study programme at the Uganda Christian University, Mukono. They are here to observe our proceedings. You are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, I direct the justice minister to inform us whether there has been contempt of court by the Uganda Wildlife Authority in the case of the national forest reserve in Bumbo and Buwabwala. 

We would also like the Minister of Public Service to tell us why they have not paid the teachers since the new district began in July 2017. 

We would also like the Minister of Education and Sports to also tell us what they are going to do about the end of the Public Private Partnership with the Government.

2.56
MS SARAH NAJJUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on an issue of national importance.

In my constituency of Nakaseke District, there is a one Maj. John Mwesigwa who is evicting people from 10 square miles in Kinyogoga Sub County. These people have occupied this land since the 1960s. The National Forestry Authority claims ownership and has been in contact with the residents on the land. 

However, of recent, the Major has been ferrying cattle using UPDF trucks and he has presented the land title Block 937, Plot 4 in the names of Dean Company Limited.

I request the lands ministry and the defence ministry to intervene and put to order the Major who is intimidating people - I can also get some information from hon. Luttamaguzi. (Laughter) 

MR LUTTAMAGUZI: Thank you, hon. Najjuma, for giving me way. Madam Speaker, the people of Nakaseke are really suffering; there are also eight villages facing eviction this week.

There are people who are highly connected to State House who come masquerading with guns and when you try to talk to them - there is a way they connive with Police and the LCs and the ordinary people do not find any help.

As hon. Najjuma has said, we the people of Nakaseke are suffering a lot. I would like to thank you for giving us assistance - even the Inspector General of Police, Gen. Kale Kayihura visited us but the situation is worsening. We are wondering whether it is these people who came and fought in Nakaseke bringing their children and relatives to come and grab land! You hear about a Major this or a Brigadier that and there is no one who is helping. I thank you.

MS NAJJUMA: And he is telling the truth. We are wondering how Maj. John Mwesigwa under Deans Company Limited got the land tittle when the land is gazette for a forest. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in respect to that issue, I would like to direct the lands minister to immediately interrogate the situation and give us a report on Tuesday next week. 

The Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs should also update us on this army officer called John Mwesigwa and explain to us how he came to be there and why he is using the army to intimidate the population in Kinyogoga Sub County. I would like a response next week.

3.00
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of national importance. We have this week been receiving a number of refugees from the DR Congo via Lake Albert. They are coming in with boats and their numbers have over powered the reception centres.

The relief agencies were not prepared for the numbers - we are now receiving over 2,000 people per day. They are camped in a fish market at Sebigoro and Kaiso.

Being a lake environment, you can imagine the hygiene at the lake shores. These people are now staying in a Nyawaiga Primary School, which is filled with a number of people we cannot handle.

My prayer is that the ministry in charge of disaster preparedness should swing into action so that we are able to have relief for those people. They should be transferred to another place where they can ably be handled. Thank you.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Office of the Prime Minister should expeditiously intervene. I know we have been credited with being very hospitable; but if refugees are occupying our schools, the children will not be able to study and they will not get food.

The Office of the Prime Minister should move on this – yes, the minister Ecweru is here.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR RELIEF, DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Musa Ecweru): Madam Speaker, I have noted with concern the arrival of these refugees through Lake Albert. The member had already indicated to the office in writing. We shall report particularly on how we have handled the new case load from the DR Congo both through Kisoro and Lake Albert next week.

3.03
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister tells us the likely intervention that they are going to undertake, it would also be pertinent for us to understand what the problem is, especially around the borders of Uganda and DR Congo so that we know how to proceed.

Just having refugees here and giving them the interventions or the reception may not solve the problem. Honourable minister, what is the problem?

MR ECWERU: I will limit my intervention to the job of a minister responsible for refugees. As to what happens between DR Congo and Uganda is a responsibility of the ministries of foreign affairs and defence. However, I will draw their attention to it.

3.04
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance. Last week, my daughter attended the burial of Mowzey Radio. However, before the burial, a gang with sticks started beating everybody at the burial.

On top of that, Mowzey Radio was beaten from a bar in Entebbe – he is not the only one. From 2015 to date, about four people have been killed in night clubs and bars. You may remember that another musician, AK47 was beaten to death in a bar in Kansanga by bouncers. In the Guvnor night club, a one Ahimbisibwe was also beaten by a bouncer and he died in March 2015. In Bwaise, Master Blaster was also killed in a bar. 

This calls for a national dialogue for these upcoming gangs that are killing people. People are no longer at ease going to night clubs, bars or for burials. We have had the “Kifeesi” gang that has popped up and bouncers killing people –(Interruption)

MR OCHEN: Madam Speaker, the issue concerning killings in our country is not only from the areas that are being reported by the honourable member. 

In Soroti Municipality, there is a systematic mechanism where the killers use a rope tied with very sharp sticks, which they use to get hold of your neck. They come to you pretending to be people seeking boda boda services. Immediately you offer them that assistance, while you are riding, they put a rope on your neck and those sharp sticks prick your throat. This month, two people have been killed adjacent to my residence in Maroon Quarters, Soroti Municipality. The Ministry of Security should come out and give a comprehensive report regarding the killings across the country.

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, my colleague –(Interruption)

MS RWABUSHAIJA: Thank you, honourable for giving way. When we talk about issues of security, we need to be more vigilant, particularly the Government, because you have heard about the many times when we have lost people because of these iron-bar hit men. These days, they have been invading people in Kampala, Masaka and Jinja which is another wave of insecurity. 

However, we are not informed about the people who have been arrested and what has been done to them. We also have those people who move, at times, with the Police in the name of “Kifeesi”. You have heard how the Kitatta’s have been terrorising and killing people yet they have been protected. How come that they have guns belonging to the Police? 

We live in a state of fear because anything can happen any time; even as we talk. Something has to be done and I agree entirely that the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain to us why so many people are dying. 

We also have those who have been killed in big numbers in Masaka District. There are also those young ladies who were being killed in Entebbe. Something has to be done about this because Ugandans are threatened. Thank you.

MR MBABAALI: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that we should know, which docket is responsible for these guns and if it is there, they must be regulated.

The bars and night clubs should have CCTV cameras so that everything is recorded and clearly seen so as to identify who is committing a crime in the bars and night clubs. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter raised by hon. Mbabaali is very grave but it encompasses many ministries. It involves the Ministry of Works and Transport, Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA), the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security. 

Therefore, I would like to assign that responsibility to the Prime Minister to put together a statement because the matter is scattered. The Prime Minister should address this issue and come to us before the end of next week because it is really grave that people are just dying in an inexplicable manner. Thank you.

Honourable members, the following members will raise their issues tomorrow; Hon. Mutambi, hon. Adome and hon. Isaac Mulindwa. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE BAN ON ALCOHOLIC DRINKS PACKAGED IN SACHETS

3.12
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you, Madam Speaker and Members of Parliament.  I rise to respond to the issue of the implementation of a ban on alcoholic drinks packaged in sachets as raised by hon. Esther Anyakun of Nakapiripirit. My response has already been uploaded on your iPads.

We are all aware of the socio-economic problems associated with excessive alcohol consumption, which has been aggravated by packaging alcoholic drinks in sachets. In order to regulate consumption of alcoholic drinks packaged in sachets, my ministry has initiated implementation of the following measures:

The first one is that we set out an ultimatum to stop packaging alcoholic drinks in sachets by September 2017. The directive to ban packaging of alcoholic drinks in sachets was given in November 2016. However, the Uganda Alcohol Industry Association petitioned my office in March 2017 and reported the challenges being faced by manufacturers in their endeavour to comply with the directive and the challenges included the following:

    1. Delays in securing loans from financial institutions to source, procure, import and install bottle-making and filling machinery and equipment; 
    2. The meeting of unforeseen costs for scrapping off the production line, because they already had these production lines but they had challenges in meeting these unforeseen costs;
    3. Laying off workers who claim for compensation and benefits;
    4. Acquisition of land to construct ware houses as bottle packaging requires more space than plastic sachets; and 
    5. Continued threats from local governments to also ban alcohol packaged in plastic bottles.

What was our other intervention? Our second intervention was to strengthen the regulatory framework for the alcohol industry.

My ministry, in consultation with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs reviewed the current legal framework and found it inadequate and agreed to draft a new Bill that repeals the Liquor Act, Cap. 93; The Enguli (Manufacturing and Licensing) Act, Cap 86; Portable Spirits Act, Cap 97 and to incorporate new developments to conform to international requirements and adopt new technologies.

In this process, the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Cooperatives has engaged various stakeholders, including the Ministry of Health and civil society organisations, to get their views and proposals on how to strengthen the regulatory framework for the alcohol industry. The principles of the Bill have been submitted to Cabinet for review and approval. 

Third intervention: Field Monitoring Visits 

In order to assess the transition to alternative packaging in plastic and glass bottles by manufacturers, in August 2017, my ministry carried out field monitoring visits, in which I was also involved, to all alcohol manufacturing industries in Kampala, Mukono, Wakiso and Jinja districts. We found that more than 50 per cent of the industries had acquired land for expansion, placed orders for procurement of bottling machines and 30 per cent had installed the machines and were making trial productions. A copy of the summary of the findings is attached.

I could briefly go through the attached appendix, which is also attached on your iPads. I would like to show registered progress that has been made by some of these companies in compliance with the regulations or ultimatum we gave in 2016.

There is Brigade Distilleries, which has already gone for manual bottle packaging and the expected date of transition is April 2018. The expected date for King Albert Distillers is August 2018. Chief Distilleries is already in operation; they have already started packaging in bottles. Uganda Breweries is already in operation; they have already given up plastic sachets. Leading Distilleries is already in operation and are packing in bottles. Premier Distilleries is expected in August 2018. Global Distillers Limited have not given a specific date; they are open. John Distilleries is open while London Distilleries is already in operation. Gama Distilleries will open next year; Buwembe is already in operation; Navya Distillers is due next year; Buddo Distilleries is due in October 2018. Rocky International is open; Heme beverages is due in June 2018; Sai International is open; Blue Nile Distilleries is due this year; Sharda Beverages is due this year; Sugar Corporation of Uganda is already in operation. 

There are others, which are open but our focus is going to be on the open ones and we are going to insist that they also ensure that they start working on transiting to bottling. They have mentioned that their equipment is in transit but we are going to ensure that they work on that.

The following companies have already bought land and are in the process of constructing buildings for housing packaging machines. They include: Brigade Distilleries, Buddo Distilleries, Blue Nile Distilleries - they have also mentioned the areas where they bought land. The list is from 1-15 - West Nile Distilleries, Leading Distilleries, Kasese, Morino, Beedee and many others. They are 15 in number.

As I conclude, Madam Speaker, in light of the above mentioned measures, progress attained and considering the challenges involved in modification of production lines, I extended the ultimatum to March 2019. At the same time, I directed the Uganda Alcohol Industries Association to speed up the transition to alternative packaging in plastic and glass bottles and ensure that the minimum packed volume is increased to 200mls.

I stand to be guided by the august House, Madam Speaker, but those are the interventions I have taken so far. Thank you for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister, for the update on the status of implementation on the ban on sachets.

3.22
MR JOSEPTH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her report but it is misleading. Actually, you have given the opposite of what the alcohol association gave you.

Madam Speaker, this organisation wrote to the minister asking her to ban buveera because of the following reasons - Madam Speaker, after my submission, I will go and bring these letters and lay them on the Table. 

The association wants to continue bottling because people who are selling waragi in buveera make it from their homes and UNBS has no method of finding them out. Therefore, they are competing with the association which pays taxes while those who are manufacturing from their houses do not pay.

I have three letters, including one from a distiller; Ambience Waragi, writing to you, seeking for your intervention to stop these people and arrest them. They even gave you details of people who are distilling alcohol from their homes and using wrong content but you have failed to handle them.

When you state that the association asked you to give them time, I fail to understand what you are saying because they are interested in packing in bottles and they are already doing so.

Madam Speaker, they are also saying that they have their factories. They have asked you to inspect them as they manufacture their alcohol. Madam Speaker, give me permission to go out, bring these letters and lay them on the Table so that we can compare them with those of the minister. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.24
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the good statement given to us today. Honourable members, I think the whole issue, which was brought out by hon. Anyakun, was centred around selling sachets of waragi cheaply and in the end, our people consume too much of it, which disturbs their mind and they become a nuisance in their environment.

I do not think that it is about the packaging itself because if you look at the nature of the country that we are in, we have different categories of people. There are those who can afford bottles and those who can afford the sachets. It depends on your level of earning.

However, the problem comes in the production line of some of these drinks. There is a way these people mix waragi with some chemicals, which are not good for our bodies and in the end, it disturbs the minds of our citizens. Some chemicals used in the waragi may lead people to become mad. There is a chemical called DCL, which people mix with waragi and it knocks off people at a very high speed. 

Therefore, I would like to suggest that we do not harass these companies by enforcing expensive packaging because we know the capacity of some of our people; the consumers and suppliers. We should instead put in place an investigation team to investigate the production lines of these companies to ensure that the chemicals used are the right ones for our people to consume at a cheap price without disturbing their minds. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should not move away from what hon. Esther Anyakun raised. Her concern is the ease with which you can access and move with that sachet. School children can easily put these sachets in their pockets and go to class. That was her concern.

3.24
MR ODRIA ALIONI (Independent, Aringa County South, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the minister’s statement although I think it is not comprehensive. 

If you move around the country, we have almost 1,000 different brands of waragi: Dragon, Lizard, Liberty and many others. In this report, I expected the minister to give us the number of production lines of waragi we have in the country and how many are licensed. From that report, we would then know the ones, which are not licensed so as to follow them up.

Madam Speaker, bottling may be a better option but I also feel that the minister is relaxed. You cannot give an ultimatum to people who put waragi in sachets up to 2019. This is a very long period because if you look at the cost of plastic bottles imported from China, a 200ml bottle on the local market is sold at Shs 100. Therefore, the timeframe given to these people is too long. 

I expect the minister to go and come back with a clear report indicating how many production lines there are, the different types of sachet waragi we have in the country –(Laughter)– because it is too much -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, what was the question given to the minister?

MR ALIONI: Madam Speaker, my prayer is that you guide this House to ensure that sachet waragi is banned in this country. Thank you so much.

3.30
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the minister for the report and hon. Esther Anyakun for raising this important issue. Sachet waragi is something, which has become a menace in my district. Many young people are engaged in drinking early in the morning. People cannot work and the youth who have finished school cannot look for jobs because of sachet waragi. 

It is therefore my humble prayer that sachet waragi be banned because it also affects the economy. We are saying that Uganda will reach middle income status by 2020 but it will not be possible if you continue to promote sachet waragi.

In my district also, there is concentrated waragi which hon. Allan Ssewanyana was talking about. They brew it from Jinja District and it is almost 90 per cent alcohol. When you consume only a small quantity, you become drunk. 

Honourable minister, I do not know whether you are aware of that kind of alcohol, which has killed my people. For example, if somebody has not eaten and they take that kind of concentrated alcohol, they may die –(Interruption)                          

MR ATIKU: Thank you, hon. Kipterit, for giving way. What hon. Kipterit is raising is true. The alcoholic content in most of the sachet waragi is not as it is marked on those sachets and sometimes, it is not marked at all. The reason why women in the entire country are complaining is because this liquor has made men to become impotent, inactive at night and weak. 

Therefore, when hon. Kipterit is labouring to explain this issue, he is talking about the future of this country because if men do not perform at night, we will have no future Ugandans. That is the information I would like to submit. Thank you.

MR KIPTERIT: Thank you so much, hon. Atiku. Madam Speaker, I would like to request the minister to take this issue seriously.  In Kenya, the time for opening bars is around 5.00 p.m. but in Uganda, we open bars at 9.00 a.m. The time for opening the bars should also be looked into and I would like to suggest that bars be opened at 3.00 p.m. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to give information to complete that but I am still grateful for the opportunity. I would like to confirm to the minister that while she is telling us that some factories have stopped, in the supermarkets that I visit, there are many of those sachets coming out and going to the villages. 

When I go to my village called Sibanga, the boys come with different colours of sachets of waragi in their mouths. I have not been inquisitive to read as I did not know that this report was coming before the House. However, I would like to promise that I will collect as many of those empty sachets of waragi as possible and bring them to the House so that the minister can know that even if these manufacturers pledged to you that they had stopped, distilling is still on-going. Unless you assure us that there will be close monitoring, visiting of those industries and making sure that the distilling has stopped, we are in trouble.

Madam Speaker, I do not know what happened to hon. Nambooze’s proposal to bring a Bill to stop these sachets. When I went to my village and told the boys that we are bringing a law to stop these sachets since people are dying, the boys said, “You are too late; we are dying.” I asked, “Why do you drink?” They said, “What do we do? They are there.” Madam Speaker, we need a Bill. We are late.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister asked us to give her guidance but the way you are debating is as if you want a ban on alcohol. 

MS MUTONYI: No.

THE SPEAKER: Let me say something - because I can access the drink in a bottle; so do you want the minister to ban alcohol; because I can get a bottle and drink?

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, as Parliament our problem is the easy access to these sachets. However, if it is bottled like it was in the olden times, young men could not access it because they did not have the money. Now it is so easy. They move with it – I even boda boda riders suck on these sachets as they transport passengers. Let the distillers improve their products by bottling in bigger amounts so that they are not easily accessed.

3.38
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda County North, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a number of solutions that I would like to propose: We need to agree that waragi should be bottled in bottles of 250mls and above because then, the problem of access would be reduced.

Another solution would be bringing most of these illicit distillers into the taxable fold because when you start charging them tax, they will have to adjust their prices upwards. 

If you look at the last agriculture census of 2011, you will find that our population is growing at 3.03 per cent while our food production is growing at around 3 per cent. Why would someone distil waragi and call it “Bajaj”? It means that when it goes into your head, it moves you like a “Bajaj” and you are totally finished. Therefore, if we can bring most of these people into the taxable bracket, they will increase their prices and you will find that waragi is not affordable.

Go to Makerere University during campaigns. You will find people everywhere finished. If you do not distribute sachets of waragi in Lumumba Hall, you cannot win. Now you are about to have more names and by the way, the more exciting the name, the bigger the market share you get. For example, you will find someone distilling waragi and calling it, “Togikwatako waragi” and then you will have many supporters of “Togikwatako”. You find someone else with “Gikwateko waragi” and you find Tayebwa and group there.

What are we going to have as a country? I do not think there is any justification for extending the deadline from September 2017 to March 2019. What are your reasons? Therefore, let us agree that the ban should start immediately or maybe in July. This will enable people to start adjusting but if they keep getting what they ask for, you will never control this.

3.41
MR EMMANUEL KALULE-SSENGO (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a different opinion. Waragi is distilled in almost every house in this country because it is very easy to distil. It is equally easy to pack waragi in buveera. 

Therefore, I think the solution should be to ban buveera. There was a time when we had decided to ban buveera in this country. Other countries like Rwanda have banned buveera but I do not know why in Uganda we have failed to ban buveera. These polythene bags are available everywhere. 

Since distilling is done in so many houses, a man will distil his waragi, get the buveera, pack it and sell it even locally. Therefore, this question of saying that you put a tax net to tap all these people that are distilling waragi will not be a solution. The solution is to ban buveera. Once we do not have any buveera in this country, people will have no buveera to pack it in. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I asked, suppose I buy my bottles, together with my classmates, will you stop us?

MR KALULE-SSENGO: When you bottle it, first of all it will become more expensive and school children will not be able to buy it. However, because it is in buveera and everybody can pack it, you find school children with it. School children smuggle it into their pockets and take it to boarding schools where they misbehave. 

Therefore, the solution is to ban buveera. I believe that the sooner we ban buveera, the more we will be able to solve this problem. You will not go to every homestead to check whether they are not brewing waragi as that will be a very expensive exercise –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give this House is that as Parliament, we did due diligence that for environmental reasons, we should really ban the use of kaveera in this country. It is actually a conflict of interest from the same ministry when they say they want more tax instead of protecting the environment. 

Madam Speaker, it is a resolution of this House that kaveeras below 7 microns should be banned so that this menace is stopped. Honourable minister, you have seen that it is not only the environment that is affected but also the health of our people. We should therefore effect the ban on kaveera in Uganda vis-à-vis the tax you are collecting. Let the tax you have been getting from kaveera be shifted to the cost of alcohol. Thank you.

3.46
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the response. In her response, the minister requested for more guidance. To me, that is so misleading. We took a decision for the ban; that was the advice we gave because we believe that this will protect our country. 

Therefore, I would like to say that there is a laissez faire attitude in the implementation of our decisions and that is why, up to now, people cry over non implementation and we are losing more people. What we can do is to re-enforce what we said previously, that the minister should effect the ban. That will help our people. As a result of easy accessibility – this being the dry spell, the youth are drinking. It is like we are sentencing people to death. What do we expect from our generations to come?

Madam Speaker, failure to implement this ban is discouraging the local governments. Adjumani District Local Government passed an ordinance on the ban. However, at parliamentary and ministry level, the effectiveness of the decision is not seen. Why should we discourage the efforts of the local governments?

The minister mentioned some challenges but I wonder whether it is we, the members of Parliament, to directly address these challenges. Many of those factories that distil alcohol do private business. We are members of Parliament and we need to raise money but we should also protect the lives of our people. 

One of the issues raised here was that there is a problem in getting loans to support these people. However, these people run private businesses. Is it Government that should go and get loans to support these private investors before the ban is effected? Whose primary role is it? It is private - [HON. MEMBER: “But they employ people.”] - even if they employ our people, what the minister has submitted cannot help us. 

If they are employers, are those distillers drinking the alcohol from the sachets? Many of the people employed in those factories are sick. How do we sacrifice our people in the name of employment?

Madam Speaker, there is conflict of interest. Let us have the alcohol but it should be made expensive. One of the factors is accessibility because alcohol in sachets is cheap and easily accessible.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a liberalised economy. I do not know whether we have ever issued directives that no one should distil anything. People took up that job, invested money and they are employing people. You should also think about those people in the economy. They are part of this economy.

MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ababiku for giving way. The information I would like to give is that there are some local government authorities that passed the ordinance and banned alcohol packed in sachets.

I recall that it is the office of the minister that went and started fighting those local governments. For example, when Gulu District Local Government passed an ordinance to ban sachets in Gulu District, authorities from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives started fighting the authorities from Gulu District Local Government. This means that although on the ground people are willing to enforce the ban, at the top level, others have personal selfish interests. Thank you.

3.49
MR FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the minister’s response but I am perturbed by the lack of seriousness in the response.  

I have always said that liberalisation without regulation is very dangerous for our country. We cannot liberalise each and everything without any regulations. That is why anyone can enter our country, everything is being taken out and we have fake products on the market. This waragi in sachets is poison.

First of all, I would like to request the minister to prove to this House that this waragi in sachets is certified by the Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). If she can bring that information and the sachets bearing the UNBS stamp, I would be satisfied – (Interjections) – I actually doubt it.

Secondly, I think that we should censure these ministers. We banned kaveera; why is kaveera still on the market? We should move to censure any minister who is failing to ban this kaveera –(Laughter)– and I am going to spearhead that censure.  It is our responsibility as Government to protect our human beings and the environment. We cannot go on dillydallying about these things. If we liberalise, we must regulate.

I was talking to the minister here – Kenya and South Sudan are taking our produce. Nothing is regulated. It is a matter of coding and export. This liberalisation is not good for our country and we must put some bolts and nuts to stop this.

Madam Speaker, buveera are dangerous to our people and the environment and it is also our duty to protect the old and the young from this poison. Like a Member said, this waragi is very dangerous to our people. If we do not move to protect our people and the environment, then we shall be judged by history, badly. Thank you.

3.54
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to guide the minister on what should be done. 

I remember before the introduction of this alcohol in sachets, our people used to make local brew. I do not know the names given by different communities but I am familiar with “malwa”, made from millet; there is “tonto” made from bananas and there is also “kwete” made from maize. If the ministry can guide our people to add value to this existing local beer, it would help them. 

In my constituency, this alcohol in sachets has caused very many dangerous issues to my people. Let me mention at least five of them: -

1. 	The school dropout rate is high. Parents are taking this waragi because it is cheap and they have not been able to save money to take their children to school. 

2. 	Low agricultural productivity; most of you are aware of what happened in Teso, especially in Toroma. There was famine. When these people go to dig, they move with this waragi and hence cannot dig.

3. 	The crime rate has increased, which has caused domestic violence and women are complaining that the men are not performing –(Laughter)

4. 	Poor feeding among the drunkards. Many people who drink alcohol from sachets do not feed well and in the process - majority of them are sickly. Doctors have also attributed the rampant deaths to excessive consumption of alcohol.

Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.55
MS ROSE AYAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I would like to add to what has already been said in this House. We are generally not happy about this alcohol that is easily available in our communities. 
We have said time and again that we should have bottled alcohol. However, my question is: what type of bottles are we talking about because we also have cheap plastic bottles. If it is plastic bottling, then I would like to assure us here that it is still going to be cheap to avail alcohol for sale. We need to be mindful of the quality of the bottling. 

The other issue that the minister needs to look into is the issue of the concentration of alcohol because she asked for advice and on the way forward on how she can transact business in the ministry. Some alcohol on the open market has a very high alcoholic concentration. Therefore, it is important that the concentration of alcohol is regulated.

The second bit is about the content of the alcohol. There are some people who mix some toxic substances in the alcohol. It is therefore important that they regulate this and ensure that the alcohol on sale does not have toxic substances. Many people have died in many parts of this country as a result of drinking toxic alcohol –(Interruption)

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Thank you very much, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that I realised that in the villages, Anti-Retroviral drugs (ARVs) are added to the local brew. This is true and you can go ahead and investigate. They are adding ARVs to make it more concentrated and potent. This means we are consuming a lot of harmful substances. 

MS AYAKA: Thank you very much, colleague, for the information. Honourable minister, the points to note are that the concentration levels need to be monitored and we need to monitor the content of the substances that are put in the alcohol. 

We also need to monitor the bottling. What types of bottles are we talking about? We have cheap bottling and expensive bottling. It is important that we rule out plastic bottles. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.58
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point is on packaging; much as we say kaveera is very dangerous to our environment and to our health - recently, I was in the constituency. Our cow died and we did not know what had killed it. 

We later found out that it was a kaveera of waragi that killed the cow. There are so many brands that you can’t easily tell which kaveera is on the market. We have talked about the kaveera of waragi but what about the one in which salt is packaged? It is also very dangerous for our environment and to our animals.

Madam Speaker, we have talked about packaging alcohol in bottles; when somebody finishes drinking from the bottle, where does that bottle go? It is also very dangerous. What if that bottle breaks and you land on it unknowingly, won’t your leg go? We need to do something on packaging the alcohol. I totally concur with you, Madam Speaker, basing on the report you have given to us. 

On the issue of packaging, if we decide to use plastic bottles, you can easily burn the empty can or change it into any other form. For instance in the villages, you will find empty bottles everywhere and without a solution for them. Shall we keep like that? What are we doing to our environment? 

We need to know how we are going to do all those things to make sure that our environment and lives are protected. Otherwise, there is need to have a serious position on the issue of kaveera. Failure to do that, our environment is totally doomed. I thank you.

4.01
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. To begin with, there are two issues that we have to disentangle. The first one is the alcohol in sachets, to which I think the minister agrees with us that that it needs to be banned. 

What is a little disturbing is that there is a bit of change of heart from the earlier deadline given to March next year, whereas it appears that the companies will be ready by August this year, according to her own submission. 

One of the biggest challenges we have is that these sachets make it very easy to access this drink. At the moment, in Uganda, 75 per cent of the alcohol sold is in sachets. The other problem is that these sachets go hand in hand with drugs, which then leads to crime and some of the killings and fights that we have heard here. 

These sachets are being banned around the world. I will give examples of countries; most recently in March last year, Tanzania banned them. Ivory Coast, Senegal, Malawi and Rwanda have banned them. It is unfortunate that we are dillydallying. 

Of course we appreciate the revenue generated and the people who are working in this industry but I think we need to take radical action to protect the population.

The second problem is that the sachets are an environmental hazard. They litter everywhere and they – actually there is a bigger debate around that, which probably I cannot go into now. 

The other area we have to think about is how the consumption of alcohol is regulated in this country. In many countries especially in the Western world, you cannot just walk to a bar or a shop at any point in time and buy alcohol. I think there is a delay on having that resolved.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the minister needs to act fast. The matter was agreed upon and according to the minister’s report, it has to be implemented. I just do not understand why it cannot happen sooner than March, which the minister is talking about. The industries are ready to go ahead with the current thinking.

4.04
MS MARGRET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to comment on the alcohol packed in sachets. It has truly affected the whole country, especially Kitgum District, where women who used to pay school fees for their children through brewing local beer have completely failed because there is already packed waragi in the buveera.

The poverty level is high to the extent that people are selling their food stuff. Men have changed this time round; they pour simsim and sorghum in their trousers to go and exchange it for beer. Women put – (Interjections) – Yes, that is the truth because it is very cheap. You can get it in the shops. Women put all categories of cereals in buckets and sell them instead of fetching water with jerry cans.  

Another thing that is alarming in Kitgum is the health of our people. This waragi, whether packed in bottles or drums, still affects the health of people. It is the cause of liver cirrhosis. We demand that this waragi be banned. 

There are many school dropouts among our people simply because children begin drinking at an early age and they stop caring about learning. In my culture, a married couple is not supposed to divorce. However, because of sachet alcohol, the divorce rate has gone so high in Kitgum. Very few people are surviving. My prayer is that we really ban waragi. It is alarming that the men are not functioning - (Laughter) - I rest my case.

MR OSCAR OMONY: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I remember you sent us to Sri Lanka with hon. Nambooze to benchmark on regulation of alcohol. I urge you to let hon. Nambooze come and present this Bill because it has all it takes to regulate alcohol in this country. 

The issue of regulating alcohol is a very serious one. We are losing a generation of young people due to alcohol. Therefore, there is a lot that the House needs to know on the issue of regulating alcohol through this Bill. Thank you so much.

4.09
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The waragi we are talking about is a health hazard, a social nuisance, an economic hazard and it is also environmentally bad. If you compare the hazards with the potential income and job opportunities, the hazards far outweigh the potential revenue and the jobs; that is why we need to ban the kaveera. We need to reduce its access.
 
One of the ways of controlling access is by restricting the production of the kaveera and encouraging producers to pack the alcohol in big bottles of 500 millilitres. These will be too expensive and uncomfortable for anybody to buy or carry easily.

Madam Speaker, we also need to put heavy taxes. If the minister’s argument is that we should allow them because of revenue, let us put prohibitive taxes so that they make the waragi inaccessible.  

We also need to look at the sources. Some of the waragi we are talking about is not produced in factories. Local producers who are unlicensed are producing the waragi in their bibanjas in swamps and packaging it from their houses using charcoal stoves. Therefore, we need to regulate the supply of these hazardous products on the market. 

We also need to regulate the drinking hours. Most bars - if I can talk about Kabalagala - are open 24/7. We need to enforce the law on bars. 

Madam Speaker, Islam prohibits drinking because of social hazards. The hajjis are always very healthy - (Laughter) – and they can manage four wives because they are quite healthy. (Laughter)

In conclusion, I support the banning of the production and supply of waragi in sachets. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I wanted to draw your attention to the minister’s statement under 2.0. She said she is about to repeal the Liquor Act, the Enguli Act and the Portable Spirits Act. Maybe, we could tell her to do it quickly, because she said she is in the process, and then the ban and other things will come in that law. 

I recall that hon. Nambooze had brought a motion here on this issue and she was told to hold on since the ministry was coming with a law, but the ministry has not come. Honourable minister, in your response, I would like to hear a timeframe for this law. It was on the basis of your proposal to bring a Bill that hon. Nambooze was told to hold on. 

4.13
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the response from the minister. These challenges that were expressed by the manufacturers should have been addressed in 2017 because they were expressed in November, 2016. To say we postpone this matter to 2019 is unacceptable.

Madam Speaker, you reminded us that we run a liberalised economy. However, within the liberalised economy, there have to be regulations, otherwise there would be no need for the ministry. That ministry cannot just exist to license companies but it has to regulate them as well. Everything we do as a Government should be in the best interest of Ugandans, rather than thinking of how investors are not getting loans or how they are finding challenges in accessing better materials.

We know that sachet waragi is affecting Ugandans, most especially our youth. We must be able to redeem this Generation X that just loiters around, drinks and does not want to work. We must also know that the companies’ intention of packaging waragi in a kaveera which costs Shs 500 is to access bigger markets and affect more of our people. 

Hon. Mutonyi gave the example of boda bodas holding kaveera in their mouths while carrying people. Has anyone realised that the majority of the casualties in the casualty wards are from boda boda accidents? Therefore, there is need to regulate the production and packaging of waragi. 

Of course, waragi is a Ugandan product and it has been one of our foreign exchange earners. It is recognised on the international market and it gives pride that we can also produce and export waragi. However, we must make sure that we regulate its consumption within the country for the sake of our children. 

I agree with those who proposed that we can limit it to 250 milligrams upwards as it used to be. Now you have these small buveeras which anybody can pocket. Even women in their kitchens and gardens are carrying buveeras. Anybody can carry a kaveera and drink this waragi. That is why it has affected us a lot.

We also have to remember that it has robbed Uganda of our productive youth. The youth who should be working for this nation and earning for the economy with their energies are now a spent force because of waragi.

Madam Speaker, in the best interest of the people of Uganda, especially our children who are our future, we must regulate this. I urge the minister that rather than delay this regulation, it should come sooner. These industries should not dictate to us what they should do; it should be us to dictate to them what we want and how it should be done. I beg to submit.

4.17
MAJ. GEN. PECOS KUTESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know the old story of when the rats sat and agreed that they should put a bell on the cat. The question was: Who is going to bell the cat? The question here is: Who is going to stop this?

We all know what buveera is all about. Not only that, we have talked about gambling and the slot machines. When regulations are made here, who enforces them? We are all shouting, “Yes” but what measures are being taken to enforce what we have agreed to? I do not think any of us here does not know children at home or in the village whom we see going astray because of waragi. However, even the kaveera itself is not a biodegradable product. Ask the engineers who make roads what is happening when we are trying to stop floods here. 

When you said there should be no buveeras sometime back before I even came here - you discussed it - what measures were taken? The question is: After passing resolutions here, who enforces them? That is all I wanted to know. Thank you.

4.19
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Sachet alcohol is a great source of addiction to our people now. I am saying this because when you see them suck alcohol from those sachets, they suck it like they are drinking water. They suck it while riding bicycles, motorbikes, walking to the gardens in the morning. This means they have already become addicted to these sachets.

Madam Speaker, some parents, especially men, are now failing to take their children to school because they use their money to buy that alcohol every morning. They spend every bit of money that could have been used for buying soap, pens and other scholastic materials for the children.

Last year, the chairperson of Kole District sat with her team and came up with a resolution and they started burning this sachet alcohol with fire. However, she was blamed for it because some people went round and started encouraging people to disagree with the chairperson.

I would like to tell the minister that the one-year ultimatum is not a bad one because first of all, we want the production of the sachets to be stopped and not the production of the alcohol. Let it be stopped. As for the sachets already in store for those manufacturers and also those that had already gone to the market, we should look at a period within which these sachets should be phased out of the market.

Personally, I look at the one-year ultimatum as a good period for phasing out these sachets. However, while we stop the production of the sachets, it does not prevent the manufacturers or factories from producing alcohol to be put in bottles or any other packing material. It does not prevent them - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give you and the House is that the production of these buveeras has been done illegally because we banned the kaveera. So, why have they been producing them? They have been producing them illegally and so if the ban or directive is to take effect immediately, it should not affect them. Thank you. 

MS ALYEK: Thank you, honourable member, for the information. I would like to say that, as much as we will give the minister this period, it will be a gradual process to graduate from sachet alcohol to bottled alcohol.

Madam Speaker, allow me to respond to what hon. Akello said about the use of ARVs in alcohol that people drink. This also needs some investigation because if we have the ARVs already infiltrated in the alcohol that people consume, it may be causing more harm to people than the alcohol itself. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.23
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like to speak on this matter as an engineer but also as a Christian. As a Christian, I request that I read Leviticus 10:9 verbatim. It says, “Drink no wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, that ye die not.” The Bible says this will be law and a decree for generations to come until the end of the world.

Madam Speaker, I get perturbed when the ministry or minister does not implement a directive even from God. (Laughter) Buveera were already banned. Even if we want money, we are not here to kill and bury our own.

I will now speak as an engineer. I came from Butaleja today after we hosted the President during the Tarehe Sita celebrations yesterday. As I was coming, it rained around Mukono but when you see the drainage systems blocked, it is because of buveera. 

Honourable minister, why are you placing Uganda National Roads Authority in a situation where they have to beg for money every day? Instead of constructing roads in Omoro, Butaleja or Buhweju, we are concentrating on Kampala where the kaveeras produced by the ministry and the manufacturers are spoiling the roads.

Madam Speaker, some of us visit Kitezi where the landfill is; the biggest problem is kaveera. Most of our people burn these kaveeras and when they are burnt - These are polymers! – (Interruption)

MR OGUZU: The information I want to give is that we may be blaming the minister but as far as I know, and based on our interactions with National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), the President wrote directing NEMA to stay implementation of the ban on polythene bags. Therefore, we must deal with individuals becoming law in this country. Who do we follow? Thank you.

MR WALUSWAKA: Madam Speaker, if I knew that the information was diversionary, I would not have accepted (Laughter). If we are to merge agencies, I think NEMA and National Forestry Authority (NFA) should not waste our time; they should be merged.

Madam Speaker, we are killing our own. Honourable minister, on the issue of one year, I want to advise that you just talk to the Commander-in-Chief and whoever is responsible and even in one month, those polythene bags will be gone. Thank you. 

4.27
MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

Taking the issue of polythene bags to March 2019 is a sign of unseriousness. Gulu District Local Council came up with an ordinance on sachet alcohol and it was implemented together with churches. It was a very difficult fight but it helped a bit.

Our young people, our sons and daughters in primary school, do not access these sachets very easily. However, the boda boda riders are still able to get this sachet alcohol. They call it “Mapenduzi” or “Arch Bishop John Baptist Odama” because those were the people at the forefront of fighting sachet alcohol.

If we think that we are employing our young people by making polythene bags, we do not know that we are killing a lot of people. When you have these small sachets, it is very easy to buy this alcohol. You find young pupils of primary five with sachet alcohol in schools, and it makes them behave differently. 

Our young people should now take the responsibility to become pillars of our families. You see them completely go astray and are knocked off by alcohol. Therefore, we should not delay this anymore by shifting the ultimatum to 2019; it is a disaster to our people. (Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Betty Aol, for giving way. There is a clear channel that we can take. First of all, we know that the sachets are being sold in shops and in bars and are even taken in homes. For homes, it may be complicated to monitor, but how about in the shops and bars where we have local authorities who can monitor and make sure that the ban on the sale of sachet alcohol is implemented?

Madam Speaker, in conjunction with what hon. Anywar said about the ban on polythene bags, strict monitoring of sachet gin in bars and shops across the country would help to address this challenge. However, when we meander 100 times, saying that we are licensing it, it may not help. Monitor and ban them at the shops and bars.

MS BETTY AOL: Thank you, honourable, for the information. I would also like to suggest that it is not impossible to manufacture these bottles. I remember when some of us were in primary school, alcohol, including that made from home, was packed in big bottles. The people who now go for those big bottles are those who have matured. 

However, if you sell it in these small sachets, even those who are not supposed to be accessing alcohol will always access it at Shs 500. If it starts at Shs 5,000 or Shs 10,000, I do not think that our young people can access it. Will you see your young child putting a big bottle before him? It is impossible! Honourable minister, just save us. 

Gulu District is failing to implement its ordinance because people can access the sachets through the neighbouring districts that do not have the same ordinance. If we do not ban it from the source, some people will still access the sachet alcohol. 

March 2019 is too far. We appeal for that law to also come here very quickly; maybe you should give us a timeframe. Thank you.

4.33
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we were growing up, we used to fear to even pass near a bar. You would know that it is a problem; young people would not go to a bar. How does it now become so easy for a young person to go to a bar and buy alcohol? I think it is not just the kaveera that is a problem. Even if we ban the kaveeras, they will use other containers and still take alcohol.

To me, the problem is that there is a lot of lawlessness. The enforcement officers have not stopped these kids from buying alcohol. You can find a bottle written on, “Not for sale to people below 18”, but somebody of 13 years is buying it. The problem is with enforcement and not polythene bags. 

Madam Minister, you need to work with enforcement officers so that we stop children from buying alcohol, whether it is in the morning or during the day, as long as they are children. Otherwise, this business of concentrating on polythene bags - 

My problem is not even with the policy. Even where it is written that you cannot buy alcohol when you are below 18, children are still buying it. Saying that there is no law or policy is not the issue. Maybe the police and people who are doing the work of running after people should also run after children who are taking alcohol. Thank you.

4.35
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I lay these papers on the Table, I would like to say that what the Members are saying is what is contained in these letters. The first letter was written by Ambiance Distillers Limited on 5 March 2017. They copied it to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) and Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). 

In this letter - because I am a teacher I am going to be very brief - they say that the polythene over leaks and they get several returns, which increases losses. They went ahead to explain what Members have just talked about - the dangers of polythene. They were actually following publications during the time Parliament had banned polythene papers and buveeras for waragi. This letter is signed by Mr Kiyimba Joseph. I beg to lay.

On 13 June 2017, Ambiance Distillers Limited wrote another letter to UNBS requesting them to ensure compliance of several alcohol brands on the market to the required East African Community standards. I do not want to name all the brands they gave here, but they mentioned them. This shows that these distillers are interested in compliance so that they can market their business very well. This is the letter. They attached some of these sachets sold around that are not favourable. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, on 25 July 2017, they still wrote to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and this letter was received on the same date, from Ambiance Distillers Limited. The reference is: “Requesting your feedback on the advance of the letter written to you before concerning the existence of several uncertified alcohol brands on the market”. This letter was sent to the minister then. I beg to lay.

Lastly, Uganda Alcohol Industry Association on 11 September 2017 wrote to the Manager, Quality Assurance Department at UNBS, reporting a brand from Sperenza Group Limited - a Rwanda product. They wrote this letter, stating the product and where it is sold without the UNBS mark and the Q-mark. They wrote and copied to you, giving facts about this drink. 

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let me state that as we speak now, Kenya has over 1000 companies running these funny businesses in this country and yet Uganda has less than 20 in Kenya. Rwanda is running a lot of businesses here, some of which are not certified. I saw one of them selling soap. You could take that piece of soap to your home, use it on your face because you want to become brown, and it just gets scratches and breaks. These are the issues that I want to raise. 

Therefore, these companies are asking the minister, hon. Amelia Kyambadde, with whom I travel on the same route along Masaka Road, to kindly carry out due diligence - UNBS and the ministry - so that we have products that are certified and get taxes. That is all. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those letters are photocopies and they have not been certified. Therefore, I do not know whether we can trace their authenticity.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, if you want original copies, I can get them from the source. We shall certify them and bring them. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 19 Members have contributed to this debate and I am mindful that we shall have a full scale debate when the Bill comes. This is because we shall have to make very serious policy changes on these three laws, which were amended. Therefore, I just want to appeal to the minister to continue with the resolution of the House but brief us on the law.

4.40
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for the contributions they have made on this very important issue. Allow me to make about four or five comments on this issue, and I will also take some decisions on the basis of the comments made in this august House.

First, I would like to talk about the association. Ambiance is not a member of the association and if they are, they should write in the name of the association but not on their own. Therefore, I must admit I have not been privy to that, but I wish they could refer – (Interjection) - They are not, because I have the list of all the members of the association. Therefore, when I was speaking, I was referring to the association itself. 

Number two, on the issue of –

MR SSEWUNGU: Can I give you information? Let me give you information.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please take your seat.

MS KYAMBADDE: On the issue of testing, it is true all alcohol is tested but we must admit that there are some illegal distillers who are producing alcohol in their houses, who we have not been able to access. We pray that if honourable members know anybody, please report them. It will help us to follow up on some of these people. The alcohol content is supposed to be 40 per cent. 

The other issue is the Act. We will bring the Enguli Bill by July -(Interjections)- Is it very far? It is ready – 

THE SPEAKER: You can bring it during this session, before the end of May. This session will end in May.

MS KYAMBADDE: Okay, I will do that then. However, we have to take it through Cabinet first, but we will endeavour to do that.

Another point is that a number of issues have emerged in this debate. There were three main issues that emerged here. The first one was on kaveera or polythene bags, the second was on banning waragi and the third was on controlling the youth. 

I have no authority over some of these issues. However, on the issue of kaveera or the sachets, I pray that we stop the importation. Some of them are importing buveera for making sachets. We should stop the importation of the sachets by July –(Interjections)– and then production - 

THE SPEAKER: The minister is giving some proposals. Let her give them first.

MS KYAMBADDE: I am giving proposals so that we can discuss. We can stop the importation by July - (Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I did not want to raise a point of order against the honourable minister, but I just wanted clarification. However, is the honourable minister in order when she holds the portfolio to ensure that this country does not import buveera - In any case, when this Parliament passed a resolution banning kaveera in the Ninth Parliament, the concern was that some of the traders had imported kaveera, so could we give a grace period for the kaveera to be utilised and then the ban would take effect. 

Considering the debate that has gone on, is the honourable minister in order to state or to pray that the country should stop the importation of kaveera when that responsibility squarely lies on her shoulders? Is she in order? Otherwise, where do we have the hope for having what we are discussing put in effect? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you heard during the debate that there was some interference with the minister’s management of those things. That is why she is saying that she needs time to conclude that process. There was interference; I think we heard it here. Her work was interfered with. Please, conclude.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, on the importation of the buveera used for these sachets, we could ban them by July and then by September, we could stop the production. This is because people already have these production lines. 

Therefore, we would like to bring forward the date of the total ban of the buveera for sachets - not the other buveera because that is a broader subject that involves a number of sectors. However, as far as sachets are concerned, production can be stopped by September 2018 and importation by July 2018. The Enguli Act should also be in Parliament by end of May.

Allow me to comment on the issue of banning waragi. This is not something I could raise here today but I could talk about the concerns. When you look at the value chain, they are buying millet, - they started a project on sorghum - they are buying cassava, matooke, barley and sugarcane for processing waragi. All these are bought from farmers.

Let us look at some of the implications. I talked about unemployment. Already, you have about 82,000 Ugandans working in some of these distilleries. As far as taxes are concerned, Ministry of Finance is the authority but the taxes are also high. 

Allow me to comment on the ordinances. We thank the people who put in place the ordinances, but they were abused and mismanaged. When they confiscated these consignments, they would disappear amongst the officials. They burnt them once but they never burnt again, and then they would disappear. Our argument was that block them from entering instead of confiscating them because when they confiscate these trucks, you never trace them. They are actually sold by some of the officials. 

Those are the issues I wanted to comment on. However, I wanted to assure you that the waragi is tested. However, this enguli, which is prepared locally, is also dangerous. It makes you impotent. Fortunately, the Bill that I am bringing in will cover all these, including the locally brewed alcohol. Thank you all for you contributions. I rest my case.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We hope to see the Bill before the close of the second session.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

4.50
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I wish to present the Annual Inspectorate of Government Performance Report for the period January to June 2017. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. However, I would like to remind ourselves that the Inspector General of Government has been complaining that we are not paying enough attention to her reports. Therefore, I would like to call upon the committee to address this report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE ACQUISITION AND UTILIZATION OF $200 MILLION FROM PTA BANK

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday I said I was going to go through the Hansard and give an update. The Public Accounts Committee investigated the acquisition and utilization of the $200 million loan from the PTA Bank. We had time to speak about it yesterday but I wanted to give the chronological background. 

On 3 March 2015, the Ministry of Finance laid before Parliament a request by Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade Development Bank (PTA) for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilize the exchange rate. The request was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration.  

On 7 January 2016, the Committee on National Economy reported back on the loan request. The then acting finance minister, hon. Aston Kajara, justified the loan request, reasoning that the loan would be used as a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rate. 

The committee recommended the approval of the loan request. However, one of the Members, hon. Nzoghu of Busongora North Constituency, submitted a minority report on the same. He recommended that the Government’s request be rejected on the grounds that there was no merit in borrowing this money expensively, under terms which he considered dangerous for the citizens of this country and future generations.

A debate ensued and the loan request was opposed by the majority of Members of Parliament to which the Speaker asked, “Honourable members, I have not heard support for this motion, what do we do?” 

Upon guidance, the minister, hon. Kajara, proposed to withdraw the loan request and stated as follows: “Madam Speaker, the view expressed by hon. Okot Ogong is that we are not in position to conclude this loan request today. Therefore, I wish to agree with him that we withdraw this loan request for further consultations. This is so that we bring it back at an appropriate time with further improvement. I beg to move.” The motion was withdrawn and the loan request by Government to borrow that sum of money was rejected.

On 7 April 2016, the finance minister holding that portfolio, hon. Bahati, laid before Parliament a request by Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade Development Bank for what he called “fiscal purposes”. The request was referred to the Committee on National Economy.

On 26 April 2016, the Minister of Finance moved a motion for a resolution of Parliament to authorise Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade Development Bank for fiscal purposes. The purpose for which the loan was sought was:

a) 	To cover a revenue shortfall of Shs 288 billion; 
b) 	Replace domestic borrowing, amounting to Shs 280 billion;
c) 	Finance supplementary expenditure that was approved by Parliament over and above three per cent, amounting to Shs 156.37 billion and Shs 180.1 billion resulting from foreign exchange depreciation during the financial year 2015/2016.

This totals to Shs 904.47 billion required in the financial year 2015/2016. This is an equivalent of $268.75 million at an exchange rate of Shs 3,355 per US dollar.

The minister further explained that since domestic revenue for that financial year was projected to have a shortfall and domestic borrowing had become expensive due to high interest rate, there was a financing gap in the budget which was going to be financed using the loan from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA). The Committee on National Economy recommended that Parliament approves the request by Government to borrow US$ 200 million from the PTA Bank for fiscal purposes. 

The request was approved by Parliament and authorisation granted to Government to borrow that sum of money from the PTA Bank. It is important to recall that during the debate, in justifying the need to borrow this money, the then Minister of Health, Dr Elioda Tumwesigye, said this: 

“Mr Speaker, I rise to support the motion and also wish to state that not all consumption is bad. Indeed, with respect to this particular loan request, it is going to help answer a challenge we have in the purchase of drugs. 

Right now, because of the exchange rate depreciation, National Medical Stores found that they now had to buy fewer drugs than we expected. That amounted to a shortfall of Shs 58 billion. This coupled with the domestic revenue deficits, which also meant that the cash limits to certain sectors were less than expected; National Medical Stores for this particular quarter is going to receive less by Shs 14 billion. 

Therefore, as a consequence, we are starting to see no drugs, gloves and eventually, we shall lose lives. Therefore, by Parliament passing this motion, although to some extent some of the money will go to consumption, Shs 82 billion will go to save lives. We know that saving a life is the highest ethical act one can ever do to humankind. Therefore, by passing this loan, you will save lives and increase access to safe medicine and vaccines. 

Therefore, I support the motion. Of course, I would have been happier - In the past, we used to get budget support from concessional loans from the World Bank. This loan, for sure, is quite high compared to what we would have got from the World Bank. Government should also explore alternative loan sources because there are available loan facilities globally with less interest rates. Thank you.” That was the Hansard of 26 April 2016.

On 18 May 2017, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, Woman Representative Dokolo, rose on a matter of national importance bringing to the attention of the House that the National Medical Stores had threatened to stop supplying drugs to hospitals and health centres due to lack of funds. She argued that Parliament had borrowed US$ 200 million, part of which was to be used by National Medical Stores. The Speaker requested the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come Parliament with an explanation.

The Committee on Public Accounts, based on the statement made by hon. Cecilia Ogwal, decided to investigate the acquisition and utilisation of the US$ 200 million from the PTA Bank under Article 90 (3) of the Constitution and rule 147(c) which is now the present rule 156. The committee carried out investigations and reported to the House its findings including:

a) 	National Medical Stores never received money from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development as part of the loan amounting to Shs 8 billion.

b) 	The Ministry of Finance, by false pretence, impressed upon Parliament the justification for the loan approval, stating that the critical area for the loan was medical supplies yet this was not true. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development never informed the agencies who were supposed to get funding and neither did they send money to the intended beneficiaries.

Honourable members, in order to ascertain and find out the performance and utilisation of the loan, there is need for the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit of this loan. This will guide the House in vetting the report of the committee as prepared. I, therefore, would like to direct the Auditor-General to carry out a special audit on the utilisation and performance of the US$ 200 million loan from Parliament acquired from PTA Bank and submit the report to my office by 20 February 2018. We will then consider the Auditor-General’s report together with the Public Accounts Committee report and make a resolution. 

In the circumstances, I stay the debate on this matter until 28 March.     

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICES BILL, 2016

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016” be read for the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Is anybody seconding the minister’s Bill? It is seconded by some members of Cabinet and House.
 
MS OPENDI: Thank you, colleagues, for seconding the Bill. Madam Speaker, the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016 is intended to address the challenges in the laboratory sector. 

You will note that since 1926, Uganda has had a number of laboratories in the country. We currently have over 1,500 in the public and about 1,200 in the private sector. The large number of these laboratories offer different services ranging from simple to complex tests, and there is no legal body to provide oversight over the laboratories. 

The central public health laboratory that exists is under the Department of National Disease Control in the Ministry of Health. We need a standalone autonomous institution to oversee the laboratory services in this country. It is for this reason that we are proposing to have the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services established under an Act of Parliament, so that it can provide the necessary stewardship for the national health laboratory network. It will also guide the prevention of disease and provision of health services in the country. 

Uganda’s commitments to international declarations and protocols have been made over the years. We are signatory to several regional and international declarations and protocols. We have Yaoundé Accord, 2006, the Maputo Declaration of 2008 and the Kigali Declaration of 2010. All these urge member states to strengthen their health laboratory services by establishing strong, identifiable leadership and governance institutions.

As of now, we do not have any autonomous institution to provide the oversight role that we need in this country. As, a result of these challenges, the Ministry of Health consulted various stakeholders in the country and they all supported the need to have this autonomous institution that will oversee the laboratory services in the country. I beg to move, Madam Speaker.                  

MS KAHUNDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The report was tabled and we are supposed to begin debating. I do not know whether I should–

THE SPEAKER: Was it presented?

 MS KAHUNDE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: So, it is just for debate?

MS KAHUNDE: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, you have heard the justification. Did you debate it?

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, the debate took place. Yes, a number of colleagues contributed towards this Bill after the chair –

THE SPEAKER: Was the question put? 

MS OPENDI: No, we did not reach that stage. It was debated - 

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When the chairperson of the committee, hon. Bukenya, presented to us, I was in the House. He read the report and we stopped at that. There was no debate that took place on that day. 

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, we can now debate, because you need to tell us whether we should go to the second reading or not. Hon. Nandala, you have three minutes.

5.06
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would have expected the minister to tell the truth. However, when she started saying that it was done, I got worried, because she was here. 

One of the issues raised was by the Minister of State for Higher Education, hon. Seninde.  She said that this was very urgent and we should even suspend the rules to deal with it. However, Members said, “No; how can we just suspend the rules?” She then got up and said that we should leave it and instead discuss it the next week on Tuesday. 

For her now to come here and say - She must apologise to the House, Madam Speaker, because it is wrong for a lady like hon. Sarah Opendi, whom we have been holding in high regard, to come and say that the debate was done. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, can you now contribute?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, let me contribute. Madam Speaker, one of the things we had raised was the many authorities being created, which was bringing up the cost of public expenditure. I would now like to ask the minister if this one will generate its own income, so that we do not place a charge on the Consolidated Fund. 

Many authorities have been formed and some of them are duplicating work, which is being done in the ministries, and they are very expensive. This is because the salary of an employee of an authority is higher than that of a normal civil servant. This even brings up a lot of issues in the civil service. Everybody now says that they would rather create an authority so that they are paid better other than remaining in the traditional civil service, yet world over it is known that civil servants are the best paid persons and they do the best work. Therefore, I would love the minister to tell me that this one will not have additional costs on the Consolidated Fund.

Secondly, there is the issue of the commencement date. Since she is claiming that it is very urgent, and now I am sure she submitted a certificate of financial implication, wouldn’t it be right that as soon as this thing is assented to, it becomes law, if we have agreed? The other time you wanted to suspend the rules because you were saying it is overdue.

Thirdly, these days in America, for example, there is the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) that deals with everything - food, drugs, laboratories; they are all under that. Wouldn’t it be better, if we are going to form this one, to just expand it so that it covers all? National Drug Authority, the authority that handles food, could all go under this one body. We can then change the name so that the Bill says, “Food, Drugs and Laboratories Bill” so that it covers everything instead of having only one for laboratories. 

By the way, does it even include animals? If you are creating a body for laboratories, we need to know if it will include animals. Will it include the one that offers forensic services or the one that checks signatures to ascertain whether they are forged or not, because they are also called laboratories? Is this laboratories body going to have all those, or when we want to do the one for forensics we shall have another laboratory body and when we want to do the one for signatures, we shall have another one. Is this one going to do all the laboratory services so that we forget all issues concerning laboratory services?

We have seen this with authorities; the moment you create –(Interruption)– Madam Speaker, this is bad news; I was about to finish and then somebody switched off the microphone. 

THE SPEAKER: Your minutes were done. Just use one minute now to conclude.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  The other point I wanted to raise is that when we create authorities, we provide for the appointment of an executive director and a deputy to the executive director. If none of them reports to the other, then you would have created what we call kingdoms. Each will have their own kingdom. That is what happened in the National Social Security Fund (NSSF) and Rural Electrification Agency. I think we need to harmonise this. 

If the minister agrees to clarify the issues I have raised and the Bill goes through, it looks like we are going to create kingdoms. There will be the boss, who is the executive director, and there will also be a deputy who is also on their own terms. None of them reports to the other and yet when you are the deputy, you are answerable to the full director. 

Therefore, would the minister look at that and reconsider, if we agree, that the deputy must be subordinate to the executive director? This is because we do not want to create people with different assignments and fighting in an organisation. 

If the minister convinces me on that, then I will have to see how I can proceed on this Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.13
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute. I would like to thank the committee for their report, though it was sent a long time ago and when I looked at the iPad, it was not available for us to refresh our minds. 

This Uganda National Health Laboratory Services is a very important component in the health sector. Laboratory services determine the type of disease a person is suffering from. Without proper diagnosis and identification of the type of germs or virus affecting you, the doctors are helpless. 

There are very many technical laboratory tests ranging from DNA tests to tests for different types of diseases which need to be identified. When a laboratory technician makes a mistake, that is the end of your treatment because you may be given wrong drugs for treatment. They may say that you have this disease when actually you do not have it. Many people have been diagnosed with HIV/AIDS when actually they do not have it because of a mistake made by the technician. 

Therefore, it is important to have a body to regulate these important services right from the training of the technician, so that they do the right type of job - they identify the right disease, the right virus, the right bacteria so that you can get the right treatment. They must have proper training. 

Secondly, the equipment they use, even the microscopes, if they are defective, they cannot show exactly what germs are there. At times they might say the germs are not there when actually you find that you are suffering from that very particular disease caused by that germ. Therefore, once the equipment is well designed, then it becomes easy to identify the right thing.

In Uganda, there are many species which should be examined abroad. If we create this board, we shall be able to establish highly specialised laboratories that will enhance the identification of different types of viruses and bacteria affecting us instead of flying to London or South Africa to carry out tests. This board will also be able to regulate the examinations that are carried out.

What I would like us to also –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute, hon. Baba Diri.
  
MS BABA DIRI: Thank you. The issue of inspecting the technicians on duty is also very important. If they are not inspected, they can do anything. It is, therefore, important that we establish this board to help us in inspection of technicians.

The board has been given only three years to operate. However, I would like to suggest that we increase the timeframe from three to five years since three years is short for a person to do his or her work. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the Bill.

5.18
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama Country North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the report.

When we talk about health, our focus should always be on how to preserve life. Some time back – I do not have the particulars - there was a report in our media, which cast doubt on the quality of diagnosis we get from our medical laboratories. Without proper diagnosis, you can never get proper treatment. I thought this would be the major focus of this laboratory services. 

When I read the report, I realised that the Ministry of Health is now going into things like forensic services instead of concentrating on diagnostic services. It is good and they could be having the expertise, but if I go to my health centre IV and look at the quality of laboratory services offered there, they are wanting.

Madam Speaker, I would have expected this Bill to focus more on quality assurance. How do I ensure that when I go to health centres IV and III, the diagnosis I am going to get from the laboratory technician is one that will enable the doctor prescribe proper treatment for the sickness I am suffering from? Otherwise, without quality assurance, it becomes a fallacy dreaming about forensic services and animal health, although I know we want to promote them. 

First and foremost, our primary focus should be on how to save life. How do we promote life? How do we ensure that the diagnoses we get in the laboratories are those that will enable the doctors to make the right prescription? This is what is lacking in our health system.

I would like to conclude by saying that I share the concerns raised by the committee that we should focus more on the diagnostic laboratory services and ensure that there is quality assurance in - (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the minister for this deliberate effort to improve laboratory services in our country. However, similar to the submission by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, I have some reservations, which I hope the minister can clarify.

The justification for this Bill is that we need an autonomous institution and we need to comply with international protocols cited by the minster, and she has gone ahead to give examples of countries. As a country, I am not sure whether our greatest challenge is institutions. I am aware that recently, the President gave a directive to the Prime Minister to merge some ministries, departments and agencies in order to save resources and streamline service delivery. 

Therefore, if the honourable minister can bring a stronger justification as to why there is need for another autonomous institution within the Ministry of Health that will enhance coordination apart from what they have been doing, I will be convinced to support this particular Bill.

Secondly, as alluded to earlier by hon. Nandala-Mafabi, one of our greatest challenges in this country is resources. We create institutions which are underfunded and cannot deliver. We need a clear justification of the implications of this Bill so that when we decide to have this autonomous institution, we are sure the resources will be available for it to perform its services.

Thirdly, in diagnosing diseases, we rely so much on other countries for further investigations. This is partly why we are spending millions of dollars on a few privileged people other than on the less privileged. Therefore, if the honourable minister, can provide justification that this unnecessary medical tourism can be stopped by the creation of this institution, I will support the Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.24
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for its report. 

Madam Speaker, people fall sick but sometimes they are treated without establishing the exact cause of sickness. A patient can present symptoms of malaria when the real disease he or she is suffering from is typhoid but he is given malaria treatment. This is happening due to lack of proper examination. When a disease is not treated with the right medicine, it persists and can cause more complications to the patient.

It is true that in some of the health facilities, there are laboratories but these facilities face challenges. Where there are laboratories, sometimes there are no laboratory technicians; anyone can carry out the examination. Also, where there is a laboratory technician, sometimes there are no reagents or equipment. This is a challenge to the health of our people.

Health laboratory services in the country are very important for supervising all the laboratories. This is because they will ensure that those trained as laboratory technicians are the right people working and the equipment and reagents used in the health facilities are of the right type.

I am seeking clarification from the chairperson. On page 3 of their report, they are telling us that the Central Public Health Laboratory, alongside the National Tuberculosis Laboratory have been coordinating health laboratories. However, there is need to empower them legally by codifying their mandate into a law and to change the name to Uganda National Health Laboratory Services.

When you read the Bill, especially clause 41, they are telling us that the staff of the Central Public Health Laboratory will now fall under the new body we are intending to create. However, they are not giving any provision for the National Tuberculosis Laboratory. For example, they are telling us that when this becomes law, the staff of the Central Public Health Laboratory will automatically fall under the new body we are talking about. However, what will happen to the staff of the National Tuberculosis Laboratory? It is like we are leaving them out completely. Can I get that clarification? I thank you.

5.27
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Madam Speaker, thank you. When you look at the Bill, it says the objective of this Bill is to establish the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services as an autonomous body, to provide for the functions of the National Health Laboratory Services - that is where the issue is.

One thing we need to point out is the health laboratory services or health laboratory – it is not even defined in the definition clause. That is a very serious mistake. Leave alone the fact that the purpose and functions of the National Health Laboratory Services is actually not in the Bill. This Bill is talking about the board being autonomous and their functions. When you pass through it, it spells out how they will audit the accounts and so on. 

That said and done, when you make something autonomous, my understanding is that there must be a policy on national laboratory services. Do we have a policy? It seems we do not even have a policy. Secondly, there must be a law on national laboratory services and then we can go and establish a body, whether we want the body to be autonomous or not.

When you look at this Bill, it is just establishing the body. It is not talking about the purpose and functions of a national laboratory service, which is not even defined anyway. I think to continue with this thing, it is just going to stampede us into establishing a body or a group of people simply to work, but working on what? There must be a policy and a law. If that is not clear for the House, let us not be stampeded into a corner in establishing a body which will operate haphazardly. I beg to submit.

5.30
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. They say without good health, you can do nothing. As my colleagues said last time, to know that you are diagnosed with a certain disease, you need to be tested. I will give an example in my place, there are few laboratories, so when somebody is sick, they just guess. They give you malarial medicine or another medicine to try to cure you, but it may become worse. I support the report that they should have laboratories so that it can help diagnose diseases.

I would also like to suggest that they include animal laboratories, because we are animal keepers and we use animal products. If an animal is sick, you can also fall sick as a human being. I would like to suggest that we also introduce animal laboratories so that if animals are sick, we know what type of disease it is and we treat them, so that it does not affect the human beings. Thank you so much.

5.32
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues who have spoken before me. Picking from hon. Joshua Anywarach, I would like to say first that Members of Parliament should understand that what is being looked for here is not to create laboratories that do not exist. 

The Bill is about governing the laboratories and creating mechanisms to govern them, but there is even a bigger problem of - what are you governing? Where are they? What is the relationship between the laboratories that are in existence and bio-medical engineering?

Some of the fake diagnoses we get from the existing laboratories are not because we do not have a board of governors to govern laboratories, but because of the malfunction of equipment, systems and reagents where there are no technical people in health centre IVs. 

For example, we have nurses, doctors, midwives - but there is no one to look at the microscope at Obongi Health Centre IV. This Bill should be returned to the source to be remodelled in such a way that it comes here when the following is done first:

    1. A clear policy is put in place about laboratory services and the relationship between the laboratory services and other facilities like bio-medical engineering department.

    2. All the laboratories are put together, both for health of human beings and health of animals, because there are some diseases which animals and human beings share. For example, if you look at Nagana as spread by tsetse flies in the case of cattle and then sleeping sickness in the case of human beings. The causative organism is the same, but the disease is affected differently.

What has been started is a good thing. It should not be destroyed completely, but it should be returned to be remodelled and returned to the House, so that we have a more comprehensive Bill to deal with laboratory services, laboratory equipment and the bio-medical engineers – how they should be regulated and governed under one body and one law. I thank you.

5.35
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.  I want to thank the chairperson and the committee for coming with this recommendation and the report. My submission comes from page 10, whereby the committee says in bulletin four that the Government should consider the possibility of reviewing the entire laboratory services sector, so as to establish an authority that will take care of all the laboratory services.

The committee is talking of the future action to be taken. I do not know whether it would not be good for us to wait until such a time when we could deal with all these issues since the committee is also recommending the same. We know this Parliament has passed many Acts that established regulatory bodies to address the issue of laboratory services.

However, I still think we have a problem. Many times when we go to the health services, you can get different results. For example, I took my child to one of the hospitals and he was diagnosed with - what is this disease again -(Interjections) – it is not leprosy, come on. He was diagnosed with measles. However, when I went to another hospital, they said there was nothing. 

This means we have a problem, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)– wait a minute, I will give you time. This means we have a problem because if our health centres give different results to the same person, it means we have to sit down and get all these things done at once. 

The committee also mentioned that there are laboratories which really do not deal with human health and we know there are some diseases transmitted to humans by animals. Therefore, I do not know when this will be addressed because the committee recommended we address it in future. 

Madam Speaker, I would like the chairperson of the committee to clarify whether we shall not be wasting time when after three months, we may come back on the same issue of laboratory system -(Interruption)

MS AJILO: Thank you, my sister, for giving way. The information I would like to give is about the wrong diagnosis because it is now common in Kaberamaido. When you report to most of the clinics, they subject you to a laboratory test. Besides malaria, there has to be typhoid. They will always diagnose you with typhoid. If you do not seek a second opinion, you will be treated for typhoid. It is quite wrong for somebody to be treated for something they are not suffering from. Therefore, we need this law so that we can regulate our laboratories. I thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true there has been very poor coordination in the health system. I would like to say we need a central laboratory system to coordinate what other laboratories are doing so that we address the issue in the health sector once and for all.

I also would like to note that there are so many machines which are lying idle in the health sector, Madam Speaker. When you go to the hospitals, you will find the personnel to handle the X-ray are not there. The machine is there but it is not working or it is spoiled and there is nobody to repair it. 

Therefore, however much we talk about the laboratory, we need to address the issue of the health workers and the machines so that we achieve the desired goals. I would like to thank you.

5.39
MR PATRICK NSAMBA: (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I was here when this Bill was introduced. I remember the minister said the National Health Laboratory Services exist and this law requires us to define their mandates. The Bill says the purpose of the Act is to define the mandate of the Uganda National Health Laboratory Services to effectively support the implementation of health service delivery in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, it baffles me to hear there is an organisation already in existence which needs sanitisation from us but it is operating under no law. Therefore, my assumption is that from this Act, we will go beyond only formulating a body but defining what will be done by the institution. 

Madam Speaker, we are aware that in this country, even the laboratories the body would like to coordinate, in most cases, are not there in the health facilities. If a Ugandan needs any laboratory services, he has to run to a private establishment. Now, I would be highly interested in the body if, among the mandate, it was coming to Parliament to be appropriated money to establish laboratories at the government health facilities.  

Madam Speaker, at the health centre IIIs and IVs, there are no laboratories. For example, Kassanda Health Centre IV is being supported by an NGO, Mildmay. Previously, every time we would go to the health centre and a test is required, they would refer us to private laboratories.

Therefore, for me, this body would make a lot of meaning if it is not only concerned about coordinating something that does not exist. When you look at the functions in Article 7, it is all about coordinating and setting standards. By establishing this body, we would have an entity to coordinate other government establishments. 

Madam Speaker, National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is autonomous but it cannot coordinate the environment officers at the district. It is because the environment officers at the district report to CAO of the district and they can never report to NEMA. Therefore, we are establishing another body where you, as Government, do not have the staffing and the laboratory technicians will report to their clinics –(Interruption)- Madam Speaker, I wanted to conclude by saying that until such a time when we have serious laboratory services in this country, we can establish such a body to run the standards. They can operate in the same way they have been operating. Let them bring a policy and a law; then, we will establish this body. 

5.43
MS DOREEN AMULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Mine is not very far from what my colleague who has just resumed his seat said. When I look at this Bill and the real scenario taking place in our health sector - is it having an authority that will solve the health problem in our country or doing something much better than that? For how long are we going to run away from real solutions and creating bigger problems as solutions? It is because if we are failing to recruit laboratory technicians into our health centre IIIs and IVs or buy even the smallest equipment like a microscope to diagnose sicknesses - it is true we would want our people and ourselves to go through tests first before treatment but is that the reason for which we should create an authority? How much are we going to pay a director of an authority? I would think that the money that we are going to spend on employing a director and all other board members is far much more ten times higher than even buying the machines that we need.

Therefore, the critical point is can we strengthen our health department as far as laboratory equipment is concerned other than running away from the real problem and creating even bigger expenses for ourselves? 

Madam Speaker, in Uganda I don’t know whether we sit down as technical people and politicians as well to think about how best we should spend our money to benefit ourselves or diagnose our problems and see how best we should serve our people as a nation.

Our problem is not the lack of an authority. Our problem is about the failure to diagnose diseases, failure to strengthen the health ministry, looking at the real problem at the grassroots and making sure that we deliver direct services but not spending money on the creation of authorities. In any case how many of these authorities do we have? How perfect are they? Therefore, to me the real problem is not an authority. Thank you.

5.46
MS WINFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is a good thing to talk about laboratories at this time. I will not support this Bill because it is not an important Bill at the moment because we have many other priorities that we should be establishing.

Recently we toured different districts in this country; some of us Members of Parliament who have a passion of stopping Tuberculosis (TB) in our country. We visited different districts and health facilities and discovered that most of those laboratories that are supposed to be well equipped to treat patients of TB, which is a highly contagious diseases; a disease that anyone of us can get and which is airborne was - most of the laboratories we visited did not even have enough equipment, personnel to manage them! It was so pathetic that even this multi-drug resistant TB, which is rampant in areas like in Ndeija in Mbarara, does not have enough equipment to treat the patients.

Some of the expensive equipment like the GeneXpert machines that has been purchased are idle because they do not have cartridges; a machine that costs Shs 100 million. Therefore, instead of dwelling on establishing these autonomous bodies, we would rather take time and go at regional or district level establishing proper laboratories that can handle these diseases and coordinate them with the ministry.

I am aware that this central laboratories place is already there and it has a fantastic building in Butabika. However, that is not what we need now. It can be managed by the Ministry of Health. I do not support the issue of establishing entities that we are not going to manage.

They are talking about laboratories to be vested in this UNHLC; I would like to know from the minister and the chairperson whether the private laboratories are considered in this regard. In our visits we discovered that the non-profit health facilities and private hospitals have got better laboratories compared to those in Government institutions.

Therefore, those vested in this institution, are they going to be monitored? However, in any case – and it has already been raised - what are you going to monitor if the laboratories are not in place? We have buildings - if you go to Mbarara Regional Referral Hospital and you visit the TB laboratory, it is in appalling state. They don’t - (Member timed out.)

5.49
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to support this Bill. To have a law to ensure overseeing the performance of our laboratory services in this country is very much needed.

I would like to remind Members about the report brought by the honourable minister where she had two results from an examination; one reflecting positive and the other one negative. Outside there it was an embarrassment because people were wondering about the type of services our country offers.  We even know the chaos the two results caused in this country. Therefore, I support this law because I know it will give the ministry mandate to ensure quality service.

Madam Speaker, to have proper diagnosis in this country will even add value to the health services that we offer, not only within the country but also in outside countries. We know, even Members of Parliament for various reasons, go for better services outside this country.

Therefore, it is for those who can benefit that get the services. What about the poor? We know about the performance of the medical board; the process is very long. I really support this move so that we improve on our health services. We also need to gain in foreign exchange. Uganda has spent a lot of money in getting services outside the country.

Lastly, on the issue of in future having an authority, I am somehow reserved because the head of state made a statement about the mushrooming authorities in this country. The honourable minister sits in Cabinet and this is what has been proposed in the committee report; why don’t we divert from creating authorities where we have a lot of wasteful expenditure?  Yet we could have the same services with institutions or structures where we can spend less money. Therefore, I - (Member timed out.)

5.52
MR JAMES NIRINGIYIMANA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the committee and the minister for bringing this Bill. However, I am a Member of the Committee on Finance and I can say that there are so many institutions - about 39 or so - under the finance committee. When you relate their performance, you realise there is a lot of duplication, which makes assessment of their performance a challenge.

Madam Speaker, we have been grappling the question of whether these authorities are relevant to Ugandans. We have correctly said that we need to even reduce or abolish some of them. However, the ministry which is grappling with the resources here and which has been saying National Medical Stores has no money, that every sector has no money, is now saying we need another authority so that we spend on salaries.

When we as the Committee on Budget analysed these authorities, we got to realize that some of them are being created to offer jobs to some people. You find the prisons authority but which is competing with the Uganda Investment Authority. They don’t know what to do next.  This is the same thing. What do we require to ensure proper diagnosis? There are no staff in those health centres. You find that reagents are not there.

However, while the responsible minister is saying the ministry does not have money to purchase those requirements, she has money to employ more workers in a new authority. Is it therefore relevant?

I thought that by having such ministers who are doctors in the health sector would help this country to have a proper outlook but it seems like we are there to count numbers. We owe Ugandans service delivery rather than creating unnecessary authorities. 

My thinking is that we only need a law to regulate those already in practice. We need a policy to make sure we have all these otherwise the creation of these offices is not helping us. We need service delivery and not authorities. Thank you.

5.54
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko North County, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the creation of an institution or a body that will oversee the provision of laboratory services in the health sector. 
 
I happen to have worked in the health sector for some time and I quite understand very well where the challenges are. Laboratory services, if fully functional, will cut the health sector budget by almost 40 to 50 per cent –(Interjections)– yes. I have done studies in Mulago and established that if laboratories were functional, we would have cut down the cost of treatment in the hospital by almost 50 per cent; this is from experience. 

At that time in Mulago we tried to resource the laboratory services to make sure that it helps the clinicians do a perfect diagnosis so that a patient would stay a shorter time in the hospital than if you continued treating what you suspect is a problem.

Therefore, I would like to support the fact that trying to institutionalise the provision of laboratory services in the health sector is very critical. However, the problem in the health sector has also been lack of funds.

My experience in Mulago is that whereas hospital equipment was available there is no money provided to maintain them. When they breakdown they end up being non-functional. 

I would like to know from the minister whether steps have been taken to rationalise budgeting in the health sector; to make sure priorities in the heath sector are clearly defined and understood.

This is important because it is absurd to see equipment in Mulago worth billions but the budget for maintenance is only 0.04 per cent. Where is the logic? Yet this is a very critical service to the extent if it functions well, we can cut down the cost of health service delivery by almost 50 per cent. 

5.56
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to reject this Bill. I want us to be specific. We should be looking at matters at the micro and not at the macro level. For example, I usually visit all the eight health centres in my constituency. They have small rooms called laboratories. They are understaffed and the equipment is virtually not well organised. So, when I read this Bill what comes into my mind is: what is the big problem we would like to cure? Now people are talking about establishing an authority but let me ask a question - because we should be talking about how to secure money to buy medicine for people suffering from Hepatitis B - How do we test them? These are the important things because, Madam Speaker, if somebody is suffering from Hepatitis B and they are in Kamuli, they have to travel from Kamuli to Kampala or Entebbe where the testing machine is. 

I am sure that we should be talking about how to give quality services and not waste money on creating an authority. If we establish this authority, we are going to pay its executive director a minimum of Shs 30 million yet if we used that money properly, many people can benefit.

Yes, we talk about job creation but that should not be along these lines. Let us look at other ways of addressing the issue of unemployment not through the creation of authorities. 

When we have problems in our communities like in Ngora and Kamuli where you come from - somebody said that people are not treated very well because there is no authority? I get disturbed. We need to talk about how to help our people. 

I know that all the medical decisions are taken based on the laboratory results, but let us address the issue of improving the laboratory service provision in Uganda other than hiding -like those days when we were growing up we used to have what we called hide-and-seek games. Let us not use the hide-and-seek approach in –(Member timed out.)

5.59
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this very important Bill and the chairperson for the great work.

Madam Speaker, we can afford to dismiss or minimise the importance of this Bill but one thing that is critically important is that we cannot afford choosing the consequences of dismissing it.

Madam Speaker, you will recognise that world over, research and investigations began with the laboratory. I am a first timer in this Parliament and I am wondering where this Bill has been because it is very important. The Laboratory Bill should have been given the priority that it needs for the following reasons, and I am speaking this as a scientist.

When you want to look at a problem, you begin by defining the problem at definition level and after definition you go into constructing that problem after which you get into developing a solution. It is after developing a solution that you go to adaptation and transfer; and after transferring, we go to application. At application level you finalise with utilisation. 

I wish honourable colleagues would ask somebody that has got into a false medical problem because of mixing up the laboratory results or mixing up the laboratory diagnostic system.

Madam Speaker, globally, laboratory systems are a way to take. How are you going to solve the problem you have no knowledge about? I recognise different views from colleagues but I would like to encourage them to support this Bill and use the ability they have to reinforce the Bill.

I do not support the Bill 100 per cent but I am here to make things better after reinforcing. Once the Bill comes for second reading and processing, I will give my input. For now, I would like to encourage colleagues that this is worth supporting. We need this Bill more for the betterment - (Member was timed out_)

6.03
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the committee report and the Bill because we needed this Bill yesterday. 

I have visited that ultra-modern facility in Luzira several times and we have got some good lectures on what that facility will do for us as a country and as a region.  Honourable members, our Government has invested a lot of money in trying to put that facility there. Without a legal regime, we cannot fully operationalize that facility –(Interjections)– a moment.

Madam Speaker, when we talk about laboratory services in the health sector, we are talking about the engine of the institution because that is where diagnosis takes place. If we do not have a framework to functionalise this engine, then what are we doing? The report clearly tells us that the laboratory industry at the moment is operating unregulated and is subject to abuse because of standard issues. Therefore, if we put a legal regime in place to help us have standards so that –(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Thank you. You have referred to that institution in Luzira as an inspiring one that would require this authority, do you think that this institution was put there because of the board or, will the board functionalise it?

The other clarification I seek from you is: do you think the board will add value other than the existing structure?  What do you think would be more cost effective?

MR ATIKU: Thank you. First of all, I would like to say that the ministries supporting this position are fully bankrupt. If you have visited a regional referral hospital, you must have seen the staffing gap. Even in Mulago here - we have been complaining that we do not have experts in these facilities. The reason is that the ministry setup does not help us to attract some of the brains that we need to man some of these facilities. My belief is that if we have such a facility manned by a professional who is paid some good money, we can retain these brains. 

The reason we are having our doctors running to Rwanda, South Africa and wherever is because of this kind of structure that does not allow Government to remunerate some of these technical staff the way it is supposed to be. I believe that if we have Ugandan National Health Laboratory Services as an autonomous organisation, well remunerated and supported –(Member timed out_)

6.09
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. We are all aware that when you go to a health centre - even at the ground level - the results that you get from the laboratory will help to cure your sickness. 

We have several health centres, both public and private. When you go to a laboratory or a health centre to take tests, they may treat you and you do not get cured and they may referred you to another health centre where the same tests are taken but it might be that you may not get cured. 

When I look at this Bill that is establishing this body to coordinate, I feel relieved because I know that there will be supervision. Its functions are very clear and if we have a body that ensures that all these functions are carried out, I think we shall reduce a lot of costs in treating – I do not think that establishing an authority under health would be something we would pull - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give to my colleague is that what we need to solve the problem that you are presenting of testing for the sicknesses for which we go to the health units, is the establishment of the laboratory but not an authority. We need a policy before the -(Interruption)

MS CHEKWEL: Thank you, honourable. I have now got the information. Madam Speaker, we know that we have few laboratories but even these few should give us efficient services. We need to have coordination of these few before we can add. You can have so many of them but when they are not coordinated, it can be a challenge. 

Therefore, I feel that as a House, we should support this Bill and have this authority established. It will have to give us data about what we have. We shall have to regulate what we have and testing the reagents to ensure that we have efficient and effective laboratories before we can spread it all over. Thank you.

6.13
MR ROBERT NTENDE (Independent, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support this Bill. It has come at a time when this country needs it because when you walk into a health facility, after the doctor has checked you, the next step is the laboratory. 

Without a proper laboratory system in this country, the doctor is rendered helpless. Because our laboratory services are very poor, doctors start treating clinically. He will look at you, your eyes, the way you appear and prescribe treatment, which is very dangerous.

I would like to inform honourable members that most of the functioning laboratories in this country are all private - MBA, JB, Lancet, Ebenezer, all these are private and these are the laboratories that we walk into to get services and proper results.

If we do not make this law, we are negating from our own duty. I would like to inform the House that laboratory services are the core for the health service delivery. Minus a proper laboratory services, the health sector is rendered useless. Therefore, I would like to say that there are a number of departments in the health sector. For example, imaging, nursing, pharmacy but even the doctor to prescribe the right medication for you to pick from the pharmacy, he would have based his decision on the laboratory results.

Therefore, I would like to request honourable members, that without wasting more time, we should overwhelmingly support this important Bill because it touches the core of your lives; all of us are clients of these hospitals. If these hospitals do not have a proper health laboratory services, you and I will be in problems. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at this laboratory course, it starts from a certificate, diploma, degree and even masters –(Member timed out_)

6.15
MR DENIS OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Madam Speaker, I have keenly listened to honourable colleagues’ submissions and if we are not serious, we are about to create another white elephant by way of saying we should have an institutional framework. 

There are broad ranges of laboratory services in veterinary, agriculture- if there were particular issues associated with laboratory services, we should have incorporated them in those. I do not see the urgency of having a regulatory framework only for health when there are quite a number of urgent issues we should have attended to. If this is about improving the health service delivery, we should prioritise the national insurance scheme. We should have dealt with issues of ambulance services. I do not in any way see how this law will help us improve laboratory services in this country.

Madam Speaker, the Government has proposed a number of austerity measures. There are even proposals in the National Budget Framework Paper to review creation of health centre IIIs in each sub-county and health centre IVs in each constituency. There are proposals to review having secondary schools in each sub-county and all this points to the fact that the Government anticipates that they will lack resources to implement a number of projects.

Therefore, if we create another institution, how will this fit into the proposed reforms? Maybe the minister needs to assure us on that. (Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, honourable, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that recently, when we were interfacing with the National Planning Authority in the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the Executive Director was on record that despite the fact that we are engaged in planning for this country, without an honest opinion on restructuring Government, these plans would be rendered useless. They will lie in shelves gathering dust.

Therefore, the point is, this drive towards creating more institutions is unnecessary and this is an expert opinion from the National Planning Authority who are also suffocated because of funding and cannot deliver their mandate. That is why I still insist that the honourable minister together with the committee should justify where these resources will come from. Thank you.

MR OGUZO: Finally, I have information that there is going to be a moratorium on recruitment and even creating new administrative units and entities; how will your proposed Bill fit in those reforms? Thank you.

6.20
MR GENENSIO TUMURAMYE (NRM, Kashongi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. First, a health related Bill is very important for our lives as Members of Parliament and as Ugandans.

Secondly, when you talk of autonomy in health - we all fall sick, our people fall sick and they get treatment. I would wish that we regionalise other than centralise these laboratory services because our people get sick and get treated at health centre I, III and IV. Therefore, improving this service and making it autonomous is very good for our people. 

As my colleague mentioned there, every person must be diagnosed. Its role is to diagnose and help increase diagnostic and monitoring treatment. In addition, one of the benefits is to enhance capacity to monitor quality of health laboratory services. Therefore, it is very important, I urge Members to support this Bill because it is going to save our lives.

There is no way –(Interruption)

MR OKOTH: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The clarification I am seeking from you is that you are urging us to support the Bill but as far as I am concerned, the minister is seeking to create a coordinating agency to coordinate the poor diagnostic laboratories in our health facilities with others - forensic, animal laboratories, etcetera –(Interjections) Yes, that is what the Bill is talking about here.

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking is, before we support this Bill, are we sure that when we create this coordinating agency, our diagnostic services in our health centre IIIs, will improve?

MR TUMURAMYE: Absolutely, yes. Honourable members, I urge all of us to support the Bill because our people- (Interjections) - By the way, let me tell you, hon. Nandala Mafabi, we need services particularly in the health sector. Our people get treatment at the health centre IIs, IIIs and IVs. I urge Members, if we could increase the budget so that we also increase services at the lower health centres.

For instance, in Kashongi County, there is equipment at a health centre III but it has been idle there because of lack of electricity. That means if we improve services at all levels, our people would benefit- (Interjections) Just a minute. Let me finish up.

Therefore, before I wind up, I urge Members to support this Bill because the moment we centralise, it is going to improve service delivery of our country. Thank you.

6.25
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am one of those who are yet to be convinced that we need an authority for laboratory services. I know it may be necessary but not urgent at this time.

There is no guarantee that we shall have improved health or laboratory services when we have an authority in place. What we need is to strengthen the current departments to recruit qualified staff, have a policy in place and allocate adequate resources to the department and the Ministry of Health in general.   

Many authorities were created but they are underfunded and they are unable to execute their mandates. Under the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have a number of authorities: Uganda Prisons Authority, Financial Intelligence Authority and Lotteries and Gaming Authority. Year in and out, they are under staffed and some of them are working below 30 per cent because they do not have enough resources. Every time, we raise this issue, there are no resources. When you go to the Committee on Budget, they do not have resources. I beg to submit. Thank you.       

6.27
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and minister for the submission. However, I would like to say that at this time, I am not in position to support this Bill.

I would also like to request the minister to give us an inventory of all the equipment that are out-dated, lacking maintenance, those that are new and do not have competent staff to operate in the health centres all over the country. In addition, the minister should come up with a strategy of how she will address this issue. 

I would like to move a motion without notice under Rule 58(c) of the Rules of Procedure. It reads, “any motion for the adjournment of a debate;” Demanding that the minister tables to this House an inventory of all the idle equipment; what is out-dated, especially the key equipment that is used in diagnosis of most of the diseases that we have, lacks maintenance, new equipment that does not have competent staff to operate it and a turnaround strategy on how the ministry will address this. I beg to move.

6.28
THE MINISTER FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, there has been a public outcry on the state of the health service in the country for some time now. How can you have sufficient health services without diagnostic services? We needed the diagnostic services yesterday. We know that in order to have sufficient services, you must diagnose the patient. Therefore, what kind of services are you giving him or her if there is no diagnosis?

It is important that we have an autonomous body that would be transparent in regulating and streamlining this sector. We have heard Members who have presented; they have made it very clear that the laboratories do not avail sufficient services. How will they avail them if they are not regulated? They are introducing a Bill to be able to streamline the services that we badly need in this country.

I, therefore, pray my honourable and respectable legislators that we support this Bill so that we have a body that would regulate, streamline and monitor the laboratory services. I wish to submit and support the Bill.

6.31
MR EMMANUEL KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I find it difficult to support this Bill because recently, we had a strike of doctors who asked for more pay. The problem is money; we do not have money and are trying to create a body that will even consume more money. Are we being realistic? Why can’t we have a unit within the Ministry of Health to go around and check on the laboratories? Do we need an authority to do it? 

THE SPEAKER: Are you speaking to the motion? 

MR KALULE: Due to that, I do support the proposal by hon. Nakate that we move a motion to ask the minister to justify the creation of such a body when we are so poor in this country and we cannot pay our doctors and nurses. We are now creating a body that will even consume more money. 

Let us put off this Bill, sort ourselves out and get the money. In the meantime, let us have a unit within the Ministry of Health to ensure that the laboratories are put in place; train the right people to man those laboratories without creating a body that will be of no use at this moment. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the motion has been moved on the Floor and we do not know the fate of that motion –

THE SPEAKER: You are interfering with my work and I am going to deal with that issue.  

MS CECILIA OGWA: Are we moving in support or against?            

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 31 Members have contributed to this debate. Those in favour of the Bill are seven while those against are 18. 

However, in the meantime hon. Nakate has moved a motion for adjournment of this debate so that we can interrogate the available services where this law would apply. 

Honourable members, I think one of the sectors that we have discussed frequently is the health sector. We have been complaining about the shortage of money available to it and services in hospitals. I would like to agree with hon. Lillian Nakate that we get an audit of the services available before we complete this Bill. (Applause)

I put the question that this debate be adjourned.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I agree with the reasons given by hon. Lillian Nakate that we should get a census.

6.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the Members for their contributions. This institution does not need any additional funding to have it in place. As I indicated, administratively, this institution was created and the central public health laboratory services already exists but it lacks a legal mandate to do what it would wish to do. We do not need any additional funding and we brought here the Certificate of Financial Implication and it already has a vote under the Ministry of Health.

The certificate of financial implications was very clear that all the costs, once this institution is established, will be covered under the existing funding. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think it is not the issue of the financial implications. The case raised by the Members is that you have nothing to govern, that this law has nothing to govern.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, I indicated that laboratory services in this country were established way back in the 1920s. Currently, we have over 3,500 laboratories but without any body to regulate and look at the standards. 

When we look at all health centre IIIs in this country, they all have laboratory services, all private clinics have laboratory services and it is for this reason that we need this body that will be able to supervise and come up with standards for these laboratories in this country. 

I want to plead with Members that this Bill should be supported if we are to have quality health care services in this country we need laboratory services, which must be regulated. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, why don’t we just adjourn the debate? We have not said we have rejected the Bill. Let us adjourn, get extra information and then complete it. That is all. We are not rejecting it. We are simply saying we stop for now, you give us the information and we shall complete it.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I would like to support your argument. I was a Minister of State for Primary Health care. The guidance I am seeking for, the object of the Bill- (Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have been sitting here for some time. Hon. Kakooza has not been around and he has not even been following what we have been discussing. Now, he is coming with ideas and he wants to take us back. Is he in order to take us back instead of waiting until tomorrow so you can tell him to stand up?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kakooza you were not here when we were debating. You have just come.  

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I listened in very attentively to all the Members. Respecting your dignified ruling and leadership on this, I also recognise that 99 per cent of colleagues that differed with the Bill had everything to do with the source of funding. I am just wondering with what we have been able to hear from the minister that this is not going to place another financial burden, whether there is a possibility of us proceeding with this Bill especially with now the knowledge that we have, that really this is not going to add another shoulder burden. 

Madam speaker, I have looked at the Bill and the reason I have kept in the House -

THE SPEAKER: Are you taking issue with my ruling? 

MR KATUSABE: No. 

THE SPEAKER: I said we adjourn the debate and then we shall continue.

MR KATUSABE: Much obliged.

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, we will go by your ruling and maybe in a month’s time or so, we shall be able to bring that report and then the House can make a decision.

THE SPEAKER: Therefore, the debate is deferred. Honourable members, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.41 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 8 February 2018.)
