

Wednesday, 26 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.57 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like, on your behalf, to congratulate Madam Anne Juuko who has been appointed the first female Chief Executive Officer of Stanbic Bank. That has never happened in the history of Uganda. I think that as we are about to celebrate Women’s Day, there is some progress, so we congratulate her and wish her well.

Honourable members, we shall be receiving Bishop Jjumba in the afternoon. He is coming here to celebrate Lenten with a high mass, which will take place at 5.00 p.m. in the Parliamentary Conference Hall. I just wanted to alert you that he will be coming, and we welcome him.

There are just a few matters of national concern. Hon. Sebaggala, two minutes.

3.00
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two issues of national concern. 

One, at the beginning of this year, I raised the issue of the land, which the Government promised, to house the headquarters of the Afreximbank. The Afreximbank is a developmental bank and the Government promised that they were going to be given land on which to construct their permanent headquarters in the best interest of all Ugandans.

I raised that issue because there were some contradictions and also conflict of interest in the companies that bid. When I raised it, one of the companies pulled out. That was not the only reason; even the money, which was being charged - the price at which that land was being sold - was exorbitantly high. 

Madam Speaker, you directed that we have more information from the Minister of Finance, Panning and Economic Development and see the way forward. We have learnt that when the other company pulled out, according to Red Pepper of Monday, a new twist came in. Instead of looking at the three remaining companies, they have gotten another company that never bid and when they advertised, it was among the bidding companies. 

I am questioning and wondering as to how Government property can be bought in a manner in which rules and laws of Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) are flouted. I raised this issue so that we can save taxpayers’ money. Right now, the land which they want to buy backdoor is being sold at US$ 7 million for two acres. It is opposite Nakasero Hospital. However, there was the other land, which was approximately four acres, being sold at US$ 8.5 million. 

We are reliably informed that the Government is also looking for land in Kampala to house Islamic banking. Indeed, in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they are looking for land where they are going to house Islamic banking. If the Government goes ahead to buy land at US$ 7 million and at the same time, they are looking for another two acres to buy land for Islamic banking, that would be a lot as far as taxpayers’ money is concerned, yet the other land could house both the Afreximbank and Islamic banking.

Madam Speaker, I request that you direct the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and update us about the progress. If Afreximbank is given that piece of land to construct its headquarters, it is going to be in the best interest of all Ugandans. The same applies to Islamic banking, since up to now many Ugandans are yearning to have Islamic banking products because you did very great work in ensuring that Members of Parliament pass an amendment to open doors for Islamic banking.

The second concern is that one week or two weeks ago, we heard that papers were being circulated around Kampala and many other surrounding areas with people moving from door to door pinning up these circulars on walls and trees. The heading of the circulated papers was “most wanted” and indeed, they listed about 15 Members of Parliament who are supposed to be killed as soon as possible. The names that were mentioned included hon. Allan Ssewanyana, hon. Robert Kyagulanyi, hon. Moses Kasibante, hon. Roland Mugume, hon. Latif Sebaggala, hon. Theodore Ssekikubo, hon. Francis Zaake, hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, Lord Mayor Erias Lukwago, hon. Medard Sseggona, hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa, hon. Betty Nambooze and hon. Janepher Egunyu.

Madam Speaker, these papers were circulated and they went viral on social media. What surprises us is that we have cameras in every corner but we have not got any information from the police as to how these papers were being circulated. I am aware that if these papers were saying anything ill against the Government, the circulators would have been caught with them red handed. 

The matter worsened when they went to particular individuals and said, “Latif Sebaggala, you are going to be killed in four days because you have four wives in various areas”. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, is it news to tell a Member of Parliament, more so the Parliamentary Imam, that you are going to be killed because you have four wives! I think these were malicious papers. My concern is that they were pinned all over and up to now, the Government has not come out to investigate the incident. I went to Kawempe Police Station and I opened a case but up to now, they have not handled this case –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give Latif Sebaggala is that during the registration of persons, we all provided our thumbprints. In modern technology, once you have provided a thumbprint and you touch just a single document and the security accesses it, they are able to trace the origin of the document.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, it is my humble appeal that we do not take these papers lightly. Some two years ago, we had a list where many senior citizens were mentioned. Out of the 13 people who were mentioned, seven were killed. We do not take these papers that are circulating lightly because it has ever happened. 

Madam Speaker, I wish that you could direct the Minister of Internal Affairs to get interested in this, so that they can investigate. We have even had videos where people have been recorded saying, “We attended meetings in order to plan to burn the city.” These videos have gone viral and the police have these videos but they have never taken interest in investigating the people who are making such allegations.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table these malicious papers that were circulated. In one of the papers, they say that I have four wives in various areas and they are threatening me with death. It is normal, and it is encouraged in Islam, to have more than two wives. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, I do not have any vacancy right now. I have filled all the four. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the next paper I am laying on the Table is a list of Members of Parliament who were mentioned. It says that they must be killed. I beg to lay these papers on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, I do not see the Minister of State for Internal Affairs, hon. Obiga Kania; he is the most regular person here. Let us hear from the minister on the issue of land.

3.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, as you know, Uganda was privileged to get an opportunity to host the Afreximbank here and we passed the Bill to that effect. The Afreximbank is going to build its branch here in Uganda. It will also build a centre and hotel. Therefore, they need a big piece of land. They also restricted us to having a piece of land especially in Nakasero and the surrounding areas.

In our system, we had a process to procure that piece of land. However, we have learnt that the prices which were quoted were, in our opinion, out of the way and we have halted the process. Therefore, we are not going to purchase that piece of land, which hon. Sebaggala has talked about. That is the information we have for this House.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, maybe you could tell us who is behind these manoeuvres. There was a manoeuvre in the other one, which they dropped, and now you are saying there is a new manoeuvre, which the Government has also halted. Really, who is this powerful person who is continuously trying to manipulate the funds of the country?

MR BAHATI: We have halted the process of purchasing that land and we are also investigating who is behind this. The information we received –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, we all know that once a bid is placed, the persons behind the bid are known. If it is a company, due diligence requires any prudent prospective buyer to investigate from the companies’ registry and find out the owners or the proprietors of the company. If it is an individual, the individual is known. Is it in order for the minister to avoid answering your question and instead tell Parliament “we are investigating the people behind”, when they actually know them?

THE SPEAKER: Minister, do you know them? (Laughter)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we have a procurement unit and therefore people in the procurement unit know them. We know who put in the bid and we know who evaluated the bid. However, I think what we are referring to is the manoeuvrability of this process, and that is what we cannot tell you right know. If hon. Sseggona has information, he can give it to the House. We are investigating to give you the right information.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, when they advertised and the four companies bid, there was a conflict of interest. I raised it here and you guided on it. That process is the one which the minister is saying was halted. Right now, a new company – Magric Uganda Limited, which has land opposite Nakasero Hospital, is the one they are pushing in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development without even going through our PPDA regulations. 

Let the minister be very clear because Ugandans need this Afreximbank. We should not stop any arrangement because of our personal interests. Because of conflict of interest, the land which was promised to the Prime Minister of India for the construction of the centre and a monument might also be cancelled. That is exactly what is happening with the Afreximbank.

THE SPEAKER: Doesn’t this Government have any land? Do we have to be buying every time and exorbitantly? Can’t we get land through the Uganda Land Commission?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, even what Sebaggala is referring to has been stopped. Therefore, there is no purchasing of land for Afreximbank until we review the process, including seeing whether we can get a piece of land from our own land bank to give the bank. 

We signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with them and they were strict on the area they would want to be located. We are now negotiating with them to see whether they can move out of Nakasero to another place where we can get a piece of land. That is part of the options but the most important point is that that process has now been stopped since there were many manoeuvres, including stealing titles from the land office. So, it was a bit complicated and we have stopped that. Thank you.

3.28
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi South County, Bukomansimbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Ssembabule-Villa Maria   Road, which is a stretch of 110 kilometres.

Last Sunday, residents of Kyakatebe, Bulalo, Buwanga and Bugomola in Butenga Subcounty staged a demonstration against the poor construction of a section of the road after Bukalasa Seminary, where there is a big swamp and a sharp corner. During the old days, when this road was still gravel, we used to have a bus stage around that corner. After the construction, the Chinese decided to block the access road to these neighbouring areas.

The other defect on that section is that one can use his or her finger to remove the tarmac, which was placed there. This shows that substandard work was done. At the section where this road joins the section going to Kalungu, to hon. Ssewungu’s place, the road was poorly done and it is very dangerous. It can actually cause accidents.

The last issue is about compensation. Although, the road is now close to 99 per cent completion, some of the residents that have been affected by the construction of this road have not yet been compensated. Therefore, I request the Ministry of Works and Transport and Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) to intervene and meet the residents to tell them why they have not been compensated.

The ministry should also address the issues on the road before the Chinese complete and handover the work that has been done. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not see the team from the Ministry of Works and Transport. – Who is there? There is no one; he left.

Honourable Members, the Minister of Works and Transport is directed to address the issue of the Project Affected Persons (PAP) on Ssembabule-Villa Maria Road and report to this House. The ministry should also address the issue of the substandard work on the road and the obstruction of other access roads connected to the Ssembabule-Villa Maria Road. They should report to us within a fortnight from today. 

3.31
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA	(DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on two matters of national importance that call for the attention of this House as well as responses from the specific ministers concerned.

The first matter relates to the new wave of murders by armed groups in uniform. Early this week, a one Rita Nabukenya was killed in Nakawa by a police patrol vehicle. Upon knocking her, while she was riding lawfully on a boda boda towards Kampala, they picked the young lady before she died. Instead of rushing her to hospital, they took her to Naguru Police Headquarters for some time and subsequently, proceeded to Mulago when she could not be resuscitated. She eventually died. 

The events that followed were punctuated with violence from the police firing tear gas canisters and live bullets on the people associated with burial. The police spent over two hours arguing with the mourners on where they should take the body. Whereas, the People Power movement, which she subscribed to, in agreement with the family, wanted to take the body to Kamwokya for viewing, the police dictated that the body must go straight to her father’s home. Eventually, the police had their way, only to beat up mourners later in the night.

Yesterday, as mourners were coming back from burial in Kiboga in Katera, people lined up along Hoima Road cheering hon. Robert Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, who was driving in the thick traffic of Nansana. The reaction by the police and Local Defence Units (LDUs) again was to fire live bullets that resulted into the death of a young man called Kyeyune, who was shot in the eye, which demonstrates that they were targeting to kill someone. Another young man was also shot in the palm and lost that part of his hand.

Madam Speaker, I think the genesis of this is the way police manage public gatherings. We passed a law here in 2015 called the Public Order Management Act, which has continued to be abused by the police. In their interpretation, it is about disallowing any public meeting, which is not of their choice.

Hon. Kyagulanyi has indicated that he intends to run for the presidency of this country. He, accordingly, wrote to the Electoral Commission as required by the Presidential Elections Act and notified them. He also complied with the Public Order Management Act, 2015 by writing to the police, notifying them and attaching a schedule.

The reaction of the police first is not to respond to the letter until the last hour, when they gave unimaginable conditions. One of such examples was the meeting that was supposed to be held in Gayaza. On Sunday night, for a meeting scheduled for Monday morning, the District Police Officer (DPC) invited hon. Kyagulanyi’s team and among the ridiculous demands by the police was that the organisers should provide –

    1. A traffic plan for people who are coming from different directions;
    2. Fire brigade services in the event of a fire;
    3. Sniffer dogs, as if they man the canine unit of the police. 

The following morning – First, the police had written to the proprietor of the venue, Gayaza Parish, and instructed them to withdraw the permission to hold the meeting there. The police issued guidelines, which contravene the Act by requiring venue or hotel operators, before offering their venues, to demand for police clearance. On the other hand, when you go to the police to notify them, the key demand they place is that you must have consent from the owner of the place. This defeats logic!

One of the demands they place is that if you are to hold a public meeting, it has to be inside a hall. We said that whereas the law does not require that, we agree. The latest was on Monday this week when we organised the meeting at Pope Paul Memorial Hotel, Ndeeba. It is fenced, outside the central business district and in a hall. We paid after the police had refused to respond to our letter and we took their consent and confirmation that we were cleared. It is not in the middle of any businesses because they said that we disrupt business.

The police never responded until Monday morning when they went and deployed. How can you deploy without notifying the person who wrote to you? When hon. Kyagulanyi proceeded to Ndeeba, the results were teargas, arresting and shooting.

Madam Speaker, I have raised this matter for the good of this country and to notify the public that if there is no need for this election, we should be informed accordingly. This Parliament made a law that a year to nomination, any aspirant is free to consult provided he notifies the Electoral Commission, local authorities and the local police.

Finally, the second matter, which is equally of great national importance, relates to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. Since Monday this week, the country has been reading, particularly from the New Vision newspaper, about a fight between two ministers - the one of agriculture and a minister of state. The fight is over 15 cows that are alleged to have been taken out of the breeding farm in Entebbe by hon. Bamulangaki Vincent Ssempijja, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.

For the information of my colleagues, this is a breeding place for stocking the country with high quality animals. I have visited this farm before and they cannot sell two cows to you because their argument is that this being high quality breeding, it is for all farmers in the country, so they would not disadvantage the rest by giving someone more than one.

The minister responsible for the docket walks into this place, removes 15 cows and takes them out, not for multiplication but for slaughtering. When he was asked, he said, “I had an occasion and a meeting organised to sensitise people on the achievements of the NRM so I needed cows to slaughter and this is not the only farm; I have done it before.” (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, this is in good spirit. At one time, the members of the NRM caucus had an argument on the issue of hoes and there were a lot of questions about those hoes. At the right time, I will lay on the Table a receipt of hoes meant for Kalungu from Government, which were sold. I bought one box from the marketer and kept it. This is the same minister.

One time, we got cows for Kalungu District meant to be given to people in our district. They were brought to the district headquarters but were given to different people or sold along the way. We have all those facts in Kalungu.

Regarding the issue of hoes, cows and the party that took place, I know that people ate 15 cows and the information is available in Kalungu District. I will bring that receipt and the box of hoes I bought from a hardware store and kept while waiting for other issues that would come up as we move ahead.

MR SSEGGONA: I am grateful for the information from the minister’s neighbourhood. It vindicates me even more. This seems to be a consistent and persistent practice. Njeru Stock Farm lost cows before losing the land. The cows, which were in Njeru Stock Farm, were alleged to have been driven out, again on the orders of another minister, Lt Col Bright Rwamirama. Immediately after taking the cows from the farm, the land disappeared. 

Madam Speaker, we had stock farms across the country; there was Rubona Stock Farm, which lost a lot of cattle during the war. Even after the war, they remembered the cows they had left in Rubona and went for them. We had farm institutes in this country, which are no longer functional - in Ntawo here in Mukono, Buyana Stock Farm, Kabanyoro and the former Njeru. We are moving from one crisis to another. How many crises are we going to manage and run as a country, especially those that could be avoided?

Madam Speaker, for the first matter I raised, my prayer is to have the minister responsible for internal affairs come here tomorrow and explain to the country why people continue losing their children. There are children that die in hospitals because drugs have been stolen but we cannot afford to lose more children because we are shooting them instead of protecting them.

My second prayer is for the two honourable ministers to come and explain the state of those farms, where they are taking cows. Also, somebody should explain to us which occasion has ever happened in this country where you slaughtered 15 cows and why you did not have a budget to buy from the markets - from Ssembabule and in particular Lwemiyaga where there is no quarantine. You could have bought from anywhere. What occasion is this that necessitated killing the best breeds we have in the country and you call Uganda an agricultural country? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, on the issue of the shootings, the Minister of Internal Affairs should come and explain to us why this is happening. However, one thing that is more disturbing is: I am beginning to wonder whether we shall have elections and whether candidates will campaign. Even stating that MPs cannot organise in their constituencies; who issues these instructions? I told you about the call I got from hon. Centenary on Friday; he said, “I am here but I am being told that I cannot invite people to speak.” Who is leading this campaign of madness? (Interruption)

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda): Madam Speaker, yesterday the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs met with the Electoral Commission and they told us that there are now 1.5 million elective positions in Uganda. The first batch of elections for the interest groups from village to national level is going to take place in April and nominations are starting in early April. 

I am a senior leader in the Forum for Democratic Change (FDC). Last time I went to Njeru, to a primary school, to discuss with the FDC leadership in Buikwe on how we will go through the candidate selection process. The police came and fired teargas in a facility where there were even children. We had to take off. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we would like to understand. We have elections starting in April. I have a duty, as an institution, to look for 1.5 candidates. You cannot allow me to have a small meeting in even a primary school or hotel. So, what do we do with these elections that you have announced and for which you have issued a roadmap?

MR GEOFFREY MACHO: Madam Speaker, it beats my understanding. The situation we are in makes the police make our people believe that we are not in charge of the country. The actions of the police bring a very bad image to the Government. I get disappointed sometimes that the actions of the police make the ruling regime appear very bad in the eyes of the citizens of this country.

I, therefore, would like to agree with my colleagues. I do not know why the police are panicking. I do not know what they are after. It looks like they are working harder for our party than ourselves, which we do not want it to seem in their eyes. They try to make situations that are small to be too big in the eyes of the people.

I keep on telling people that when the ex-President of Uganda People’s Congress, Amb. Olara Otunnu, wanted to move from Uganda House to demonstrate, the police left him and the next day, he was nothing in this country. Why do we see Kyagulanyi and begin panicking? Why do we see members of the Opposition and begin panicking? The police are really panicking and I see that this panicking is affecting the electoral process of this country.

They better leave the Electoral Commission to manage the electoral process of this country. I am saying they are panicking because we all know we have no opposition in this country. We have two DPs, two FDCs, two UPCs but they act as if there is something that is happening and Uganda is collapsing tomorrow. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, the police must be stopped. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think now this is a matter for the Government. The Prime Minister should come and authoritatively address this House. Are people allowed to campaign? Are people allowed to hold meetings? It seems the police are deploying themselves anyhow. This is not right. This is not good for democracy. We are debating with ourselves, honourable members.

MR PATRICK NSAMBA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Recently, my father had a thanksgiving ceremony. That old man was turning 77. He had gone through some treatment the previous year and he thought he needed some celebration. The old man went through an ordeal because the police determined his function not right. The old man had to keep waiting every other time until a Regional Police Commander (RPC) had to decide when he will have his function.

I first spoke to the RPC and he said, “No; you are against us.” I told the RPC that he is a police officer who is supposed to ensure that we have law and order in this country. I told him that his job is to ensure that the function runs properly. The RPC told me frankly, “I am here to ensure that our Government stays in power.”

Madam Speaker, to me, that was so unfortunate. We went and pleaded with this man to allow the function of the old man and it took place on the 31st. However, on that day, the RPC gave instructions that he does not want Members of Parliament at that function. I am a Member of Parliament and my friends and colleagues are Members of Parliament. They are the people I work with. 

The RPC told the DPC, “If I see any Member of Parliament at that function, I am going to close it” and it happened that way. When MPs arrived at the function, the great RPC gave an order to the DPC and the DPC came and told the people who came around for the function that everyone should go home. He told them, “We are either going to teargas you or we are going to shoot you live”. The DPC was on record. He claims he is protecting his job. He told us, “You people, I am protecting my job. Leave this place; I am protecting my job”. 

Madam Speaker, that is the kind of police that we have in this country. They have turned themselves into a regime protection force, which is really very unfortunate for many Ugandans who are living in this country. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: I have already given instructions to the Prime Minister to come and address the country on this issue.

MR SSEWUNGU: There is a small record here, Madam Speaker. There is a Uganda Police vehicle, UP 4841 - Honourable members, take interest and get the footage of those vehicles which follow people, including the one which knocked this young lady. If you look at the number plate, this police vehicle is common everywhere, carrying out these atrocities.

I would like to caution you, honourable members. If you are not following what is happening in your constituencies, it is going to be worse than what is happening to hon. Robert Kyagulanyi. Those interested in constituencies against each other will find a force from police to manage each of us, which is a threat. What will come out is going to be death.

Therefore, we must come out to fight this vice very seriously; otherwise, things are not good. It is not because nobody should contest against Ssewungu or Tom, but the effort and powers you have against police will determine what you will get through. I want to say this and it should be on record.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think my colleagues were faced with this problem and you never know who will be next. I will give you the example of hon. Asuman Basalirwa. He had a function and they had threatened to stop it. In fact, they communicated to him. Little did they know that the guest of honour was hon. Kivejinja. (Laughter) When they got to know who the guest of honour was, everybody withdrew. Maybe these are the tactics that we need to use. I will decide to call honourable Dr Chris Baryomunsi –(Laughter)– to my function, call the other Members and then we see how they are going to stop the minister.

However, on a serious note, I want to comment on the actions of the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in Entebbe. I do not know whether we need a committee of this House to take up this matter. There are people who even retired in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who were in charge of that facility. Two years down the road, they are still using the ministry vehicles. Four years down the road, they are still in Government houses. I think there is a mess that is going on. No wonder, the minister is also going there and picking cows. Madam Speaker, I think they have learnt from their senior. 

That is what is also happening in the National Animal Genetic Resource Centre and Databank (NAGRC&DB). It is supposed to be a place where we go to restock the whole nation. You are supposed to pick semen from there, not take the cows. Where will others who want to breed the exotic breeds pick from? It happened in Serere Research Station. That is why we do not have animal breeding in Serere Research Station. People carried the animals; they carried the bulls. 

Madam Speaker, we need something to be done. I do not know what –(Interruption)– 

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I remember when I was a member and vice-chairperson of the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, there was a petition concerning ranches in this country. The committee visited a number of ranches including the one in Busolwe. 

We observed a number of issues. We came across ranches were animals had not multiplied in over five years. The animal numbers were reducing. We came across ranches were records indicated that at the end of the year, towards Christmas, over 200 head of cattle would be sold at Shs 200,000 per head. The reasons were that some of the animals were malnourished and they could not support themselves to stand, yet they were in a ranch. 

The issue of ranches is actually bigger than we think. It is because all land belonging to ranches is parcelled out. Someone takes four square miles, another takes six square miles and another takes ten square miles. No single ranch is safe because all of them are in the same situation.

The committee presented a report and it was debated halfway. I think it is high time we extracted the recommendations of that committee because all we are talking about – this fight between the ministers - has been on. It is on record that hon. Ssempijja and hon. Joy Kabatsi in some meeting – actually, in one of the meetings in Hotel Africana, I had to sit between them. I think there are issues, which are beyond them. Maybe hon. Ssempijja as a person may not be the issue; there may be bigger issues especially as far as land belonging to ranches is concerned. 

I request that maybe at a certain time, Government should brief us on how far they have gone in implementing the recommendations and resolutions of this Parliament as far as ranches are concerned. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, maybe we need to get that report and we review the recommendations and then we set a timeframe for response by the Government. However, I would like to ask the two ministers to come to this House and explain the issue concerning where those animals went. These are public facilities. The impunity in this country – I do not know. It is growing.

3.51
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise appears in today’s New Vision newspaper, page 8. 

The newspaper says that Government has come up with new amendments on SGS’ mandatory vehicle inspection. When you read through, it is clearly mentioned that the Speaker of Parliament, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, and the entire Parliament came up with a resolution on the same. However, before even thinking of bringing the new amendments to Parliament, they are thinking of starting the implementation of motor vehicle inspection. They have even put up the fares. 

My concern and prayer is that the minister concerned first reports to Parliament because that was an issue that was well discussed here. Motor vehicle inspection had gaps. One of the issues was the 10 per cent, which was supposed to be paid to Government. By the time you sent that matter to the committee, not even a single coin had ever been banked on Uganda Revenue Authority’s account. 

I think the minister should come and tell this House before the new agreement –(Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: The information I would like to give hon. Johnson Muyanja is that this is not about motor vehicle inspection alone but there is also motor vehicle inspection at the port. The contract of the companies that were supposed to conduct that inspection has already expired and they continue to charge money from Ugandans for pre-shipment inspection, even without remitting to the Ugandan National Bureau of Standards.

The impunity thereof is that Ugandans continue to be ripped off as they import and yet the institution also intends to rip off Ugandans, even when cars are here. In any case, if we already know that the cars that we import are old, what is the use of that inspection?

THE SPEAKER: Are the Minister of Works and Transport or the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives here? Who is in charge?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, yesterday, I brought up this matter because what was on the Order Paper concerned the Minister of Works and Transport coming to make a statement. I remember the day we discussed those reports, the Attorney-General was supposed to come and explain what they have done regarding the contract. Secondly, the Minister of Works and Transport was supposed to come too because there were areas which were supposed to be handled by the minister, given what was raised in the minority and majority reports. 

We have been waiting for the Attorney-General to come to this House to report on how far they have gone with the issue of the contract and then we go on to other recommendations that involve disciplinary action against some officers in the Ministry of Works and Transport who had connived to work for the company. They went without any permission to South Africa and Europe with this team. I think the Attorney General should bring the report on how far they have gone with the amendment of the contract and then the Minister of Works and Transport should come to explain how far they have gone with the recommendations. 

We did not adopt the majority or the minority reports, although the minority report was popular. It was shelved at that time to let the Attorney-General go and come back before we could adopt the report. Therefore, both ministers should come here and explain what is going on, other than rushing to the Uganda Media Centre to make pronouncements. 

MR KATOTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. About the inspection of cars, 95 per cent of cars which come to Uganda are actually not inspected. I think it is a project of someone intended to swindle money from Ugandans. You just say I have these many cars and you give money. Sometimes, you do not even get a receipt but they just give you the inspection certificate. 

If you go to Tilbury, UK, for example, and you ring someone and tell them you want them to inspect your car because it is going to Uganda, the guy will just tell you, “Come to Manchester”. However, if you know the trick, you just remit the money and the car is given an inspection certificate.

Madam Speaker, the same applies to goods. If you buy cement in Dubai, for example, there is nowhere and no one who can qualify to test the cement of Dubai because it is of a high standard. However, when you reach here, they ask you for the inspection certificate. They will make you put the cement in the store until you pay. They will make you suffer.

As Parliament of Uganda, therefore, if it is possible, let us request the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to suspend whatever claims they have that they are inspecting goods coming to Uganda and we revise and maybe contract capable companies. For every good that comes to Uganda, it is the few that are endangered that are inspected. For others, we do not have any inspection abroad and even here in Uganda, we have minimal inspection. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I happened to lead a team, as former chairperson of committee on trade, to do an investigation on this particular matter. We made our findings and wrote a comprehensive report. Unfortunately, that report has not been presented on the Floor of Parliament because it touched on a lot of interests. When you touch on a lot of interests, they find a way of sabotaging. Unfortunately, my term of office expired before the report could be tabled. 

Madam Speaker, because this report is within the Parliament, I implore that we reproduce that report. The committee on trade should get that report and present it to the House for debate so that this House can get proper facts about all these issues, which are being talked about. That is my prayer.

THE SPEAKER: For the comfort of hon. Ruhunda, that report was presented here. We discussed it and the resolutions were adopted. Hon. Sebunya presented it.

Now on the other one, you will recall that about a fortnight ago, we had attempted to have that report done but the committee had gone to the east, so we did not complete it. Let us complete it but also, the two ministers should come and update us on what is going on because it has been a while now. That is what we are going to do as the ministers come, and we should also finish it. The Clerk will put it back on the Order Paper after these electoral laws and then we complete it together with uncompleted work and see how to move on those areas.

4.00
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, I was in the Butaleja District and I went to find out the progress of the voters’ register display. While moving around, I got some complaints from amongst the voters. One of them was that some voters’ names were appearing in subcounties and villages where they do not reside. That is already a mess, which the voters are complaining about.

Secondly, I also found out that some voters were declared dead when they are alive. One voter had come up to tell his relatives that he is going to contest for a certain position only to discover, when the voters’ register was displayed, that he was indicated as dead.

Members of Parliament should not take this for granted. Somebody can malice you while you are seated here. If you do not check on the voters’ register, you are likely to be declared dead when you are actually alive.

Madam Speaker, in today’s Daily Monitor, it has been reported that the Electoral Commission has already locked out one million voters who turned 18 years in December 2019. This means that many rights of Ugandans are infringed on. In addition, if somebody’s name appears in a village where you do not reside, I do not think there is anybody who will allow you to vote in that village. 

Therefore, I am calling upon the concerned ministry to investigate this matter and help our voters. My next prayer is for the Electoral Commission to correct the mess in the voters’ register so that voters are not denied their right to vote the leaders they desire. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should advise one another. There is a display now of the voters’ registers - Has it started? Let us not just sit in Kampala; let us organise our teams to crosscheck what is in the register well before time. Otherwise, you may find yourself not in the register.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is actually the Electoral Commission that is telling voters to identify dead people and announce them. By the way, under the law, it should be the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) to announce somebody dead and then the Electoral Commission would act on that. However, what the Electoral Commission is doing is to mobilise voters to point out dead people. When they get that information, they cancel out those registered voters, which I believe is wrong.

The minister responsible should prevail upon the Electoral Commission and help it understand the law. It can only be NIRA to inform the Electoral Commission of who is dead and who is alive. However, the Electoral Commission is requesting voters to tell them who are dead in their respective electoral areas.

MR PAUL MWIRU: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would seek your indulgence on this registration issue. Under the Registration of Persons Act, we gave powers to the Electoral Commission to seek for data from NIRA because under the Constitution, registration is supposed to be a continuous process. 

This morning, I learnt that the Electoral Commission, this time around, did not write to NIRA to ask them for the data of the people they had continuously been registering at the time they were displaying the register for update. This means that the people who registered with NIRA and did not go to the Electoral Commission to register when the Electoral Commission announced official registration do not appear on the displayed register. However, they had created an impression to the public that if you registered for the national ID, automatically the Electoral Commission will seek information from NIRA and you will find your name on the register.

Madam Speaker, I thought that this matter must be taken up very seriously because yesterday when we interacted –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, hon. Paul Mwiru, for giving way. Honourable colleagues, the information I would like to give hon. Mwiru and the House is that the law requires the Electoral Commission to maintain and update a voters’ register. 

In 2015, hon. Norbert Mao, the President of the Democratic Party, who had previously stood as President and therefore was in the voters’ register, went for nominations for Parliament and found that he was not in the register. Nobody informed the Electoral Commission that hon. Norbert Mao had either migrated from the country or died. However, they blamed him for not registering, yet their duty is to maintain the register. They can only remove those that have died or those that have since left the country. Therefore, the information is that the Electoral Commission does not keenly maintain a voters’ register but keeps changing it as and when convenience serves. 

In 2015, again, during the registration of persons, I went to register three times and whenever I would go back, they would tell me that they have lost information about me. I had to write a notice of intention to sue and indicate that I knew they intended to block me from standing - (Interjection)- I thought hon. Silwany knows who we speak through in Parliament. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I would implore and seek your indulgence that the minister responsible for the Electoral Commission discloses to this House how many people registered with NIRA from the time of the general election until the Electoral Commission closed the register. 

At least now we know that those who will be 18 at the time of voting in 2021 and were registered during this time of the Electoral Commission are 19,000. However, whoever registered during the continuous process did not find their names on the national register. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of voting is a public right. It is the responsibility of this House to protect the right of Ugandans to vote. Therefore, we need to find a solution for those children who are turning 18 and might be disenfranchised. I do not know whether our chairperson has anything to say on this matter.

Mr Andrew baryayanga: Madam Speaker, I need to be educated on how registration at times happens. In Kabale Municipality where I am going to contest from, there is an army General who also wants to contest. He has just returned from the army and what I have noticed is that he was ferrying trucks of soldiers, towards the end of last year, to register to vote from the municipality. How does it work? –(Interjections)– It is not only from Kabale but also Mbarara. He ferries them to come and vote from the municipality. I do not know how that works. I am not sacred that they will defeat me, but I do not know how that works.

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from our chairperson and then the minister.

4.09
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFIARS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, this is an indication that Members are alive to the process, the awareness about the voters’ register and the update.

I would like to correct an impression created earlier here that it is the duty of the Electoral Commission to look out for people to register them. The Electoral Commission, under the Electoral Commission Act, I think section 19, is to maintain a register of those who have registered. The matters of those like hon. Nobert Mao’s was one that was known, that he never took out time to register - (Interjections)- You could be a presidential candidate but what we heard from the previous election was that he did that after registering with NIRA. 

We used to have a voters’ register - (Interjections)- Madam Speaker, those who were raising the same matter are heckling behind me. After I have said this, they will again ask. The obligation is upon us, as the Member from Butaleja said, and as Madam Speaker rightly guided. 

We interacted with the Electoral Commission yesterday and they gave us their mandate. I think they are doing well but administratively, there could be some cases of missing names or wrong entries made. These are things that if Members are vigilant enough, they can raise with the Electoral Commission and it is made right. (Interjection) Hon Agaba was there yesterday and he wants to remind me. I will take the information.

Mr agaba: Thank you, Mr Chairperson, for giving way. Yesterday, while the committee interacted with the Electoral Commission, they were hesitant with regard to opening up further registration of Ugandans turning 18 despite the election being ahead of time.

Mr Chairperson, I thought that I should empower you with this. The Speaker has made a statement that we must find a way to see to it that our Ugandans are not disenfranchised and they miss to vote simply because they have turned 18 after the Electoral Commission has closed registration, even when 18 finds them in time for the election.

Mr oboth: If I could conclude – (Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson was still submitting. 

Mr okupa: The honourable chairperson should listen to us first. Thank you, Madam Speaker. They closed registration a year and a month to the voting day. I think that is where Members are having concerns. If it were three or four months to the voting, it would be understood because they would have to handle the administrative part of it. However, for the Electoral Commission to close when we are left with one year and a month is the problem. 

It is just like yesterday’s issue, which the chairperson was putting forward here. I do not know how we are planning to have nominations on the 7th and 8th yet on the 9th is Independence Day. I do not know how that was arrived at. 

These are some of the things, which need to be clarified and can cause confusion. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to caution the Electoral Commission to ensure that they are not violating the rights of the citizens. You remember last year when they attempted to do registration during the school term, some children went to court and got an injunction. This vote is not a joking matter. Chairperson, conclude then we hear from the minister.

Mr ssekikubo: Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: Are you sharing the platform?

Ms Florence kiyingi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are obliged as Parliament to maintain a true record of the Hansard. Hon. Sseggona talked about hon. Norbert Mao having missed on the voters’ register. However, from my own understanding, I believe he was missing a national identity card. Can he clarify to Parliament, for purposes of the Hansard, what the true position at that time was?

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, I can talk authoritatively as the Democratic Party Whip because he is my President. I think the honourable member who is raising this question never got details why the president was not allowed to contest. Among the issues was his name not being in the voters’ register. She was a member of Democratic Party but I do not know why she is forgetting so fast. Things are becoming very difficult on her side. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us address the issue of the children who might be disenfranchised. Forget the past.
 
4.15
The deputy attorney-general (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues have been raised regarding the Electoral Commission and the register. 

Yesterday, we met the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs with a team from the Electoral Commission. I remember clearly that an issue was raised as to why they should stop or close the registration exercise. The answer from the Electoral Commission was that it is not true that we are left with a year and a month to go. They were very clear and said that they are starting nomination this April for special interest groups. Therefore, the registration exercise cannot continue while nominations are also ongoing. It will distort the whole programme of the Electoral Commission.

A colleague raised an issue of someone whose name was listed as dead. I am meant to understand –(Interruption)– Remember this is my maiden speech –(Laughter)

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, I seek clarification from the Deputy Attorney-General. Each election has its own register. Therefore, the elections coming up for the interest groups have their own registers, like each election must. 

The clarification I am seeking is: what is the relationship between the special interest groups’ election register and the one for presidential and parliamentary elections? The Electoral Commission has now accepted to push the parliamentary nominations to October and elections are in January. General elections are not one single event. Each election has its own register. 

MR OKUPA: Additionally, the people in the electoral college for these groups, like the workers you are talking about, are people like hon. Hood Katuramu. They are not affected by those turning 18 or 19 years old. Therefore, you should differentiate that. When I talked about one year, I said so because they closed on 23 December last year and we are talking about the final elections. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what I can say is that this House will not associate itself with any attempts to disenfranchise Ugandans for flimsy reasons. Why don’t we use the national register? 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, when we were here last time, the question I posed was whether there was still need to hold the elections for special interest groups by starting their nomination cut-off way earlier. The reason was that since they are part of the entire electorate, let us also elect them during those dates when we are all certain that the entire register has been fully concluded. 

In any case, as a win-win situation, we can say at least 30, days because things are now electronic. You compare the data with the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA), pick up that data and maintain it. If you say there are people that will turn 18 so that they can participate in elections of the youth, then you will disenfranchise them when they turn 18 in January of 2021. We can understand the predicament that you have but can’t you manoeuvre to see that we at least get a win-win situation? Let us see to it that we update the register until at least two or three months to the general election date. 

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I do not wish to prolong the ping pong on this but allow me state this; assuming a disabled person is turning 18 this April and that person is entitled to vote and the Electoral Commission says they are closing registration because they want to do nominations for special interest groups. If you continuously keep registering, it means those who will have turned 18 immediately after nomination will be disenfranchised. It means you will alter the cycle or the timetable of the Electoral Commission or the whole electoral process. 

Madam Speaker, allow me answer a colleague who talked about someone whose name was found among the dead on the register. I am made to understand that the display exercise is for 21 days. After that, a tribunal is supposed to sit to correct the mistakes within the next 10 days. I believe that mistake, if it exists, will be corrected. 

I do understand that a number of issues have been raised regarding the Electoral Commission and I cannot say that I am able to exhaustively answer them now. I humbly request that you give my senior colleagues and me time. We shall consult with the Electoral Commission and see how to ably answer those queries. Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I appreciate and we agree, but I still want us to solve the issue of the 18-year-olds. I think we should have a think tank.

MR OBOTH: Yes, the Electoral Commission came to us and we were with the minister and the Attorney-General. I thought he would bring it on record. The Electoral Commission clearly stated that the way they are using - the law, as it is, makes it very difficult for them. From 1996 up to date, they do not have regulations. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has not been privileged, from 1996 when the presidential and parliamentary laws were made, to make regulations. The two ministers that were there made a commitment and I wanted them to commit now. 

The Electoral Commission stated that if they had the regulations, matters of registration - when it stops or begins - would have been matters that would have been administratively handled. However, now, it will be very difficult. Let the Attorney-General come and confirm that they made commitments to make these regulations and we conclude this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Will the regulations work for this election or will it be for the future?

MR OBOTH: The commitment they made would work. If the Electoral Commission had the electorate – (Interruption) 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, before the learned Attorney-General comes in to respond, and of course with due respect to the chairperson of my committee, I would like to say something. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, are we aware of the magnitude of this problem? How many people have turned 18 and are being disenfranchised? Can we sit here and say we are representatives of the people and over a million voters, who are entitled to vote, are being left out? 

The Electoral Commission does not have the discretion to allow people to vote or not. It is a constitutional command –(Interruption) 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. I am seeking clarification. I would like to know, probably from the honourable colleague that has given way or the ministry, whether they had budgeted for this registration and all the other financial implications related to this. When we go into that, maybe it will not affect the financial part of it. I would like to know if we have money to do that at this time. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, no amount of financial implication should disenfranchise two million Ugandans. It is out of question. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is where the problem is, colleagues. The people who have turned 18 years from last December are actually known. All their data is known and it is with NIRA. The people who will have turned 18 by the time of the general election are actually known. The NIRA Act gives the Electoral Commission powers to extract that data from the NIRA databank. Therefore, it is not that we are moving into the unknown, Madam Speaker. One million people can actually swing an election. 

The law is very clear when we talk about – (Interruption)

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Picking from what hon. Katuntu is presenting, I chaired some of the budget sessions for National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA) and you find that there was some money, which was allocated to NIRA, to handle the learners’ project and it was allocated by this Parliament. All that data is there and is available. 

Recently, when we were looking at the Budget Framework Paper, there was a request for some monies for the electioneering of the people of Uganda. The Electoral Commission just needs to have an interface with NIRA so that they can pick that data and print out voters’ cards for Ugandans.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, colleague. First of all, even the Chairman of the Electoral Commission sits on the board of NIRA. The reason is because those two institutions should be working together. Legally, there is no reason why we should sit here and say one million people are not going to vote and we say we are Members of Parliament. It is illegal and immoral. You cannot sit and disenfranchise over a million voters, nobody has a right. We are talking about the people – (Interjection) – Colleague, I would have allowed but let me make my point. 

This country belongs more to the young people than to some of us who have already hit retirement age and we are running down to our graves. Instead, we are the ones sitting here to disenfranchise the future of this country; it is not correct. The Electoral Commission must address this problem because the law is not on their side.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, our position as a House is clear; we shall not be party to any attempt to disenfranchise Ugandans even if they are 10. Therefore, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney-General, Electoral Commission and NIRA board should meet on this matter. When we were enacting that law, it took us so much time and we built in this because we wanted NIRA to feed the Electoral Commission. So, there is no excuse, the raw material is there and it is just for extracting. So, I want a report next Tuesday on this matter and you must meet between now and next Tuesday. 

4.30
MR AGABA ABBAS (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of urgent national importance I am raising is that while death occurred of our own Nabukenya in Kampala, death equally occurred of one Jackson Tugumesirize in Kayabeshire but of a different cause. He was mauled by an elephant and his colleague is admitted in Kyabiga Hospital nursing great injuries because he was equally mauled by an elephant.

Elephants have invaded my constituency and are terrorising the areas that border the national park. Earlier on, I think that the beasts had created a balance so that they would intrude into Rubirizi and also Kitagwenda. However, recently, Uganda Wildlife Authority and Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities laid a mesh fence along the border of Rubirizi with the park. They laid the fence up to a place called Kakari and that is where Rubirizi borders with Kitagwenda and they ended there. 

The pathways of the elephants on the other side were closed so they all come into my constituency. The border communities have been terrorised and people are not sleeping in their houses because the beasts are moving in herds of 30 or 40. We had a burial on Sunday but we buried in a hurry; on tenterhooks, not because the dead had died of deadly diseases but because we were insecure not knowing the time the beasts would come back.

Madam Speaker, UWA has not been as useful because they have failed to have the elephants back into the park for the last two weeks. Crops have been destroyed except for coffee, cassava and bananas. All crops have been finished by the elephants meaning we shall not have anything to harvest this season. 

My prayers are:

    1. UWA under the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities is called upon to immediately have the elephants back into the park.
    2. The mesh fence that has been placed up to Kakari is extended to cover the side of Kitagwenda to ensure the security of our people.
    3. Relief should be found for our people now that it is glaring that all the crops that had been planted this season, they will have no harvest. 

Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is similar to the issue raised by hon. Jalia Bintu earlier last week on the same issue and the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities has not yet come to speak to us on that incident. Nevertheless, we direct that he also takes up the complaints raised by hon. Agaba Abbas but to also come and brief us because either the Wildlife Act is not working or nobody is implementing it, I do not know. The Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities should come and update us on Thursday next week on these issues.  

Honourable members, join me in welcoming a delegation of Rt Rev. Serverus Jjumba, Bishop of Masaka Diocese. He is here today to celebrate Ash Wednesday to start the lent season. He is accompanied by Monsignor Dominic Ssengooba, the Vicar General and Rev. Sister Maria Proscovia Nassejje of Masaka Diocese. 

The delegation consists: 

    1. Rev. Fr John Baptist Kintu. 
    2. Rev. Fr George William Lubega
    3. Rev. Fr Peter Paul Ssemakula
    4. Rev. Fr Francis Mugerwa, and
    5. Rev. Fr Expedito Kitto. 

They are represented by His Excellency, Edward Ssekandi, the Vice President, hon. Mathias Mpuuga, hon. Mary Babirye and hon. Florence Namayanja. You are welcome, Your Grace. (Applause) Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE PROGRESS OF CONSTRUCTION WORKS IN SEED SCHOOLS IN THE COUNTRY

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr Chrysostom Muyingo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the amended statement about the progress of construction works in seed secondary schools in the country. You will all recall that yesterday Tuesday, 25 February 2020 I made a statement to this august House on the status of implementation of Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers programme (UgIFT). 

Following my statement, the august House requested me to provide a progress report detailing the status of construction of seed secondary schools under phase I of the programme. Colleagues, the report that was requested for is available on your iPads. However, before I submit it, I wish to point out that the report is for all the 117 seed secondary schools under Phase I of the programme and it contains the following information: 

    1. School name; 
    2. Contractor;
    3. Contract sum;
    4. Implementation status as at 31 December, 2019, and
    5. The payment that has been made to the contractors as you requested yesterday.

Madam Speaker, I wish to further inform you that most of the contractors have performed to our expectations. The success stories include Visvar Investments Ltd, which is implementing works for Seed Secondary Schools in Buwenge Town Council, Kamuli, Luuka, Buyende and Kaliro districts. Most of the facilities are already at roofing stage. 

Madam Speaker, Egiss Engineering Contractors, which is implementing works in the districts of Mayuge, Namayingo, Namutumba, Bugweri and Iganga, is also performing well and works are at roofing stage. These are only a few examples where works are progressing as planned.

However, a few of the contractors are not performing to our expectations. An example is Davrich Company (U) Ltd, which was contracted to implement works for Seed Secondary Schools in the districts of Amuru, Nwoya, Gulu and Omoro. 

It is worth noting that implementation of this programme is fully decentralised. The ministry plays a supporting role and our ability to intervene is limited. It is, therefore, important for all stakeholders, including Members of Parliament, to follow up on individual projects in their constituencies. 

Madam Speaker, I am now laying this report on the Table for consideration. I have also attached the list of seed secondary schools to be constructed under phase I and phase II respectively. Annex I shows the classroom blocks, administrative blocks, science blocks, etc. Annex 2 shows the photographs of quite a number of these construction projects. Annex 3 shows how much money has been given to each of the contractors.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether I should go through the whole document. I would like to lay the document on the Table because everybody has it on their iPad.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are my very good friend but I think you have forgotten that I represent Kamuli. You have reported that schools in Kamuli are at roofing stage, yet they have not been constructed. What you have been told is not true. Visvar is the company which has projects in eight districts. It is also not true that the project is decentralised. Choices are made from here in Kampala. The contracts are made in Kampala.

Minister, I do not want to embarrass you. You are my friend. (Laughter)

MR KISA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to seek a clarification from the minister. Recently, I had a function in Kamuli and I was surprised that one of the schools in Kamuli called Kitayunjwa Seed Secondary School in Bugabula South is in a wooden structure. I even asked the Member of Parliament for Bugabula South, hon. Henry Kibalya, whether it was a seed secondary school being constructed by Government. 

I would also like to add information that what the minister is saying is not correct. I would like to give another example from Luuka. One year ago, we were given a seed school in Ikumbya. They told us the school would be completed in six months. However, up to now the school is not even at roofing level. Therefore, the information the minister is giving is not updated. 

Madam Speaker, the minister is also talking about first phase and second phase. I am on the Committee on Education and Sports. This money which, he said was granted, was supposed to be used in the second phase, after completing the seed secondary schools which he said are under construction. The project has a time framework. The minister is talking about the first schools being at roofing level yet they are not even half way constructed.

As you have mentioned, Madam Speaker, one company is working in the whole of Busoga region, not just eight districts. How do you think that one company can construct all the seed schools in the whole region of Busoga?

THE SPEAKER: They are working even beyond Busoga. The same company is in Tororo. 

MS OPENDI: Madam Speaker, each of us here has either a constituency or district where we come from. Definitely, this subject matter is of interest to each of us. Since the minister had a report to present, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to lay the report on Table so that members can look through it and maybe in the course of next week we could get back to this?

Madam Speaker, I was saying that the minister wanted to lay the report on the Table and I was suggesting that we allow him to lay the report. We could give ourselves time to look through and maybe in the course of next week we could come up –

THE SPEAKER: I thought he laid it. Didn’t he lay it?

MS OPENDI: No, he hadn’t, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: He laid it. It is also on our iPads.

MR AGABA: Madam Speaker, no sooner had the minister laid the report on the Table than you candidly spotted for him loopholes in the report. Shall we be proceeding right if we let the minister lay on Table a report that glaringly has loopholes? Isn’t it better if we help him with further inquiries so that he can go and make a better report that he can bring for us to discuss? Thank you.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to bring to the attention of this House that there is a clique of few monopolists who have formed companies and they want to take the monopoly of Government business. The issue of the school construction is part of that problem, where one company is given very many schools in different districts which they cannot manage.

Madam Speaker, we have heard complaints from the LC5 chairpersons. They have lodged their complaints that there is a deliberate recentralisation, where all their powers to have them directly involved in the construction, supervision and decision of the procurement of these companies to have a say - 

This issue is not only about the Ministry of Education and Sports; it has gone even to the Ministry of Health. In the health ministry, we have the same problems relating to construction of health units. We also have problems in the roads sector. When we talk about the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) roads, you find one company being given different municipalities. This is all causing a mess –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: The information I would like to give the member is that I was privy to some of those matters to do with procurement of construction of seed schools. First, although the procuring entities were the respective districts, the role of procurement was subsequently hijacked by the procurement officer in the Ministry of Education and Sports. What they do is to knock out particular companies that they think do not give them their due share. 

Subsequently, the procurement officer in the Ministry of Education and Sports collude with Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority (PPDA) so that even if you have lost on technicality, you will not get justice in PPDA. They make sure you do not get any information, and by the time things have gone, you have no remedy whatsoever. That is the information I would like to give you.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, you can see that the problem is beyond what we are seeing and yet, the minister is helpless. Otherwise, the minister is being given wrong information by these technocrats who are taking advantage of him –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Where is the point of order coming from? Honourable minister, in January, when we gave this instruction, it followed report from three districts. They have here with pictures and showed us that the schools only had foundations. We said the minister should report on all the seed schools, giving details of the name of the schools, name of the contractor and status of each school. That is what we wanted.

Honourable minister, when you bring and tell me that Kamuli is roofing, I know. It is not only happening in Kamuli. I am sure it is happening in Buwenge. Honourable minister, the information you brought is not what we wanted. We still want the name of the school, name of the contractor and the status. 

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the minister could also add one item. When these contractors are clustered, they also subcontract. When they subcontract, they give peanuts of the huge sum of money to those subcontractors. That is the main problem why these seed schools are not progressing well. I think the ministry should find out the subcontractors and come up with that list. Thank you.

4.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am not aware that this particular programme is decentralised fully. (Applause)

We have had petitions from local government leaders about this particular programme. Like colleagues noted, you find many contracts given to one contractor, which has caused delay. If the minister insists that it is fully decentralised, I will request him as my good friend, to put in writing to the Ministry of Local Government -(Applause)– so that we can fully monitor the local governments and encourage them to take charge. Otherwise, we are at a standstill. Some of the local governments are even denied to access the sites, where the construction is done.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is a big document. Can members study it so that they can check their constituencies and we have a debate at a later stage?

Honourable minister, I want you to send someone to Kamuli, specifically to a village called Nakimegere; there is nothing there.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am sorry if I have not provided what Parliament wanted.

Madam Speaker, as you have said, let us have more time to study the report and come back here to discuss it. However, I would like to make some two clarifications.

It is true, one contractor was given more than one site. Of course, we have realised the weakness and we are putting them right -(Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Please allow the minister to talk.

DR MUYINGO: We are putting right whatever went wrong, when it comes to implementation of phase two. We have learnt quite a number of lessons.
The other clarification I would like to make is that this project is being jointly run by the Ministry of Local Government and my ministry. When it came to procurement, it was a team. In fact, it is the accounting officer of the local government of the districts who give out the contracts -(Interjections)- I pray that you give me time to come back with a – (Interruption)

MR WALYOMU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on point of order. The honourable minister is giving wrong information. 
In the primary schools, the districts are not involved in the procurement process. I have two schools that were given grants; Bulugu and Idoome primary schools. When people started misusing the resources, I had to intervene.

When I went to the district, they told me that everything was being done by the ministry and that they were not concerned. This is happening at primary schools. Madam Speaker, I consulted one of the commissioners but he told me that unless I do not want the project. He said they were handling everything.

When you come to the seed schools, they are also constructed by the ministry not the districts. Therefore, is the minister in order to deceive this august House that procurement is being done by the Chief Accounting Officer (CAO) at the districts?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you need to substantiate.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I made it clear that procurement was a joint activity. The accounting officer signs these contracts; he pays the money out. In fact, the district engineer is supposed to be the head of the supervisory team of the district not the ministry. The ministry only supports them.

MR ABALA: Madam Speaker, I do not know about Busoga but for us the selection exercise was in Gulu. Ngora, Kumi, Bukedea and all the districts in Teso had to go to Gulu and yet we have district headquarters.

How come they had to go to Gulu and yet they had district headquarters where the activities were supposed to be done? Minister, why did you decide to take the selection exercise to northern Uganda? I do not know what happened in other sub-regions but I am aware of Teso and northern Uganda. Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, there is quite a lot of information I have to give to my colleagues. The selection of the location of where the school is going to be was all determined by the district councils. 

When it came to procurement, all these stakeholders who had the responsibility were put in regions. That is why northern region was put in Gulu but the idea was to bring them together and agree on something that would enable us implement this. Otherwise, each district council had to determine the location - (Interruption)

MR BYARUGABA: Madam Speaker, I have been itching to say this; I know for sure that Uganda is decentralised, not at the regional level but at a local Government level that is the district and sub-county. Are we honestly proceeding correctly by consistently listening to plethora of lies from my senior colleague, even after having been assisted by a colleague, the honourable Minister of Local Government that the whole process of procurement is not fully decentralised?

My problem is that you insist on using the word “fully” decentralised when it is not. If that was the case, did all the procurement officers from the same region agree on one contractor? Why can’t we use a little common sense? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we should defer comment on this matter; it is raising tempers because of the apparent procedural defects in the process.

First of all, Gulu cannot be the headquarters of the east and the north. There is no structure in the Government that puts Gulu as the head of all these other districts, including the east. The fact that you could summon people to go to Gulu-

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I think this is a very simple equation; if what the minister was saying is factual and I am tempted to believe him, would it not be procedurally right that he lays on the Table samples of the documents in issue, if you are talking about these contracts being awarded by local governments?

It is very simple to get us copies of those contracts you are talking about. It may be very difficult and that is why we decentralised, even when I am a federalist; that things for Karamoja cannot be procured from the centre here.

For the minister to convince this House, would it not be procedurally right that he brings samples of those contracts, lays them here and sort this out? I do not know why he is over burdening himself on this; if what he said is factual, as I believe him because my constituency is a beneficiary at least to the extent of one school - 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Education and Sports ad we have handled some other Government projects, including the ADB and I have seen local governments handling part of the project.

The reasoning is that there is no way the Ministry of Education and Sports would determine a contractor in Masindi and when it came to ADB you would find districts procuring contractors.

When the minister mentioned it, I eventually wondered when the minister in charge of Local Government would come and now it has become contentious. The committee has some good information about other projects apart from these seed schools where the two ministries have been handling them jointly.

I did not rise on a procedural issue but is it not procedurally right that this matter is referred to the committee to study the report, oversee the project and then come up with a report? Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like us to take your guidance; give me more time and I come back next week.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. He does not need a lot of time as the reports are very clear. There is internal audit and work plans, which determine how you come and get money and the work plan will say, “These are the activities to be done, this is what we have done; this is the variance” and the correct direction you have taken.

Madam Speaker, he wants to dodge. I would propose that he geos and brings everything he wants to bring tomorrow and he talks on it. We have our iPads even these phones nowadays - If he decided he can put all these reports right now, let him drop them now and we study tonight and tomorrow we shall discuss.

The issue of schools is very serious. Recently I was in Bulambuli. The school, which was being constructed - the engineer and even the porter are not from the area and they said that this school was contracted by the Ministry of Education and Sports.

They said that they beat up the sub-county chief the day he went there; so what you are saying is very dangerous and you have your children going to good schools –(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, hon. Nandala. Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is, after all the poor performance of service delivery, particularly regarding some aspects of decentralisation, is it mandatory that the Ministry of Education and Sports should be implementing such a well-conceived project through some of these structures in local Government, where we know we decentralised corruption? Is it mandatory that a contractor must come from a particular district or local area for them to do very good work?

We have had experiences. We saw the School Facility Grants. We saw how health centres have been constructed and the poor quality of work. I have seen a seed school in my constituency and the quality of work. Apart from being off schedule, the quality is very impressive and I think we are going to get value for money.

Should we really be sticking to all the corruption that is attributed to decentralisation or we first fix it before we emphasise the need to go that route? I thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my brother for the point of clarification. I am sure you have ever built a house. If your house was built by a Government official, it would be ten times more expensive. Do not see that seed school and say it is a good one. You do not know how much they have eaten. I want to tell you that.

By the way, if you are saying that those villagers are thieves, they steal little. These ones steal big. (Laughter) I can tell you that those who steal little can leave something for the people. 

I would like to state this. The problem we are having in the education sector is that there are people who are running the sector but who want other areas to go down while theirs go up. It is a serious matter. When Gandhi was asked what he would do for India, he said “education”. They asked him three things. He said “education, education, education”. When asked him, he said for a country to develop, you need to have people educated.

Our schools in the north and east were the last.

THE SPEAKER: Finally, hon. Odur quickly. We need to close this matter. 

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You had guided very well that we look into these documents and verify the facts on the ground and come back. There are certain facts that the minister presented and I would like to confirm that in Lira District, it is the district local Government that advertised for the procurement of that contract for the seed school in Lira.

What happened is that there is a new procurement method that Government has been trying. First, they started with the Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development (USMID) project. Under the USMID project, they wanted to award several contracts to one contractor, so that they can attract the best because the big companies were running away. They were saying they cannot go and do only one school. That one fatally failed but the Ministry of Education and Sports did the same thing again.

The reason why they invited all the accounting officers is because they had regionalised the procurement. For Lira District, they sent the money even to the district local government for the construction, one week to the end of the financial year. The ministry requested them that they should write and send the money back and after, they will send it back in the new financial year, which they did.

So, Lira District had to send back Shs 723 million for the first phase. When this financial year opened, they now sent it back for the continuation of the project. 

Therefore, what the minister is saying is actually true but there is a bigger problem within the Ministry of Education and Sports. I actually did my graduate research on procurement of contracts for Government-aided schools. 

I think that the guidance that you have provided that we go and verify and come back and debate with this minister would provide the best alternative. We are going to verify the facts and then come back and engage. I thought I should submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to pay attention to:

    1. The amended statement by the minister - a small document;
    2. Implementation status report for December 2019 of the 117 schools and 
    3. The detailed Site Matrix Reports.

If you can study these, check your district status and then we can have a debate after we are complete with the electoral Bills. Go and do your research. Thank you.

DR MUYINGO: Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on Table the documents. I beg to lay the construction of 117 seed secondary schools document. I also would like to lay the Uganda Inter-Governmental Fiscal Transfers (UgIFT) Phase Two beneficiary sub-counties and schools and also phase one of the schools under construction.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do those correspond to what you have uploaded? Is that what you have uploaded? Honourable members, study those documents and we shall invite you for the debate.

MINISTERIAL WEEKLY REPORT ON MITIGATION OF THE INVASION OF EASTERN AND NORTHERN UGANDA BY DESERT LOCUSTS

5.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to present to you a brief on desert locust control operations in Eastern Uganda.

As you are aware, desert locusts – a species known as Schistocerca gregaria – invaded Uganda on 9 February 2020 through Kalita and Loroo Sub-Counties in Amudat District. This brief presents an update on the status of the control desert locusts’ invasion in the six sub-regions of Uganda and so far carried out by the Government to control the locusts’ invasion.

The desert locust horde have since spread to 25 districts in Karamoja, Teso, Lango, Acholi, Sebei and Bugisu sub-regions. The affected districts - as of two days ago – include Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Nabilatuk, Moroto, Kotido, Kaabong, Karenga, Abim, Otuke, Napak, Katakwi, Amuria, Soroti, Ngora, Kumi, Bukwo, Kween, Agago, Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader, Bulambuli, Bukedea, Serere and Kaberamaido.

The locusts are currently laying countless eggs that are expected to hatch within weeks if the conditions are conducive, raising concerns among farmers that the worst is yet to come. The outbreaks are likely to disrupt the planting of crops in the coming sowing season.

Madam Speaker, the purpose of this brief is to – 

    i) appraise Parliament on the status of the desert locusts’ invasion and outbreak in the country, which have already spread to 25 districts in the sub-regions of Karamoja, Teso, Acholi, Lango, Sebei and Bugisu;
    ii) update Parliament on the current interventions being undertaken by Government, in collaboration with key stakeholders and the challenges encountered to date.

The interventions of Government 

Colleagues are informed that a number of interventions continue to be undertaken by Government, in collaboration with relevant stakeholders, to minimise the impact of desert locusts on food security and livelihoods of the communities.

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, with support of Desert Locust Organisation for Eastern Africa and the Food and Agriculture Organisation embarked on massive trainings of agricultural extension officers, district entomologists from the affected and neighbouring districts on surveillance, reporting and control of the desert locusts.

The district leadership including the Resident District Commissioners, LC5 Chairpersons, Chief Administrative Officers, District Internal Security Officers and District Production Officers have also been sensitised on the control measures and their roles in combating the pests. 

An inter-ministerial committee chaired by the Prime Minister has been established to coordinate the locusts’ invasion and outbreak response. Several technical subcommittees have also been established to support the inter-ministerial committee. The subcommittees include:

    1. The Chemical Subcommittee, which is responsible for guiding on the pesticides and equipment to be used. It is headed by the Director-General of the National Agricultural Research Organisation.
    2. Logistics and Procurement Subcommittee, which is in charge of procurement and logistics. 
    3. Surveillance and Mapping Subcommittee, which is responsible for identifying and mapping areas where the locusts have laid eggs.
    4. Training Subcommittee, which is responsible for training actors particularly the UPDF on the safe usage of pesticides, protective gears and pumps for spraying using the standard operating procedures for ground spraying. It also handles training of the local leadership in identification of locusts, reporting using the developed tools and on the use of the equipment mentioned above. 
    5. Awareness/Public Relations Subcommittee, which is responsible for creating awareness amongst the general public on the desert locusts. The subcommittee uses both print and electronic media to create awareness.

Madam Speaker, similar subcommittees, which include the field staff and the UPDF, have been replicated in the field to perform the above operation. The surveillance team from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and affected district local governments have continued to work closely with the UPDF to assess and map out the areas where the swarms settled and might have laid eggs. These maps shall facilitate the planning of aerial control of nymphs and immature locusts, which is expected to take place when the conditions are conducive anytime from the time the swarms invaded these areas. 

Government has dispatched an assortment of pesticides, spray pumps both motorised and knapsack and protective gear to the affected district local governments and ground control operations have been conducted in all the affected districts to minimise the spread of the mature egg laying desert locusts.

Awareness creation teams from the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries have joined their colleagues in affected district local governments and continue to sensitise and create awareness among the communities in all the affected and neighbouring districts.

Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries’ technical team with support of a national consultant and in collaboration with experts from Desert Locust Control Organisation for Eastern Africa, Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations and the National Agriculture Research Organisation are on the ground in the affected district local governments training extension workers, district leaders and other stakeholders on the management of desert locusts. The same teams have also trained the UPDF and staff of the Uganda Wildlife Authority on safe use and handling of the pesticide's equipment.

An aircraft from the Desert Locust Control Operational Base has been deployed in Moroto - Karamoja sub-region to conduct transboundary aerial spraying/control to suppress the potential of invading swarms from Turkana area, Kenya into the country. The contract for hiring a second aircraft has been signed and is awaiting the 10,000 litres of pesticide to be delivered by Twiga Kenya Limited in the next couple of days from now.

Technical leadership has been established and strengthened on the ground to streamline communication, chain of command and strengthen linkage with the National Coordination Committee.

Madam Speaker, the challenges encountered to date include:

The recommended and specialised pesticide formulation for aerial spraying manufactured by Sumitomo, Japan, a chemical known as Fenitrothion 96 per cent, which is Ultra-low volume formulation, is not readily available due to the overwhelming demand arising from the current wave of desert locust outbreaks across the East African Region and beyond. This has caused a delay in the delivery of the chemicals by their representative, Twiga Chemicals, thus negatively impacting on the regional control efforts.

The desert locusts control efforts are multi-disciplinary and requires the active participation and involvement of many stakeholders. A lot of resources are, therefore, required for example to provide logistical support to all affected district local governments for surveillance, reporting, awareness creation and support control efforts. 

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, I request you, my colleagues, to-

    1. note the status of the desert locusts outbreak in the country, which has spread to about 25 districts in Karamoja, Teso, Acholi, Lango, Sebbei and Bugisu sub-regions;
    2. note the interventions undertaken by Government in collaboration with key stakeholders and the challenges encountered to date.

I beg to submit. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, as you recall, we had agreed that the minister gives us a weekly update, which he has done. We have debated many times. Unless there is something just to –

5.23
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, first of all, I thank the minister for the updates. This is okay. My only worry now is that, as we said last time, the minister has not told us whether those areas where the locusts have been laying their eggs - the minister has also not told us the efforts in spraying. I am talking about Ngora because I am from there. He has not told us about that specifically. 

Secondly, the minister is telling us that the chemical of 96 per cent would be a fair one. Unfortunately, that chemical cannot be found in any market because he said it is made in Japan. I am worried about the impact of this chemical on the environment. I would like him to help us understand whether this other chemical from Twiga is going to impact on the environment negatively or positively. This is because the minister has talked about so many litres being imported to Uganda. 

Thirdly, I would like to ask the minister to clarify to me the involvement of the local communities. I am only hearing of national teams. What about the lower people at the sub county level where the problems are located? Otherwise, thank you. 

5.24
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also thank the minister for this statement. However, as the scare of these locusts, which are devastating not only on crops but a menace to even the cattle corridors because once they destroy all the vegetation, the cattle will starve - the biggest challenge will come with the chemicals that they are using.

We are reliably informed that in those countries, which have been ravaged by the desert locusts that they used other biological means, which are even much better. They get another living organism to consume them; an organism which has very high reproductive potential more than that of the desert locusts. Why are they not borrowing a leaf from these countries, which are actually very close to us?

Most importantly, I have not seen them focus or concentrate focus on destroying the eggs or rather nipping in the bud the multiplication of these locusts. They are more reactionary than being proactive.

Being a disaster of sorts, where is the Minister of Relief and Disaster Preparedness? Because this is a ministry that should have come out openly with contingency plans given that this is an emergency. The warning signs were there and they should have planned earlier. They should be seen more active than the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Unless there are new issues because we have had this debate really. Are there new issues that you are raising today?

5.27
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The Government does not seem to have the option of biological control. Biological control, as hon. Nambeshe said, would initiate certain other species to feed on the locusts; it is more natural and containable.

On the other hand, I would like to know from the minister if he has known of any places where these locusts are being harvested. We saw some pictures moving on WhatsApp; there was a very beautiful lady who was eating some locusts and we are told that in Kitgum, they had begun harvesting, frying and selling them.

We would like to know why Government is not interested in focusing on biological control of these insects, especially since they are consumable not only by humans but also by other organisms.

In line with the same, Madam Speaker, there is the bio-degradability of the chemicals on one side and the effect of the chemicals on human life on the other. Now that our people have begun collecting these locusts and consuming them, what would be the effect of the chemical that is being used to kill the locusts on the lives of the people who are consuming them?  Would the Government give an ear on the other side of the simpler and natural way of controlling these locusts rather than spending money on chemicals?

Finally, Madam Speaker, I saw my honourable colleague on television in an interview with either NTV or NBS engaging you, honourable minister, about the UPDF burning the thickets and bushes as a way of controlling the locusts. The minister said he was not aware but the interviewer kept bringing footages of our own men in uniforms burning bushes and thickets as a way of controlling the locusts.

Have you made any progress, honourable minister, to find out if it is true that our men in uniform, as they were shown on the television, were the ones involved in burning those bushes as the way of controlling the locusts? As they are being deployed, are they answerable to you or the UPDF? If they make any mistakes in the field, who takes charge of their actions? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.29
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is that the locusts have failed to be controlled in places where they started from and we are using the very methods that failed in Kenya, including the planes to spray locusts here.

Madam Speaker, my suggestion would be that since locusts are not only a moving target but a flying and scattering target; very difficult to control - It has failed in Kenya, Somalia and all these other places and we seem to have failed to control locusts. They started in Amudat and it is still being listed as one of the districts that are affected.

Therefore, my suggestion would be that instead of wasting resources in futility and chasing after locusts that are already spreading to now 25 districts - tomorrow they will be 50 districts - why not preserve these resources; the money? I know the locusts are going to affect the food security of our country. Why not prepare for the aftermath because control is failing therefore, why not have these resources to be ready for when the food security problem arises?

We are wasting a lot of money in the field, we are paying the UPDF, we want to buy chemicals and procure planes, which are not going to do anything. Right now, I thought that the little resources we have should be preserved for when famine sets in because it is impending. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.32
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We need to allay the fears of the public on the exact repercussions of spraying. The official Government position is that the drugs that are being used are not dangerous. The Government has also been advising that the people should not eat these locusts. Now, if the drugs are not dangerous, why aren’t people being encouraged to eat the locusts that have been sprayed? 

The other day, Madam Speaker, one of the veterinary officers in one of the affected districts was complaining that actually these drugs are dangerous, especially to the animals. Therefore, there must be a very clear position on the impact or effect of those drugs.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, about 15 years ago when I was a student at Makerere, there were vehicles with words, “locusts control programmes” and there was an institute there. I don’t know, honourable minister, how far you have gone to engage Makerere in matters related to desert locust control and related incidences? Because I no longer see those vehicles; that institute should have collapsed. 

It is now time to engage our institutions of higher learning in matters to do with the control and prevention. The research that has not come out and the monies that are being asked for, none of it are being channelled towards that aspect and yet we are going to live with this problem of locusts for the future. 

Therefore, I needed to hear from the minister on the position of Government especially in the area of research in as far as this matter is concerned.

5.34
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative, Busia): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I was listening to the minister when he was presenting his statement. I was expecting the minister to mention Busia District because last week, locusts invaded Busia District in a sub-county called Buyanga and people placed their cries on NTV and nothing happened and yet they have left so many eggs in that sub-county.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I do not know how the people of Busia are going to be helped. Thank you.

5.35
MR WAIRA MAJEGERE (Independent, Bunya East County, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not know why hon. Wambedde is thinking like me because honourable minister, we need to make some reflections. This Desert Locusts Control Organisation, which I hear we paid Shs 11 billion; is it there? When I read this report, I do not see the big impact of that so-called organisation. 

Honourable minister, these locusts have moved all the way from Yemen, Somalia, Ethiopia, Djibouti and Kenya. We are hiring the services we are using from Kenya but Kenya has failed to contain the locusts. Now we are getting the expertise from there. Why don’t we make some reflections? 

We are spending a lot of money. Like my colleague has said, maybe we keep this money for damage control because these insects are mobile. Today, they are in Soroti, tomorrow they are in another area.

Secondly, the choppers are targeting those that are flying but the biggest problem are the eggs. As you kill these ones, the eggs will come up. We need to make some reflections as we move on because you have said that the money is not enough and the problem is bigger. We may not be able to get that money. Since they are mobile and I am told they are going to South Africa from the report I heard from the experts – the expert said that the locusts are destined to South Africa. You are not an expert.

We keep these resources for the damage control. Pastor, give the information.

Mr Abala: Thank you, my good friend. The information I would like to give is that in Uganda we have only one expert called Dr John Bahana who is a worker in Zambia. He is the one advising the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries on locusts.
He said that locusts can fly for 5,000 kilometres nonstop. This means that if they begin from Morocco, they can fly up to the United States of America (USA) nonstop; no refuelling on the way. This means that these locusts are mobile and can fly at an altitude of 30,000 feet up and at the same time 5,000 kilometres without resting.

Mr waira: Thank you, hon. Abala. Honourable minister, the information we are giving is not in bad faith that maybe we are stepping into this thing. We are just looking at other alternatives, which can help us. If the insects are mobile, we do some few control measures and then we leave the resources for damage control.

The Speaker: Honourable members, we have so much other work. 

5.39
Ms lydia chekwel (Independent, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, according to your statement, you are telling us that you have mobilised the Local Government Chairpersons, Chief Administrative Officers and all those people but I would like to give you information that your teams have not reached Kween District. 

In Kween District, the locusts landed like in three or four sub-counties. They were there for some reasonable time.

For your information, it is like a bigger swam that landed in Kween. I was told that when they landed, they covered almost the entire ground, all animals and roofs. I am sure, of course, they must have laid eggs.

I imagine the biggest worry now is where these locusts landed. We are told that when they hatch, the larvae is more dangerous. I would like to inform the minister that your teams are not there. The mapping that you are talking about here is not being done in Kween and they are there. Thank you.

The Speaker: Is everybody going to talk about this issue? We talked last week.

5.41
Mr gaffa mbwatekamwa (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the minister who has decided to give us updates. I have some few concerns. 

First and foremost, recalling my little agriculture I attained at senior four, we know pesticides. We have both selective and non-selective – it is not the new curriculum because agriculture is not compulsory. They are both selective and non-selective.

My major concern is; are the pesticides you are using selective or non-selective? You are spraying and we know that some people are involved in beekeeping. We are aware that bees normally collect pollen grains as they try to make honey.

We have heard some controversial statements where a certain minister says the pesticides do not cause any harm while others say, “They cause harm; you shouldn’t even eat them.” What is going to happen to people who are involved in bee industry? For us who consume honey, what should we take right now? Should we assume that pesticides are not going to even kill the bees that we need? 

Secondly, I have heard the minister trying to indicate on 4.4 - you mentioned the committees you are working with. We know well that at the district, we have district disaster preparedness committees. I have not seen on this paper where this team is involved and how it is facilitated. You know that there is no budget at the district level for this team. Other teams are enjoying even the small money and gains.

Even on the local content, we have seen people chasing locusts using drums, stones and whistles. How are they benefiting because they are also doing some work? If you know their work is not cost effective, why are you letting them to also participate while they are not being paid for it? Thank you.

5.44
Mr alex burundo (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the minister for updating us about desert locusts. 

Yesterday, I was from Bulambuli. Indeed, the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) have camped at the district headquarters. Like hon. Abala had rightly put it, it is very unfortunate that they have not involved chairpersons LCI, LCII, LCIII and the sub-county agricultural officers.

Uganda Peoples Defence Forces is camped at the district while the locusts are in the sub-counties of Bunambutye, Bufumbula and Nabbongo. We need to involve the local leaders if we want to seriously fight the desert locusts. Thank you.

5.45
Ms jalia bintu (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has just told us that they have mobilised 25 districts to be on alert and be able to identify locusts whenever they arrive. However, from the direction of the swarms and after getting the researched report on how many kilometres they fly, it seems the entire country should be mobilised to be on alert. Hon. Achiro said that they are now in Pader and Pader is not very far from Masindi and other districts. 

Therefore, if you do not mobilise the local governments in these areas to be on standby, on alert and be able to identify them, then we shall not be helping this country. This is because if they can fly 5000 kilometres; that means that since the other day, they may already be in Kabale, Mwitazinge and then the whole country will be destroyed.

I wish the ministry could work with our scientists to make sure that – because after certain a period of time, the locusts are flying to Uganda. They should be given the opportunity to innovate other scientific methods of how we can be able to curb these locusts. 

Madam Speaker, I was interacting with my father, who is a retired veterinary doctor. He told me that while at college pursuing medicine, they were taken to Somalia. In Somalia, there is an island where they breed from. Since our countrymen went to Somalia to help in bringing sanity to that country, through bilateral means, if they can send our scientists to go and ascertain – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Just complete that point

MS BINTU: If our Government can send our scientists to follow up and go and ascertain where they breed from so that we handle the breeding ground, we shall have helped the entire globe – (Interjection) - yes, because we were in Somalia.

5.47
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke North County, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report.

The report falls far short from measures to guard against famine in this country. The consequence of this is going to be famine. In his report, there is nothing about it. 

Madam Speaker, we have been talking about food security in this country but we have not been serious on practising it. We just give out seeds and call it food security but whether these seeds germinate or not is not an issue. For those who are lucky to get good yields, there is no storage. 

Right now, there is a harvest of maize in the country but this maize is getting out of the country – (Interruption) 

MR MACHO: Thank you for giving way, senior legislator. Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of information concerning lack of seriousness on food security. 

I would like to agree with the legislator and I will give an example of Busia Municipality, where I come from. I come from a very urban area that is densely populated with houses - the Indian style called the “Bisangati” in vernacular.

However, since Operation Wealth Creation and NAADS started, they have continued to give seeds to my people who stay in the middle of the town, to plant on roof tops. Therefore, I would like to agree with you that, that is lack of seriousness of food security in this country. Thank you. 

MS BBUMBA: Thank you very much for that very useful information. Madam Speaker, ever since 10 years ago, we have been talking of setting up silos in this country, as a way of food security. However, as we speak, I have not heard of one being constructed. I remember, at one time, even money was provided but I am sure it was diverted to other things. 

Madam Speaker, these locusts have become an African phenomenon. If the situation gets worse, how are we going to feed our people? The other day I was on the Floor here struggling to present the report on budget support. Surely, if we are crying for budget support right now, when this phenomenon has not gone to very high magnitudes, how are our people going to survive? How are we going to survive? 

I, therefore, would like to conclude by requesting Government to be serious on the issue of food security. I think it is not too late and we can start now. There is some little rain and the meteorologists have told us that we are going to have above normal rains. They should start giving out seeds and this time, it should be seeds that germinate. As the seeds grow, there should be a storage facility and a clear policy on exporting raw grain. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.51
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the brief that he has given the House.

Madam Minister, over the weekend on Saturday, I was in Kenya. I had gone for burial of the mother of hon. Edward Oku Kaunya, Member of Parliament for Teso North in Kenya. During the burial, there were so many legislators from the Kenyan Assembly; over 12 of them. The bishop prompted the legislators to discuss locusts.
 
Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give the minister and the country at large is that the locusts have spread across Kenya. Legislator after legislator was talking of a new swarm that had just landed in their constituency. 

Honourable minister, you have been preparing for an attack that came through Napak but I also want to inform you that just after that burial, we received information that Bungoma, which is about 25 kilometres from Malaba, had also been raided by a very big swarm of locusts. 

Hence, what I am indirectly trying to tell you, like I told the Kenyans there, is that the locusts are coming from Teso, Bugisu and I will be opening the gate for them to cross back to Kenya. However, it now seems the locusts are now coming again from this direction, and we in the middle, are going to face their wrath. 

Honourable minister, I request that the preparation of our communities be spread across. Let us not only manage these locusts where they are but across the country, especially the areas near the border. The LCs and local leaders should be involved in trying to prepare and try to either scare away locusts or manage them, even at the lower level. 

The pumps that are being used by the UPDF are good enough. Can we also give these pumps to local leaders within the communities such that –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: We have been discussing locusts for almost three weeks. Minister, what is that?

MR ONZIMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was just trying to raise an issue about the impact of this chemical that they are using. Whereas the honourable minister said that this chemical does not have any effect, I have received complaints from bee farmers. Even one of them appeared on one of the television programmes and said this chemical kills the bees. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to come clear on this because the complaint is rampant, particularly from those who are keeping bees. 

5.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A lot of issues have been raised and I will go through them very fast. 

An issue was raised by hon. Abala about the chemicals that are needed to spray, especially those ones of aerial spraying, that they are not on the Ugandan market. He wondered whether they were environmentally friendly. This question has been raised by many colleagues and I would like to answer as follows: 

Madam Speaker, there are two chemicals being used; the first one is Cypermethrin and we are targeting the old swarms that are coming. The other is Chlorpyrifos, which we have kept for the new hatch, in case they do hatch. I would like to inform this august House that the chemicals that we are using are the chemicals that have been approved by our regulators and they have also been approved by the international organisation that regulates pesticides.

Cypermethrin is a common pesticide, which is used by most of the farmers. So, it is not a new a chemical; that chemical biogrades after about seven hours and that is when it breaks down and we are very particular on issues to do with the right mixtures and the disposal. 

There are committees and the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is with us. We are collecting all the materials that we are using - the containers - and we have a store where we are keeping them. So, on that one, I would like to assure the colleagues – 

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up; we have other items on the Order Paper.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, hon. Abala talked about the involvement of local communities. I clearly stated in this paper the areas where the invasion has taken place and we have involved local leaders and LCV chairpersons. Now, this is going to be castigated down to LCIII chairpersons and LCI chairpersons. There is a small budget that is being prepared to help us, especially on issues of reporting.

A colleague talked about an issue and this one is related; that how are the communities benefitting? First of all, Madam Speaker, I would like to inform you that in this, there is nothing to benefit. For the people to do the drumming and whistling –(Interjection) 

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, honourable minister.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if you have completed, let us go to the next item. 

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, just a minute. There might be nothing to benefit because these people are anxious to get rid of locusts but you are busy spraying and we have seen even the army men spraying without protective gear and the locals are just drumming without any protection. You may not give them money but at least, give them protective gear to use. Thank you.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I would like to tell you that locusts are not directly harmful to man. So, if somebody is drumming, whistling and chasing the locusts, what protective gear are we supposed to give to people who are chasing a creature, which is not dangerous to man?

MS KAMATEEKA: Honourable minister, they are taking in the chemicals that you are spraying and part of the education that you are giving to the public should be exactly about that as to how they should handle.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I have been given a lot of questions that will answer all these concerns. I wish my colleagues would listen to me so that I use this opportunity to really explain and you appreciate what is on the ground. 

On the issue of involving the community, we are going to cascade down; for instance, right now there is a training which began yesterday in Lango and Acholi sub-regions. We are going down to sub-regions, which are also near these areas where the locusts are currently. 

Hon. Nambeshe talked about diminishing crops, and the effects in animals and the environment. I have explained that the chemical that is going to be used is Fenitrothion 96 per cent and it is only made by one company called Sumitomo. It is ultra-low volume - the way it is mixed takes care of all the environmental concerns and that is why we have even taken long to spray using aircrafts because that is the chemical that science approved. 

Madam Speaker, we have talked about mapping. Our teams are on the ground and we have got reports from everywhere. We are mapping these areas and if the nymphs hatch, we shall finish them. 

I would like to tell my colleagues the science; when a mature locust is breeding, it will lay its eggs in soils that are either sandy, which are easy to burrow through using its abdomen or it will lay in soft soils that are moist. Its abdomen is made up of segments that are spring light, it can elongate after digging the hole and deposit eggs about 10 centimetres down. Now, what are we going to do with those 10 centimetres? This is almost a third of a foot. When it lays, it is so scientific and it closes off and you cannot even know where it has laid. Therefore, controlling eggs is very difficult.

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell colleagues that we are working with the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees and I know that the disaster committees of districts are not active but these are the committees that we are now looking forward to work with and we have started. That is why we have put these committees at this level and we are cascading down to work with all these committees. 

The option of biological control; this is true and we have got some information that there could be some biological control like using ducks. However, how many ducks do we have in this country? This is something that has just come and we are about three weeks - In China, it is true we have a record that they used ducks and deployed 100,000 ducks to start with but these are Chinese ducks. 

Madam Speaker, even when you are using biological control, you have to study it. So, these are all options that we are trying to look at and see how we can control this particular matter. About eating, I do not want to advise anyone to eat these locusts. It is true that locusts can be eaten but we have moved in for the option of spraying them. So, we cannot encourage people to eat the locusts we have sprayed. About this, I do not want to advise and this is our position. 

About the issue of burning, let me put this on record. (Interjection) – I don’t want the information. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, I want the minister to conclude. We have got other business, really. 

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, about the issue of burning, it is not true. Some fire was lit but there was no bush burning. The fire was lit and the area where it was lit was not even in an area of one square metre. This officer just thought outside the box; it was his creativity that if he puts a fire and gets a bunch of dry reeds and maybe torches them and the smoke goes up - it was not a Government strategy. (Laughter) This officer was just thinking outside the box. Therefore, there was no bush burning. There was just a fire lit in a small area.

On the issue of saying that we keep the money, honourable members, I think let us go away from this. We must control these locusts as much as possible. Locusts last invaded this country in 1948 and that was 72 years ago. In 1962, the governments of the regional states formed an organisation called Desert Locust Control Organisation. This organisation has been doing a very good job. 

What has eluded us now, Madam Speaker, is that the homes of these creatures are in the arid areas and deserts. They are endemic in Eritrea, Somalia, Yemen, Ethiopia and Sudan. These are the areas where they stay and they live in isolation. They lay eggs and the eggs can remain in the soil for as many as seven years to wait for conducive conditions. When conducive conditions set in, they hatch. 

Due to the problem in Somalia and the civil strife in Yemen, this international organisation could not go in there. They were monitoring and immediately after the eggs would hatch, the organisation would control them. Even right now, some of these locusts we see here crossed into the continent from Yemen. The organisation could not even go to Somalia. Everyone knows what the problem in Somalia is – 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR BAGIIRE: Lastly, I have talked about the fears that the public have about the chemicals. My brother talked about selective and non-selective spraying. These are herbicides and not pesticides. If properly utilised, they do a good jobs on the targets and that is what we are trying to do – to make sure that the areas we are targeting are areas where the population is low. 

If the aircrafts are going to spray, they are not going to spray over the water bodies. Our scientists have advised us on this. We are working with scientists in Makerere and other institutions of higher learning.

Madam Speaker, the person leading our team is Prof. Waiswa, who is a Professor of Entomology. If you have a Professor of Entomology, who else do you need? We have very many other professors whom we are also bringing on board to bring their knowledge so that we see how best to handle this matter – (Interjection)- I have already engaged Prof. Latigo. 

On the issue of invasions in other areas, for example Busia, our lines are open – from hon. Ssempijja to all the state ministers and technical people. When your people tell you that there is a problem, please, just tell us and we shall get on the ground.

Madam Speaker, I would like to tell this House that our position was that, if we get for instance a swarm of 10 million locusts coming in, let us knock off at least five or eight million of them. If the others elude us, fine. We shall have at least reduced on the number of the eggs that would have been laid. Our soldiers are doing a good job and we must applaud them. Our technical people are doing a good job and we must applaud them.

In Nakapiripirit today, for example, the Member of Parliament for Ik was on the ground and he sent pictures. Today has been one of those successful days. According to the scientists, about eight million locusts have been knocked on the ground. We are dealing them a very heavy blow. Thank you.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 89/04/10 TO THE MINISTER OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT

6.10
MR DENIS OGUZU LEE (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): “Why has the Okororo Piped Water Project stalled for all this time? What plans does the Ministry of Water and Environment have to ensure that water and sanitary facilities are delivered to this community; and in what timeframe?”

6.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Madam Speaker, I am responding to the issues raised by hon. Denis Oguzu Lee on –

i. 	Why the Okororo Piped Water Project has stalled for more than 10 years despite the resources being provided to the Ministry of Water and Environment for piped water project; 

ii. 	Why the Okororo Piped Water Project has stalled for all this time; and

iii. 	The plans that the Ministry of Water and Environment has to ensure that water and sanitary facilities are delivered to this community and within what timeframe.

Regarding the first question, Okokoro Piped Water System was to be implemented under the Water, Sanitation and Development Facility – North, which is being funded by the Government of Uganda and the KfW, under the German Financial Corporation. 

Madam Speaker, there were delays in the implementation of the system due to lack of funds. The funds from the German Financial Corporation, under the water supply and sanitation in refugee-hosting communities in northern Uganda Phase I, focused on areas with high refugee settlements. 

On the second issue regarding the plans that the ministry has to ensure that water and sanitation facilities are delivered to these communities, I wish to say that Okokoro Piped Water System is currently under design by a consultant Via International Engineering Consultancy Limited under the Water and Sanitation Development Facility – North. The inception report has been submitted and approved by WSDF - North. The consultant is carrying out a feasibility study and the detailed design should be completed by June, 2020.

Tendering and procuring of the contractor is scheduled to start in July 2020 and construction work will commence in December 2020, within 12 months. The construction is funded by KfW, German Financial Corporation under the programme of water supply and sanitation in refugee hosting communities in northern Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to respond as such.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Since hon. Oguzu is not here, there is no supplementary question.

QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 87/04/01 TO THE MINISTER OF WORKS AND TRANSPORT

6.13
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): “The Vurra-Arua-Koboko-Oraba Highway, which is a distance of approximately 92 kilometres, is full of bends and bridges making it unsafe particularly for pedestrians. For the period January to October 2019, there have been 12 fatal accidents, 35 serious accidents and 13 minor accidents on this road.  The road does not have any humps and although it has numerous speed limit signposts particularly at trading centres, schools and hospitals, the Uganda Police Force does not have any equipment to enforce speed limits on this road.

    1. When will the ministry construct humps on this road?
    2. When will the Uganda Police Force be equipped with speed guns in order to regulate speed along this road?”

THE SPEAKER: I do not see those ministers. Let us go to Item No. 5 on the Order Paper.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you recall, the reports were presented and you have had ample opportunity to study this particular report and the others. You are now free to debate. The principles are basically the same and so, you can touch local government or parliamentary. Let us have hon. Mawanda and hon. Odur Jonathan.

6.15
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the committee for the reports. I will look at the two reports together; the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

The most important thing in these Bills is the issue of the eligibility for one to stand as an Independent person. Madam Speaker, the Government proposes to put conditions under which, one can stand as an Independent member must first satisfy.

Article 102 of the Constitution, which is the Supreme Law, specifies the qualifications for one to stand as an independent and it is very clear. Article 80 of the Constitution also stipulates the conditions for one to stand as an Independent Member of Parliament or President. So, any attempt to bring an amendment by way of Bill without bringing a specific law to amend the Constitution would be violating the Constitution. 

I would like to support the committee that their proposal not to consider the Government’s position to insert a clause that brings conditions for someone to stand an Independent would be expanding the qualifications for one to stand as an Independent, which are clearly stipulated in the Constitution. I, therefore, implore Members to critically look at this clause so that when we come to Committee Stage, we are able to address ourselves to this problem.

The Constitution is actually very clear, especially Article 258 on how a Constitution can be amended. It has to be specific. The Bill the Government is bringing is to address some mischiefs, which are clearly stipulated in the Bill. It does not talk about amending the Constitution.

On the issue of financing elections, Government is proposing to bring amendments in respect to financing of elections. Yes, it is a very good idea but there are still gaps in their proposal. Government is saying that one should disclose the source of funding. This is a very critical matter. We are talking of financing elections. 

First of all, the Government is only interested in the source of the financing 14 days before nomination but it is not talking about how much one should disclose and what happens after nomination? How much should someone receive and how much should someone spend.

In this election financing, we should actually be looking at commercialisation of politics. This item is killing the development of democracy in Uganda. Other countries have brought in a stand-alone law to deal with commercialisation of politics. What has killed the Independents is the commercialisation of politics; paying electoral officials to announce wrong results.

On this note, Madam Speaker, I would like to put you on notice that I will be bringing an amendment, when we shall tackle the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill to ensure that returning officers who announce wrong results are personally held responsible. I am saying this because I am a victim. I went through a cycle of elections five times. When I went for my primaries, they looked at areas, where I was very popular and they did not bring the ballot papers and I kept quiet.

When we went for the primaries and I won, my party announced the wrong candidate. I kept quiet but I came as an Independent. When I stood as an Independent, I also won but it took Bushenyi District two and half days to announce our results. Prof. Kamuntu, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is my witness; it took two and half days. 

When we went for the meeting and they asked the retuning officer why he did not announce the result, he said, “My results are here. These people are telling me to announce wrong results.” He refused. They then brought a returning officer from Mbarara. They told him, “Read this,” and he read the wrong results. Madam Speaker, I went to court and won.

In fact, when I went to court to present my case - in fair trial, you are given an opportunity to defend yourself and produce evidence, which I did.  The presiding judge adjourned my case nine times before she could pass judgment.

Finally, she sent a judgment through her escort and said take it and read it. When the judgment was read, it was in my favour. The Judge, in her conclusion, said that whatever the case, the rightful elected person is the person who was in the wrong; my competitor. I got justice through the Court of Appeal. Why am I saying this?

These retuning officers who are misled - why should Ugandans pay costs on behalf of someone who has made a blatant mistake? Maybe, when they know that there is a deterrent measure against them, they will protest. So, commercialisation of politics - if no one is working on the Bill to curb commercialisation of politics, I will prepare a Private Member’s Bill so that we can deliberate on the commercialisation of politics.
	
Madam Speaker, the moment the term begins, civil servants begin campaigning because they can access resources. This is why you find members of Parliament operate as internally displaced members of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

I think we should be given enough time since we are very few so that we can seriously deliberate. These are important Bills that require us to listen to each other so that we can hear people’s experiences. When I see Government coming here to curb Independents from standing, I think political parties should first go and put their houses in order. Madam Speaker, you do not know what Independent members of Parliament go through. If they could tell their stories here, you would not believe.

I will consider the issue of bringing a Private Member’s Bill on the commercialisation of politics. I would like to, therefore, request Members to look at the issue of the Independents; the Constitution is very clear. 

In our Constitution, it is not by fiction or by just bringing a Bill to expand you. Specifically, bring an amendment and the Constitution is amended by an Act of Parliament. Thank you.

6.25
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee because they have rejected a number of unconstitutional clauses but I am very surprised that this Bill is coming from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

First of all - in drafting - how do you draft things that are unconstitutional and you bring them to this House? I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and Members for rejecting those ones on qualification, Independents and restricted areas. Next time, they should do a better job for us, especially the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. You cannot bring unconstitutional matters to waste the time of Parliament.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the issue of election financing. There are laws that are drafted and you wonder the intention and what they want to achieve. To bring a law that you want to ban sourcing of funds from people who have demonstrated intention to overthrow the Government and there is no clarity on how you are going to arrive at the definition of somebody who has demonstrated intention and who is going to determine that -

When we want to address the issue of electoral financing, we should not even go in the direction of trying to restrict people and their ability to mobilise resources. We should be looking at the impact of reckless spending during the election cycle on the economy and in terms of swaying the voting pattern.

For that matter, it is clear that while this law is very important, the movers wanted to use the opportunity to smuggle in their own mischief and one of this includes the issue of polling procedures.

An election is a matter, which is public and that is why they say free and fair. Whoever wants to observe is allowed. Now you want to restrict because the presiding officers are demonstrating the transparency to everyone at the polling station. They are not voters at that particular polling station yet you say that you want it to be at five people. What are you curing?

Instead, you should be happy to demonstrate to whoever is available at the polling station to see so that the result can be accepted because you are looking for legitimacy and if you want it, you can only be open, transparent and clean.

When we reach that amendment, I want this House to reject and retain the provision we have that if you are demonstrating the materials, you demonstrate to whoever is present because when you go to Court, it is a matter of evidence and anybody who is present can give evidence to support your petition.

Lastly, there are things that this House had mentioned in the past that I had expected the committee - because I saw that they have introduced amendments; issues of nomination fees. Madam Speaker, you know that in the past, Ugandans have approached your office asking what this Parliament can do about nominations fees that are prohibitive.

We have also talked about qualifications for local councillors. Now we have sub-counties managed by senior assistant secretaries who have masters’ degrees. What are we going to do to address that because a lot of money is being lost at the districts due to lack of proper supervision?

Lastly, when a local Government councillor dies, at the moment we do not have any law. Once a councillor has died, that is it and for the remainder of the term, an election cannot take place. I have an incident in Lira - in Parliament, we are provided for that if a Member died there is a by-election so we should pronounce ourselves on councillors.

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleague for giving way. ULGA and UAAU, the bodies that are governing the local governments through our Committee of Public Service and Local Government, requested for academic qualifications for councillors but I do not know why it is not captured here.

There is a very big concern down there. They bring a budget but it is only the Town Clerk and the Chief Finance Officer who are knowledgeable; the rest of the councillors’ only concern is their allowances.

That is why ULGA and UAAU the bodies that govern urban and local Governments came up with that concern but I don’t see why Parliament does not put some academic qualifications for councillors at the districts and urban councils, thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you. I have seen the requirement for a certified copy in the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill. Why is it there? I invite this House to reject it because some other sections are very clear that if you have qualifications from the country and if I appear before you with both the copy and the original, why should you ask me to look for a certified copy? Thank you.

6.31
MS SARAH WEKOMBA (Independent, Woman Representative, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report. I would like to support some of the recommendations though with some observations. 

On the issue of distribution of election materials, the Bill suggested that the material will be brought at any time before polling. Before the material comes in 48 hours before and I think it is the right way because when the material comes in, our agents are there to receive them and they acknowledge but I would suggest that the Electoral Commission sends the boxes when they are sealed but they do not put any materials to particular polling stations.

For example, Parliament is a polling station and they are sending the boxes there without the Electoral Commission indicting the number of the voters because the voters in Parliament are known; it would be better if they send the boxes sealed so that we acknowledge that at this polling station, we have 1,000 voters and they record as we vote. That will help us to reduce on ballot stuffing where people just go and tick ballot papers at any time to put in the ballot boxes.

Again on the issue of polling and the polling procedures; the Bill suggested that there should be five people at the polling station before they can start the polling. However, the committee suggested that there should be 10 voters at the polling station. I agree with the committee that there should be 10 people but I think they should be more as we have been doing it.

These boxes should be displayed to everyone and in case you want to authenticate the registers or the votes it should be maybe after voting; 10 people can be picked out to come and sign a form that has come from the Electoral Commission to authenticate the process instead of saying that only 10 people. Even if they are 100, there can still be some malpractice that can be exercised at the polling stations. 

Lastly, on the issue of the designated restricted areas and to provide for a special procedure for voting in restricted areas; I wouldn’t agree with this because for example in Congo in the 2016 polls, the Catholic Church sent over 40,000 election observers across the country and there were widespread irregularities in these areas. 

For example, there were irregularities, including in prohibited locations such as police stations or political party headquarters and limited access for observers. The observers were expelled; they were not allowed to get into these areas, which led to malpractices of around 27 per cent in the polling places they observed.

There were 18 areas with problems of voting machines. Seventeen per cent of the polling stations allowed voting by people without voting cards or whose names were not in the register and 24 per cent closed without allowing them to vote when they were still in line.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I disagree with this recommendation where we should restrict certain areas for these voters that are going to vote like the military and other special interest groups. I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.36
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues who have already made submissions. I would also like to thank the committee for the work done. I would like to start from where my colleague, hon. Mawanda, stopped about these electoral officials.

I think the law we are going to make should really be serious on electoral officials. The people who are bringing people of Uganda to pay costs are basically the Electoral Commission. They do malpractices and they know that they have nothing to pin them so they allow the process to go on. 

In fact, the people who are committing fraud in elections are the Electoral Commission. For now, we should really attach a penalty on these individuals, that if a case is lost and the Electoral Commission is involved, then they should pay.

In our Constitution, there is nowhere that they say you pay to stand in an election. They say an election is free; everybody is free to participate in an election. The only qualification they put there is that for presidential, you will have this qualification. For a Member of Parliament, you will have this. However, they have never said that when you want to stand, you must pay to stand. I have never seen it.

I want to quote the experience of the first multiparty system in Uganda during the UPC Government time, where the current Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs was a member – (Interjection) – Yes, he was and you were Ambassador-Extraordinaire. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, at that time, when people were going to stand, they would ask a party to pay a nominated fee; small but refundable. As soon as an election is done and you get somebody elected MP, it was refunded. Even for those who stood as Independents, it was refundable.

Research has been done. First of all, why should you appropriate money here to give parties, then at the same time; instead of developing parties, you come and say that before you participate in an election, your members should pay and yet it is the party which is nominating a candidate. The research has been done.

In South Africa, for a party to nominate candidates at whatever level, they pay 605,000 Rands, which is about Shs 150 million but it is refundable. The moment they get one candidate as a councillor winning, they refund the money. In Tanzania, it is about Shs 100 million; it is refundable. The candidates are party property; it is not an individual. Why should you sign on my form that you are going to stand and we nominate you and then at the same time, you say I, who is standing as party property, should be the one again to pay money?

The argument I am putting, Madam Speaker, is that for those who are talking about campaign financing, it begins from the day of nomination if you pay. The reason we are saying this is that this policy must change. What should change is we want to have elections where people do not start putting money upfront from day one. 

That is the reason I am putting the committee and the minister on notice that we rather have a party making a deposit and it is refundable or we remove it. If the Independents also put their money, it should be refunded.

Madam Speaker, the issue on the Independents has been talked about. You have heard about rigging an election. Basically, the rigging of elections – (Interjection) – Of course, those who have rigged may not support what I am saying. The reason is that there is ballot pre-ticking; pre-ticking is the order of the day. People go and tick and then come and stuff the ballot box.

If we said we want you to use thumbprints, there will be no pre-ticking of votes because thumbprints can be identified on an individual. If we are going to go for ink and we put a thumbprint, why is it that we cannot use a thumbprint to put on our candidates? This will reduce the process of people who go and do pre-ticking. 

President Museveni says that those who rig his votes are those in the Opposition in towns because they are elite; they tick. Therefore, this is an opportunity for him to use what he calls the villagers - who do not know - to put for him his prints better, so that they do not cheat him in an election.

Madam Speaker, there is technology and we should embrace it. I do not know why - even when talking about the voters’ register; world over, a person accesses a voters’ register on the day he turns of voting age. If it is 19, it is 19. If it is 18, it is 18.

We have technology that we are talking about. We have a ministry of ICT and I do not know why we cannot agree on our technology. Why are we not linking the thumbprints biometrics to the voter register? What it means is that if I go to a polling station and put in my thumbprint, that thumbprint should say, “Nandala has voted” and you are able to know the total number of persons, which can total at a particular time.

We should embrace that one. At the end of the day, at the polling station, they should be able to know the total by not going to count the register again. Do you know why we delay to bring - they ask how many ticks we got. All of you have gone to a supermarket. You pick sugar and all. The cashier does this and a small machine there prints what you have bought, the total amount and your balance. If you have paid Shs 50,000 and it was Shs 45,000, there will be a balance of Shs 5000.

Why is it that these machines we have, which are biometric, do not total? Are you using them? What are you using them for? I thought it should identify me and at the same time, it should be able to give a total at the end to know how many people have voted. It should even be tallying with the register.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like to propose that when it comes to technology, we should really make sure that the technology we have is not for purposes of simply displaying. It should be able to give us accurate results at any particular time.

We have got a problem of register inspection. Of course, we are happy that one of the things we are saying is that the Electoral Commission should now be given a law to be able to hire people to audit the register. As we speak, the people who are displaying registers are not electoral officials; they have hired a group of people. I think they have seen it necessary. Are we sure they are doing the right thing? 

I think we should make a law to deal with that. We should make sure that at any particular time, anybody can go to a district or a sub-county to identify what the register has. This is quite easy and I am sure – of course, during the time of Ambassador Extraordinaire, this was not possible but now, it is possible. We can deal with it.

I am getting worried of this verification of voters. What methods are we using? Do I just go and show my face and they tick? How are you sure that the one who is ticking isn’t ticking even the dead or crossing the ones alive? There must be a mechanism that when I go to check, I should be able to read using the same biometric method.

Why should I get in a car from here to go and check a register? Why can’t it be done from anywhere? With technology, by the way, I can check my registration and the Electoral Commission can confirm from anywhere by biometric. Nowadays, you use your eyes, hon. Kamuntu – (Member timed out.)

6.45
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues to thank the committee for this very important amendment. I applaud the committee for rejecting the proposed amendment to the Bill, particularly, the one pertaining to a special procedure for voting in restricted areas. 

There was special attention given to military personnel and leaving out other professionals who will be working during elections for instance, nurses in hospitals and even patients in hospitals. This, if it were left in its proposed form, would have infringed on the constitutional right of citizens to vote. 

We have Ugandans who are in the diaspora. I do not know where this Bill leaves them. It is my considered view that Ugandans, who are abroad, like it is done in many other countries in the neighbourhood, are also given an opportunity to exercise their civic right to vote. The special status would be for only the military. I must applaud the committee for the recommendation they have made and for rejecting that proposal by Government to only give the military personnel the right to vote and deny others like these ones who are in restricted areas.

The Electoral Commission is obligated to make provisions or rules on how to collect votes from patients, nurses, police personnel and even polling officials that will be deployed to man polling stations. 

The committee is also applauded on the question of independents because the proposal was unconstitutional. The proposal was that the independents would be required to have ceased to be Members of a party or an organisation 12 months before nomination day. Moreover when it comes to an independent member joining an organisation or party, he or she would be allowed to participate in the same elections. That would be an infringement on the rights of an independent candidate to freely join an organisation or party or even choose to be independent.

It is because joining a party or –(Interruption)– I am very informed on this; give me time. I will give you chance later. An independent member joins a party, or a citizen joins a party voluntarily and therefore, he or she should voluntarily choose to leave.

I must applaud the committee for making this recommendation and rejecting that proposed amendment that would have virtually infringed on the rights of the citizens to freely join parties or associate. This would be very unconstitutional. Actually, it would not be in the spirit of the African Charter or even the Universal Declaration of Human Rights as it is indeed the best international practice. 

Madam Speaker, the rights of journalists have been violated many times, almost in every election. We have seen that in elections here. However, in these proposed amendments, I must salute the committee for, this time round, protecting the rights of journalists in their line of duty when they are covering elections and also for allowing that gadgets like cameras and phones should be allowed unlike what had been proposed in the amendment to the Bill.

Finally, on the unequal use of State owned media, in the past, candidates would not be given equal time and space on State owned media. Those who are in the ruling Government, particularly presidential candidates, would enjoy lots of latitude on State owned media unlike opponents from other parties or independent candidates. 

However, these amendments are being made with – I must salute the committee for recommending that candidates should be accorded equal time and space on State-owned media to present their programmes freely. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I hope that the Attorney-General will be able to answer why the issue of the voting by Ugandans in diaspora has not been addressed. It has been a consistent demand over the last 20 years. Every year, they tell us they want to vote. We acknowledge their contributions to the economy but we do not acknowledge their rights.

6.53
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee as well for a very good report that they have come with in line with electoral reforms and a proposal that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had come to the House with.

I would like to place a concern. It seems as though the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is now proceeding to amend the Constitution by quietly introducing some kinds of proposals through the Bills that are coming because when you look at most of the proposals, they seem to touch on the Constitution and this is a bit suspicious. I do not know why they do not really want to come with constitutional amendments on the Constitution but instead proceed with these piecemeal amendments that they want the Members to pass in guise.

The House right now is underrepresented in terms of quorum and this is the time they want to sneak in these kinds of amendments, which may be to the disadvantage of a big number of Ugandans.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the proposals particularly for the recommendation on the registrars. These particular people are the source of problems generally in electioneering. In the past, we had not provided for particular punishment for these particular individuals and I would like to thank them.

It should not be about morals and integrity in terms of appointment. We should take it further by providing for punishment. This maybe a civil law but then if a returning officer commits this kind of offense and the only punishment given is being transferred from one district to another and so on. These are the same people that when you look at their records, you find that this person committed an election offense in one district and is transferred to another and to another. They continue doing that in the districts where they are posted.

Madam Speaker, I thought that the committee would go ahead to provide for punishment, which is bigger than just removal from office. There should be something more that this House can propose in terms of prohibiting these people from this kind of misconduct because even after somebody goes to court, the election petition usually may turn in favour of the petitioner and nothing is done to this returning officer.

I would also like to pray that the House can find a punishment even further to the polling assistants, agents and officers but particularly polling agents because most of the time, malpractices begin from down here. If there was a way we could also lock in that, it would help us a lot as we go towards elections. I do not know how we can do it but it is something for thought.

Madam Speaker, the reason I stand here is to oppose vehemently the proposal that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs had come with in line with independents. I am not surprised that political parties are unanimous on this matter because there seems to be a sinister agenda. You want to lock us out of parties so that we are now left out at the last minute but this is not going to work.

The political parties that are in this House need to be put on notice that this is not right and fair for you to take our rights to associate by bringing such a kind of a proposal where you want to require a person to stand as an independent. This was rejected in the last Parliament. Even in this Parliament, I call upon Members to reject it because you could be a victim of this because your party will now sit and say, the rules and regulations of a political party - And I see hon. Nandala-Mafabi smiling because he is a secretary general-

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to be very clear. I appeared before the committee and my statement was clear that even the Electoral Commission, which we call independent - the one of Mr Byamukama - is not independent. How will you tell me that the one of Tanga Odoi and the NRM would be independent? Therefore, I said that even the Constitution allows independents. 

Madam Speaker, you remember that you were a Speaker then when we were making that constitutional amendment. When hon. Dan Kyewalabye was there, he wanted to put in the Constitution amendment that we do not want independents and I am the one who said, no; we need this; one day, you will have a problem. Indeed we put it in the Constitution during that time and hon. Kyewalabye went for NRM primaries and lost. He was the first person to be on the independents.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, having made those contributions in amendment of the Constitution, why would one turn - Therefore, is hon. Amoding in order to insinuate wrong things that -(Laughter)- I am smiling and that I wanted to make independents not to be part of Parliament? Is she in order, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what she said is that she was happy that you were smiling. (Laughter) 

MS AMODING: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind hon. Nandala-Mafabi that those women members of Parliament are not just members of Parliament for Women. We represent districts and we are voted by men and women. Therefore, that seat, until changed, we are voted and we represent an entire district.

Madam Speaker, I would like to remind the Members in this House particularly political parties, leaders of the Opposition and secretary generals of their parties that the independents over there are 61 and the political parties are just 51 or 45 and you may reach a point where you are unable to even form a Government and that seems to be the case in the next election.

It would be unfair for you to lock out independents with which you would have formed a Government or even the opposition party; you may be on good terms with the independents and you may be able to form a Government. Therefore, it is very unfair for you to look for loopholes and ways to lock people out. (Interjection)- I will take information from hon. Basalirwa because he is my childhood friend - (Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Amoding. I lead a political party; JEEMA Party, Madam Speaker and I am the only Member of Parliament here. The information I would like to give hon. Amoding is that the political parties, including mine, made presentations before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

The information I give is that the assertion that we were all opposed to the issue of independents is factually incorrect. Some of us particularly JEEMA was very categorical; independents are constitutionally enshrined in our legal framework. Therefore, distinguish. That is the information I wanted to give. We like you and love you and you should come to JEEMA as and when time allows.

MS AMODING: I am not sure about that but thank you for the information, my colleague. Madam Speaker, the emphasis around this matter is very critical in this time of our history as a country because as we see, political parties are not mature to accommodate all of us; when you rise and stand on certain issues, both across the aisles, you are taken as a suspect.

Therefore, we need to have a safe ground and Article 29 and Article 82 assure us of that right of the Constitution. Therefore, I would like to call upon colleagues that if there is any amendment we need to reject, it is this one and this is for our own safety and for the safety of many other Ugandans who would like to come as independents. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.01
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker and I would like to thank the committee for the report. I would like to mention some few things. Number one is about qualification for one to qualify to stand as a President, Member of Parliament, LCV, and others.

Madam Speaker, if you looked at the report talking about when to stand as a Member of Parliament and LCV chairperson, you must have gone through ‘A’ Level or its equivalent. However, when it comes to a mayor, mayors of a municipality, according to this report, there is no qualification.

And yet for example, this is something very critical. Look at for example Kampala here and other places. This is where my problem is, you are saying that a mayor should not have a qualification yet he is going to be supervising people with PhDs, Masters and degrees and he could be somebody from anywhere and that becomes a bit of a problem.

Secondly, we are talking about the Electoral Commission; that one of the objectives is to provide for the use of technology. In the previous elections, most of the machines were faulty and could not give us the proper results. That is why, as we talk about amending this law, we should tell the Electoral Commission not to buy fake equipment. Their machines must be of quality; the ones that can give us the right results unlike in the previous elections where in some places, there was that bit of problem. 

The other one is that when you look at the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, one area, which is disturbing my head is that if a person contravenes the law, he or she will pay 48 currency points or serve two years in prison after being convicted or both.

When you talk about 48 currency points x 20,000, it brings you to about Shs 960,000 only. That means that we shall not be curing any way of breaking laws. People will break the law, after all, it is only Shs 960,000 that he or she is going to pay.

The other thing that I would like to say is that when we talk about elections here, this law must be strong for both the Presidential and Parliamentary elections. We should put in place a law that is going to bar the issue of the use of militias. In some instances, some people will establish militias who will cause anarchy. They will be breaking many of these laws.

That is why, as we talk about amending these laws, they must come out clearly that we must be able to protect the rights of the people and resources of this country. We got the country here and we must work hard to develop it. We are going to leave it here as travel to heaven. 

However, what is important is to make sure that the law must be one that is going to protect the rights of Ugandans to vote. Like you said earlier on, everybody should be involved in this electoral process. For example, those who have turned 18 up to December should participate in the elections. They even qualify to contest as presidents and as members of Parliament because they will be 18 years old. The mere fact that they are not included here means that they will not participate in the electoral process. I beg to move.

7.07
Mr godfrey onzima (NRM, Aringa County North, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. My contribution is going to be premised on two areas. One is the Parliamentary Elections Act and the Local Government (Amendment) Act. 

Although, initially, I thought the issue of the Local Government Act was supposed to be referred to our committee, nevertheless, I would like to thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for having handled it. There were a number of issues, which we thought should have come on board.

There were amendments, which were related to issues of elections that when a new district is curved out of the old one, the elections of the leadership should be halted until the next election. This is a very good idea. 

As I had tried to raise it sometime back on a procedural issue, when we are looking at the amendments introduced by hon. Mutonyi and when we carried out consultations, we came to realise that we could not proceed with the amendment. It also required not only to amend the Local Government Act but also the Constitution.

Also, the challenges, which were raised, did not only affect the LC5. For example, when a new district is curved and the LC5 happens to be in the new district, the people of the old one will force him to go away, since his district is already there. There are even cases of threats of death.

This does not only affect the LC5 but also people who serve as representatives of interest groups if a sub-county is curved out and you are supposed to be in this sub-county but you continue to represent the other. 

The idea that once a district is curved, one should also go, as it is proposed to the lower local Government that the elections should only be done once in five years’ time, will cure a number of issues. 

Even on the issue of the interims, most of these local Government interim Governments do not have powers to appoint standing committees. Although they exist, most times, they are supposed to rely on the mother districts. The interim Government itself is a powerless institution. 

Further, most times when some of these interim Governments are created, there is no budget given to them. Therefore, the idea that once a district is created, the elections should be halted until the next election will cure all these problems.

I would like to address my issue to qualifications. When we were looking at that Bill at that time, most of the local Governments we consulted were concerned about the issue of qualifications. They said that due to Universal Primary Education many Ugandans have gone to school. When we say that councillors are not subjected to some level of qualification, it does not make any sense. They are mandated to make ordinances and by-laws but sometimes, some of the laws they make at the end of the day contradict the Constitution because they are not subjected to some level of qualification.

This issue of qualification of councillors, especially at sub-county and district level should also be taken into consideration.

The issue, which was raised by hon. Abala, was equally talked about; the qualification for mayors - they said mayors should also be subjected to qualification. 

On the issue of independents, many times, when primary elections are conducted, you can visibly see that some candidates are rejected but they opt to continue for primary elections. At the end of the day, there are a lot of manipulations and some are subjected to unfair judgements. I think the issue of independents is the only valve that they are left with to survive. If we close this, people will be subjected to unfair treatment. Politically, they will have no ground to use to come on board.

I would like to say that I support the view that the independents should be allowed. Today, I may sit on this side but tomorrow, I might be the other side. We should not only debate for the sake of our own interest but for the sake of others. 

The other issue I would like to raise is that, which was raised by concerned people about the verification of academic papers by Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB). Although many times people go and verify their papers, there are people who are challenged on academic grounds and they lose elections. 

Many people were arguing that if somebody had had his papers verified by UNEB, why should he continue for the same verification from the same body? This could be left to those who are coming as new comers. 

However, to say that if you are going to contest again, you should take your papers for verification and yet, these are the same qualifications, I do not see any sense in this. (Interruption)

Mr basalirwa: Thank you, honourable colleague.  The information I would like to give with regard to verification is that these agencies, especially the National Council for Higher Education that does verification, keeps changing regulations especially when it comes to equating. What is equated in this electoral period may not necessarily be the same requirement in the next electoral cycle.

When the Electoral Commission came to Parliament, we got that information. 

MR ONZIMA: Madam Speaker, not every candidate will go and equate his papers. If the qualification is senior six, it will still remain senior six. Sincerely, if I have verified my papers today from UNEB, why should I continue to go there again, unless it is something to do with finances. Maybe, it is a way of trying to raise money. 

I really ask my colleagues to look into this issue, unless it is somebody coming as a first timer. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, just for the record, in the National Assembly of Malawi, the independents are more than all the parties; it is a serious issue. Yes, it can happen. Suppose we have 100 independents here, what will you do? 

7.15
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Beginning with the observation you have made about independents, I think it is something we will increasingly see even in this country. I can predict that there will be more independents. This is as a result of internal contradictions within the political parties. Many of the political parties we have depend more on the founders than what they should be. That is the dilemma the country faces, when we talk about building formidable political parties with a culture of multiparty dispensation. This culture is still very far from us. I have also been a victim to that and I know what it means. When you have big people within the system looking for their own children within the party, the godfathers and so on, you get a situation where they abuse a party. (Interruption) 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give is, for example, they are proposing that you must go to your party and get a discharge certificate. This is the party where you have won elections and they have announced another person. Will that party give you a discharge certificate? 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, that is the kind of situation I am talking about. We know that political maturity is a process, especially when it comes to multiparty dispensation. However, in the exercise of our democratic right, it is extremely important for us to protect and safeguard the independents. That is the only breather for independent minded individuals who can provide good leadership. That is an area we should not even tamper with. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, there is also the issue of campaign financing. I had moved to Table a private member’s Bill on electoral financing. What urged me to do that is that I have observed the past elections for a long period of time. During Presidential elections, if you look at the series, for the last four terms, we have seen the economy being affected by a lot of money flowing, causing inflation. This is something, which we felt is extremely important to regulate; come up with a law to limit this big expenditure of money that affects and hurts our economy. 

By the time Bank of Uganda comes up to squeeze money out of this economy - they raise interest rates so high and try as much as possible to squeeze what we have exaggerated and poured out during campaigns. 

This is why we need to put an end to this and use this opportunity to limit how much money a presidential candidate should spend. We should also look at the sources of financing and this should also apply to the members of Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I have been sharing with members of Parliament and some of them will use billions of money for campaigns. Someone will pour Shs 2 billion in an election. Imagine a member of Parliament spending all that in an election campaign. This has put a lopsided way of elections where people do not look at the values, manifesto or qualities but are just looking at the available money. 

Madam Speaker, we have now got specialists and middlemen in electioneering. They are already positioning themselves and are negotiating deals and holding many leaders at ransom. They tell someone that if he does not give them that much, then, he is in trouble and risks losing the election to his opponent.

At this point in time, the committee should come up with the limitation of expenditure and a budget and declaration of sources of funding, in order to save this country from electing – (Interruption) 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way. It is true what you are saying that campaign financing is a very dangerous thing. Probably in hindsight, these laws you see here that look bad like this – you know we came from 1996, and in 2006, we just brought up a multiparty system. However, one intelligent man behind all these problems was hon. Amama Mbabazi. It was until he was hit in 2016 that he discovered that these laws he made were bad.

Therefore, if we become serious, this campaign financing will be done. Colleagues will say that we do not need it but it is until it hits them that they will know. 

Madam Speaker, I suggest that my colleagues be allowed to bring that Campaign Financing Bill to attach something in the electoral process, other than waiting. This is an opportunity for it. 

THE SPEAKER: In the Presidential Elections Bill? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, Section 22(4) of the Presidential Elections Act provided for soliciting money and the old law talks about it. This should have been cured at that time but the only mistake we made was that we never took consideration of the sitting person. It was more or less looking at trying to blocking others. This is where we can say we have deleted sub-section (4) and put those ingredients he is raising. It is in both laws.

THE SPEAKER: Please, develop a proposal. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I would be very glad if I am allowed to table this Bill because it has been long overdue and if that happens, then it will cure a lot of challenges that we are facing with commercialisation of politics. I beg to move.

7.24
MS SAFIA NALULE (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, National): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for this work. However, I would love the committee to look at clause 4(b) of the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. In sub-section 7(c) by substituting for the words “deep the tip of any hand into indelible ink” by the words “mark the tip of any hand with indelible ink”. That is clause 4(b) of the amendment Bill. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to bring to the attention of this House that there are people who do not have both hands. Basically, we must improvise to see whether they can be marked with their foot or whatever they have. 

Related to this, I would like to speak on the representation of persons with disability in this Parliament. Article 78 of the Constitution provides for election of members of Parliament representing Persons with Disabilities and the mode of their elections and numbers is to be determined by Parliament. Parliament determined this in the Parliamentary Elections’ Act where it provided for representation of Persons with Disabilities by five members of Parliament.

I hear in this Parliament people calling so and so representing eastern region, northern, central or western but Madam Speaker, we do not have any demarcation of constituencies in our representation. So, basically we are elected by a national electoral college, which is a very tedious process. 

Due to the fact that we are in a multiparty dispensation, I would like to inform this House that for example, if one is coming as an NRM candidate, he or she is subjected to two levels of elections whereby they are elected by people who come from as low as the levels of a sub-county or a town council and this number is up to 2,062. 

In addition to that, they are also elected by representatives from districts, which number is up to 135. Ideally, before you come to Parliament, you must have traversed the sub-counties where the number of sub-counties is more than the number of days in a year. So, it is practically impossible for them to play the representative role, which is one of our mandates.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to talk about the population of Persons with Disability. We are here but everybody may think that our numbers are meagre but according to the state of the World Disability Report by World Health Organisation and World Bank, 1 in 7 of every population is a person with disability. With the Ugandan population of 42 million persons plus, we are 6 million plus. On average, in each sub-region, we are 1.5 million and this group is not a homogeneous group but a heterogeneous one coming with different demands. 

I am saying this because I made presentation together with my other colleague to the committee to propose that now that it is a constitutional provision for Parliament to determine the numbers of our representation, I begged that there must be a consideration for us to be represented maybe by two people per region; one man, one woman.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, there was extension for the other elections but ours remained as it was. We are told that our election maybe next month and yet, the registers are very confused. We are told that let us go and extract our names from the national register to go to the special interest register but the whole process is still confused, yet, we are told that we are going to be elected either next month or in April. 

I pray that this Parliament and the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs looks at all these issues because I do not think there is any other Member of Parliament who goes through an election like ours, yet we have very many short comings.

So, my prayers still stand. Let Parliament consider these so that we can have something reasonable. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, considering that the other elections have been pushed to later in the year, is there any reason why we should insist that special interest groups are elected next month really? It is not fair. If we need time, what about them? They actually need more time.

7.30
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, like I said earlier, those very issues relating to the Electoral Commission have been raised several times here. We have taken the necessary notes and we shall liaise with the Electoral Commission and get back to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, if we insist on them, we shall be discriminating against them. So, it is a very serious issue.

7.31
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, just something little to add to the Deputy Attorney-General’s submission. If the Electoral Commission finds it suitable that they can adjust the election of the special interest groups, it will go a long away to cover the debate we had here, that they accommodate the 1.5 million Ugandans that will be of age; 18 years and above to be able to vote in the general election. They are maintaining the closing date because we are going to hold elections for the special interest groups. The moment you agree to push the elections of the special interest groups, then it opens up the window for the debate we had. I thought I would add it on for him.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, maybe, just for the record. My attention has been drawn to Section 30 of the Parliamentary Elections Act in relation to voters who have no hands. For purposes of sub-section 5(b) and the voter has no hands, the process shall be applied to any conspicuous part of the voter’s body as a polling assistant may determine; maybe on the ear or on the – 

7.32
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I really understand and I must appreciate on record, hon. Nalule. She is a researcher and has gone ahead to make various presentations. The committee appreciated her presentation but we had a challenge about the recent constitutional petition No. 2 of 2018; Male Mabirizi & Uganda Law Society Vs Attorney-General. We could have gone ahead but what she is proposing would have serious financial implications. We had advised her to liaise with –(Interruption)

MS SAFIA NALULE: There are five of us but all of us are considered national members of Parliament. As I have told you, there is nothing like demarcation of constituencies in our case. Actually, I was perturbed by the issue of financial implications. If we really go to the papers and do the mathematics well, if somebody goes to represent a region, I do not think the Government would spend on him or her more than the Government would spend on a national member of Parliament.

7.34
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, first, I congratulate the committee chairperson and his team. I would be surprised if the committee chairperson, who has been a victim of injustice in the parties, had gone against the independents. He has experienced it for two consecutive elections and proved them wrong. I would like to thank him for standing firm. Please, continue. (Laughter) He has live experience, just like hon. Mawanda has told us today. We need to support what is in the Constitutional and the minister needs to apologise for bringing something that is unconstitutional. 

Madam Speaker, you raised the issue of Malawi. By the way, Malawi could be the only country in the whole world where Parliament is led by the Speaker and Deputy Speaker, who are from the Opposition. The independents ally with the small parties and overwhelm the ruling party. That is why when they took the election matter to court, the elections were nullified. 

It is surprising that in Malawi, the majority party is the one that has the Leader of the Opposition in the House. I know that because hon. Lowe, who is the Leader of the Opposition in Malawi, is a personal friend. Therefore, do not joke with the issue of the independents. They can be a force in the next elections if the parties do not shape up in the way they conduct elections.

I would like the chairperson of the committee to clarify to us, which were the parties that were determined to waive the independents? I have heard a contradiction here with JEEMA saying: “No, I was not party to it.” You need to clarify on these parties that were opposed. We need a clarification from the committee chairperson.

I need Members to be serious on the issue of election laws. I hope that when we get to the Committee Stage, they will show up in the House. This is what affects us and what determines our coming back here. When you look at the attendance – I met some Members out and asked: “Why are you out when we are debating a very serious matter?” He said; “what is in the House?” How can you not be serious on something that is going to determine how you are going to come back here?

Supposing only those who support the removal of independents show up? They would scrap it and you would not be here. I think Members need to take this matter seriously.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of declaring the source of funds, maybe we should limit this to the presidential candidates. When it comes to the parliamentarians and local Government leaders, we should relax it. I do not know whether colleagues know what should be the maximum amount of money that a parliamentary candidate should use for campaigns. 

I did simple arithmetic. If I need a good public address system – I have just bought one – it is Shs 50 million. If I need 10,000 T-shirts, the cost would be slightly above Shs 100 million and my total would already be over Shs 150 million. I have about 60,000 registered voters but let me take a conservative figure of 10,000 t-shirts.

I pay a polling agent Shs 50,000 and I will have three polling agents per polling station. If you multiply Shs 50,000 by 300 polling agents, how much is that? What about the convoy that you need during the campaigns? Let me limit it to three cars. In the last election, I was paying Shs 1.5 million per day for the two months that we had last time –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH-OBOTH: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. I do not envy your opponent. The way you are making your calculations for the campaigns –(Laughter)

The preoccupation of the Bill and, therefore, the committee, was largely on the sources of funds. If you read the report of the committee, we actually recommended that there should be a law that would cap or control how we use money in the campaigns. I agree with you that that is a matter that needs proper legislation. What they brought before us was purely to align this piece of legislation with the Anti-Terrorism Act, 2002 – that you comply by disclosing where you are getting the money from. 

The committee said this is not good enough. We need a comprehensive legislation on campaign financing, which is broader and which would go on to determine how much you can spend during election time, from the presidency to LC1.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, just look at the basics. For those who are saying politics has become expensive, I think it is because people think candidates get money to give to people. To me, what people give the so-called voters is less than what candidates invest in the posters, vehicles, public address system and t-shirts. 

If you consider the fuel required on nomination day – considering how many vehicles you need for the convoy – you find that you will have already gone beyond Shs 400 million. I think there is need to consider what we need for the campaigns. Are you going to determine how many vehicles one needs? Are you going to determine how many posters one needs? What type of public address system does one need? Will you determine how many t-shirts one needs? 

If I say I am going to buy 60,000 t-shirts for all the registered voters, how much money is that? You would already be above Shs 600 million. If you want to cap it at, say, Shs 200 or Shs 300 million, we would need a thorough study of this.

What I would be against is the money candidates use to “buy” voters. That is what we need to be stringent on. For example, for our colleagues in NRM who are going for lining up, I see a situation where people are going to stand by the road and they are going to be given Shs 1,000 or Shs 2,000. That is where the problem is. We need to understand and address that properly.

On the issue of nomination fees, if you want to stand for President or member of Parliament, you should be able to contribute to it. Last time, we raised the figure for the nomination of presidential candidates. However, even when we raised that figure, we still got more people. Supposing we leave it low, you will have many jokers coming in. Of course, it should not be something that deters people but it should also be something that shows the responsibility of the person.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of qualification, you should allow us to bring an amendment. Let us just look at the mayors; how can we have no qualifications for the mayors of, say, Mbarara and Mbale municipalities? There is need for us to bring an amendment. They are going to be the bosses of the town clerks who have master’s degrees and PhDs. 

Even when it comes to the councillors – I remember when hon. Reagan Okumu brought a report here – we have also heard from Uganda Local Government Association (ULGA). In the last Parliament, ULGA brought a petition to you, Madam Speaker, to help them understand something. They were interested in the allowances. I, therefore, think we need to find a way of bringing this information here.

MR WAKABI: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give to the honourable colleague is that whenever civil servants come for accountability in Parliament, members of Parliament are always undermined as senior six leavers. I think we need to look at the academic qualifications of a member of Parliament to be at least a first degree. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: He is talking about members of Parliament but we are talking about minimum qualifications. The other petition that has been brought to the attention of the Speaker is from the Ugandan North American Association (UNAA) members. We have gone out there but UNAA members have always complaint about voting. Honourable chairperson of the committee, we went to UNAA and you saw how the diaspora people are demanding to be given right to vote. I think you should mention something that can allow our nationals who are leaving in diaspora to vote.

Finally, I think we were mixing up the issue of certification and verification. My understanding is that verification is meant for people who need their papers to be equated. If you read your books straight, why would you need to verify papers? For those who need to equate their papers, there is need to have their papers equated to avoid unnecessary challenges in future. Where one fails to equate, you begin to behave like hon. Sematimba who said “These Ugandans do not understand the American standards. Let me do what they want to do”. He actually solved the problem. I applauded him for having done so to enable him have no challenges in future.

Madam Speaker, we shall be bringing amendments for the qualifications for the municipality mayors and LCV. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Abacacon, hon. Alum, hon. Osegge, hon. Ariko and then we get the last group.
  
7.46
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have two concerns. First, I would like to thank the chair of the committee and the honourable minister.

I would like to inform the House on the issue of independents - In the Seventh Parliament, I would not have come to the Seventh Parliament without the independent clause in the Constitution. I was the first to be held by my party; the great former UPC because of interest in one candidate. I was not even allowed to go and campaign for the primaries but I managed to sell in the House even in the Eighth Parliament. An attempt to remove the independent clause from the party is a big crime and so, we cannot waste time to discuss that. 

If I have won, in my party, which is serious about developing this country – If you want to have peaceful and successful general elections, you do not only say free and fair elections but say free, fair and creditable elections. This is what we are aiming at. The issue of independents should be discussed further because it is obvious that it is very important, which is why those great minds put it in the Constitution.

I am going to talk about the issues at polling stations. In any election, the most important point in the election are the polling stations since the most important things take place there; the voting. In the polling stations, we have electoral officials, party officials and agents of each party. However, the challenge in the polling stations is restricting it as a polling station. That does not tally at all. It actually means we are not free and fair. Why should we restrict people in certain areas, when it is a public place, where all voters must come and make their decisions?

Again, in the polling stations, the agents of the parties must be there. The question then is: who is going to represent parties in these restricted areas? This leaves a lot to think that there is a big fear somewhere. Whether you are in uniform, when it comes to elections, you are a free person and so, you must express your freedom of interest. Why should you be given a restricted area? Yet, we always have big fears that the army has not been effectively representing the people of Uganda.

My view is that since a polling station is where the declaration of result is made, there should not be restrictions. If we want three agents for each party or each candidate for the presidential, I think two would be enough. One should be sponsored by Electoral Commission, which is Government and one sponsored by the candidate or the party so that there is equal play.

We have seen on many occasions, when you look at the results, you find that some presidential candidates have no agents to sign on their declaration forms. What does this mean? It means they cannot afford and if they cannot afford, what do we do? I think Government must come in. Otherwise, these are people who may one day become future presidents of this country. I, therefore, think they must be given fair treatment.

Madam Speaker, the Government in power fears to lose an election. To hear that the NRM Government in Uganda has lost an election, it would be a big shame. This is why they are thinking ahead to ensure new measures and Bills are brought in so that things are distorted. At the polling station, this is a real matter, where signatures are recorded. This is the first station, where all the resources must be announced, which is why we need witnesses to ensure that results that are announced are correct and entered in the correct form for each candidate. Yet, this is where results are changed. 

For example, after counting X having 50 votes and B with 100 votes, when they are entering the results, the 100 votes will go to the other X and 50 votes will be registered to B because during the signing, no one understands what is happening yet this has been happening. It is very important that we treat the polling station all over the country equally as the most significant points of results, which should be exactly transferred up to the end.

Madam Speaker, I thought they were going to amend that. Otherwise, from the polling stations, results should be checked at the parish, subcounty and eventually, at the districts.  Otherwise, my papers got lost at the district yet they were well done at the polling station. Can you imagine what can happen? When it came to court, it was obvious that I won the run-up. (Interruption)

MS SILVIA AKELLO: Thank you very much. I would like to add that it would have been good if we talk about issues of power during counting of votes.

In most cases, that is where things go wrong and delay. Where there is controversy, power is always off yet, we have not put a provision to consider that in case power is off. I would like to propose that in each and every office, where the votes will be counted, there must be standby generator, solar or something of the sort. Thank you.
	
MR ABACANON: Thank you very much for your information. Madam Speaker, when it comes to the source of funding especially what the Bill is talking about the source of funding, even as we stand now, at one time, we were demanding to know the source of funding for the NRM party and how they spend the money. No accountability has ever been given anywhere and it will not be given. 

If we want to have a peaceful election, right now in my constituency, there is serious rebellion because there are two villages. The voters have been transferred across to another polling station almost three to five kilometres away in a new polling station and they are going to vote there, leaving their original polling stations because it has been taken over by the Town Council.

What are we going to do about this? In the last elections, I witnessed several of these characters where some of them were transferred a 10 kilometres away polling station.

What is happening when we say the voters’ display and checking, which is very important because it helps you to check your name and polling station? Cases like these should be addressed very urgently and it should not wait for a last minute. 

7.55
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for coming up with the recommendations more especially on the independents.

The issue of independents is very important in this case because we have to ask ourselves why do people stand as independent candidates and most of them belong to political parties. The very clear reason is that most of these political parties mismanage their primary elections and that leaves the independents or candidates who want to contest with no option but to run as independents. 

I see that this proposal that the Bill is giving is dead from the onset because right now, we are left with less than 12 months to declare whether we stand as independents or not and if we have not yet even made the law, that means that this law we are trying to make on the independents cannot be applicable in this coming election.

On the issue of election financing, the Bill proposes to prohibit obtaining, soliciting and receiving of money from foreign Governments, institutions who have demonstrated intentions of overthrowing a lawfully established Government.

However, when I read the Bill, part (a) talking about “…getting assistance from foreign Governments, institutions, bodies or persons, which or who have demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established Government of Uganda.” I am wondering whether there is a list of these foreign Governments, institutions, body or persons who have demonstrated intention to overthrow a lawful Government in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, if that list does not exist, then it will be very difficult for us to implement this because for us to give a blanket statement that foreign Government, persons, bodies -  They will misuse this law as they are misusing the Public Order Management Act.

I am not supporting this clause because of the misuse of the Public Order Management Act. The Bill also proposes the polling procedure. The Bill proposes that at the commencement of the polling, there should be five registered voters.

I do not know the criteria they will use to choose the five registered voters. Supposing at the commencement of the polling, there are more than 10 registered voters and the Bill is proposing that we declare only to five. How will they choose five from the 10 voters, which supporters will they be? Supposing we are five candidates and each one of us has sent five registered voters, making 20 or 25, how will they choose the five?

To me, elections are supposed to be transparent and if they are only choosing five and leaving the rest, where will these five be taken? Will they be taken inside so that they are the only ones to view?

The other practice where all the registered voters who are there are eligible to prove whether the ballot box is transparent or not is better than what the Bill is trying to propose.

Lastly, on the issue of giving opportunity for those in the restricted areas more especially the military, I feel that there are also many other officers, for example my husband, he is an electoral official and many times he does not vote for me. I remember in the last elections, he was in Otuke District and I kept telling him that I would lose because of his one vote but he could not come. If we are trying to handle this problem, it should not only be the military.

We have doctors and electoral officials. They should also be allowed to vote so that people who are like us do not miss the chance of getting votes from our spouses or relatives who work with the Electoral Commission. Thank you.

8.00
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I appreciate this opportunity. It has been a long time and I would like to appreciate the committee for a good report. For once, I think we are beginning to realise that Uganda needs to get to some level.

To begin from the issue of independents, it can only get worse as we go along. I appreciate the committee because if it had stated otherwise, probably, we would be helping to kill the democratisation process in this country.

If we do not show the political parties that they need to correct certain things in order to make them build up to true democratic organisations, then we are killing the politics in Uganda.

I really appreciate the stand of the committee and I support it. All of us are candidates. If we have this kind of situation before we were mature enough to become politicians, probably, none of us would now be in NRM because all of you who are mature were in UPC. You realise that we are also in a way inhibiting the creation of other political parties.

Political parties grow and die and others develop. When we develop laws that prohibit people from thinking and advancing as changes occur, they say that the only constant thing in life is change. Thinking changes, opinions, systems change and so, we do not have to hold people to a party when they no longer believe or subscribe to the ideas of that party. Maybe, tomorrow, I want to register my own political party. I appreciate this stand and I thank the chairperson very much.

Madam Speaker, on the issue of financing, you realise that by virtue of us being in a multiparty dispensation, currently, for us who are in the Opposition, our main preoccupation is to overthrow the sitting Government because we want to get into power. When we are restricted on who to raise money from, of course, there are those who support us. You do not expect somebody who supports NRM to fund me to come back to Parliament or to overthrow NRM. I think this is not tenable to say that you do not raise money from certain categories of people because you do not have – like hon. Santa said – a list of those blacklisted countries or persons, unless you are going to supply it and make sure that somebody does not raise money from those kinds of categories. However, I think this is just not tenable. 

Also, political funding and fundraising goes on through the election period. We are not going to raise money before nomination and raise all the money for elections. You will continue approaching friends and say, “Tomorrow, I have a rally. Can I get this money? The other day, I have this”. We also need to rethink it if we are to be honest about the kind of politics that we want to have.

I would like to comment on the issue of local Government leadership. There is very much that is not possible now that is not being done, just because of the qualification of the supervisors. They do not understand even the documents that are supplied by the technical persons. When they lay the Budget in Council, there are very few people who can comment or even contribute to the budget debate. 

There is a lot that we are failing to harness because of the qualification of the supervisors at local Government level. If we are saying and boasting that our literacy levels as a country have risen, why are we afraid to make sure that we harness that and show that more people have been educated and yet, there is a high level of unemployment? So, provide them an opportunity. Let us set a level for the local Government leadership. It will help us.

Madam Speaker, the time I was chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts, we were supposed to look at reports from sub-counties and so on. That would not be the burden of this Parliament, if we had local Governments capable to look at those reports of the Auditor-General and be able to proffer solutions and sort out their own issues –(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. On the issue of the qualifications for local leaders, I have one of my sub-counties where the chairperson stopped in Senior Two. The sub-county chief, who is from local Government, has a Master’s degree. When they prepare budgets and they give to the chairman, he says, “Where do you want me to sign?”  and yet he is supposed to supervise. (Laughter)  

I think the Member is right that we need to seriously look at the qualification of the local leaders. Thank you.

MS OSEGGE: Thank you. Finally, Madam Speaker, I appreciate the thought and idea that elections should not be conducted at any time during the cycle in between the five years of the term of Parliament. Could we take it that also to the planning system of Government? When do we demarcate constituencies? When do we demarcate districts? Can we harmonise this so that when you are looking forward to starting an election time, those are the things that Government must plan for, so that they are also included in the budget? 

We should not seem to be waking up to situations by surprise. Can we ask Government to be more organised? Now that my friend, hon. Kafuuzi, is there, I am hoping to see better organisation that these things will be coordinated. It will help the country. It will help limit our time and help us use that time more profitably. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ariko, three minutes and then hon. Sizomu, hon. Nzoghu, hon. Tinkasiimire and finally hon. Etuka.

8.07
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and committee for the report. First of all, the recommendation regarding the issue on whether or not the procedure of people standing as independents, that have hitherto been members of political parties, should be included as an amendment to this particular Bill. In their recommendation, I think that was the wisest thing that they could ever do.

Political parties and political organisations, at the moment in Uganda, largely operate around the persons that own or started them. I want to give an example. I request the President of JEEMA to allow that I enjoy the benefit of the attention of the honourable members in the House.

About two months ago, there was a function in one of the sub-counties in Soroti. At that function, three members of Parliament – since they are in the House, I can say – hon. Okupa, hon. Osegge and hon. Ariko were read as those members of Parliament, among the other 15, who were declared as no longer members of the party in which we belong. This gathering was informed that there would be other flag bearers.

In the circumstances where neither of us has yet declared that we have left our organisation and such a law is passed by this House, would Uganda stand the loss of having hon. Okupa, hon. Ariko and hon. Osegge out of this House under such circumstances? (Laughter) It is better that a democratic process gets us out of political office, rather than simply a letter that somebody writes and sends to someone they call a chairperson of a party in a district who goes to declare that you are no longer in this political organisation.

Hon. Jacob Oboth of this House and hon. Mawanda here have proved to be some of the best members of Parliament in the 10th Parliament. If we had this sort of law, we would lose these kinds of brains in this House. I enjoin the Members of this House to completely shun and vote against this amendment, as it negates the principle of good leadership. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, on the issue of qualification of political leaders, the requirement of the public service regulations is that the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) must have a Master’s degree, a certificate in administrative Law, in addition to other qualifications but more so, with at least 12 years’ experience. You are one super executive.

The Town Clerk is at the same level. A Deputy Town Clerk and Deputy CAO are at the same level. The only thing that is different is that they have fewer years, which is ten years. Here is a situation where a municipal council is literally almost at the same status as a district, in terms of service delivery, resources and even level of the budget.

How is it possible that we have a law in which Herbert Ariko simply walks in there with a national identity card and gets nominated and you come and supervise a Town Clerk with this level of qualification? This Parliament needs to help improve on the capacity of analysis, capacity of supervision and therefore, capacity of service delivery at the local Government because this is the point at which the people receive these services.

I believe –as hon. Okupa has proposed – that we move an amendment when we go to Committee Stage, so that we provide for at least a basic level of qualifications such that these leaders –(Interruption)-

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you hon. Ariko, for giving way. With your advice and appeal, are you suggesting a change, considering that the requirement for the President’s academic qualification and members of Parliament who are ministers including the ones behind me, except for the Attorney-General and his deputy is A-level? To be a member of Parliament who can supervise the immensely qualified Permanent Secretaries, don’t you think the debate should actually be holistic that it is time for us to rethink the entire thing? Thank you.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, honourable chairperson, for your clarification –(Member timed out.)

8.14
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to add my voice in thanking the committee for throwing out the section that prevents Members to stand as independent candidates. It is in the spirit of fairness. 

In the spirit of fairness and transparency, the use of State media houses and technology should go beyond the campaign period. It should extend to the tallying and announcement of election results because this is where unfairness occurs. For instance, my results were tampered with in the tally centre because the tallying officers were on their computers and we did not know what was going on. By the time they began to announce in a marathon way, we could not catch up.

The tallying and announcement of Presidential elections should be done on State television and radio. In the United States of America, the announcement of results from every State, for instance, would appear on State media for everybody to know. It is a national election and every member of this country should follow the tallying. 

For the President, we only hear the final results and yet, in the process of tallying, presidential candidates and the nation would be up to date and by the time they announce the final results, the whole country would have known who the winner is. 

Therefore, announcement of results in that effect should be as transparent and the transparency should be managed by State media. That is my submission. Thank you. 

8.17
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will begin with the issue of qualifications -(Interjections)- it is not part of the report but I am beginning with it. 

Madam Speaker, you actually hear from most of our colleagues and I can recall that by 1986, the levels of education could have been relatively low. However, now, we have serious Ugandans who have attained reasonable levels of education. By now, given that, for example, the President is supposed to be a strategic thinker to give strategic direction to the country, we would not even be misfiring to say the qualification should be a minimum of Master’s degree. 

When it comes to Members of Parliament, I have looked around, most of the Members who are here – actually, none of them has Senior Six or its equivalent qualification. All of them are highly schooled. I have my colleague here, hon. Centenary. We were together right from O-level up to Makerere University. I agree with my colleagues that honestly, we must find a minimum qualification for councillors, LC5 and mayors so that we can know that the direction we are moving to is balanced.

I do not agree with people who want to close space for independent candidates. I believe that some Members – I witnessed it in a number of areas in Kasese where some political party would simply register members without their knowledge and they would drop the membership cards in their homes. If, for example, they register me in a political party, which I may not even necessarily belong to or believe in, what if at some future time, when elections come, you use it to say we have not discharged this one and therefore, he must not contest as an independent? 

I would like to – most of the – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Tinkasiimire – 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, add me one minute. 

THE SPEAKER: Allow hon. Tinkasiimire, please. You will speak more at the Committee Stage tomorrow. 

8.20
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I thank the committee for coming up with a very good piece of work. I also would like to thank the minister. You know the minister proposed and the committee did justice. For sure, I see sober heads handling the Bill and raising a very good report to this House.

I would like to support Members who are proposing to raise the level of qualification of local council members. If it also touches members of Parliament, I will equally still support the proposal. 

While I was still working in local Government, I would like to confess that these councillors and the chairpersons were really at our mercy. You would use certain technical terms and they would be lost. In the process, you would disappear because you are not there to educate them. In the process of going away, it is the local community, which is losing. Therefore, proposing an amendment to raise the level of qualification will be doing something beautiful for this country because this country has lost a lot of resources in having people who are only interested in seeing where to sign as hon. Mawanda said. You give him a voluminous document- first of all, it is even written in English; to comprehend the words there and terms which are used is very difficult.

Therefore, I would like to propose and support that the level of qualification- maybe for the local council- it can go to A’ level and for members of Parliament and we graduate from A’ level to graduates. I would equally agree with hon. Nzoghu who says that a President should hold a post graduate qualification and not just ordinary qualifications.

The other issue, Madam Speaker, where I want to add my voice is-(Member timed out)

8.23
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the recommendations and amendments. I totally agree with the issue of raising the qualification for the local leaders and also the parliamentarians.

We have said that primary school teachers will be graduates and therefore, it will be proper to raise the qualification for the local leaders. In fact, when you look at the quality of the council at sub county and district levels, it is not proper because of the low qualification. I support that highly and at least, the district chairperson could even almost at the same level of qualification with a Member of Parliament and then councillors is senior six leavers.

I want the Bill to address the issue of the integrity of the electoral officials. Sometimes, some of these electoral officials particularly of the Electoral Commission also connive with some candidates.

Madam Speaker, when I was nominated, one hour after my nomination, the incumbent connived with the returning officer to have me denominated. We appeared before the Chairman, Electoral Commission, Mr Kiggundu twice and he said that we are going to sort it out. The integrity of electoral officials should be addressed in this.

When we appeared before him, he told me that, “now, you do not campaign at the moment” and they even wrote a letter of de-nomination for me. I was in court because I was de-nominated by the Electoral Commission. They denominated me because they claimed that I was nominated in error because the incumbent had already placed a court order and this came one hour after.

Therefore, when we came before the Chairman of the Electoral Commission, he wrote a letter of de-nomination but they never nominated me on the polling day. People even knew that my name was not going to be there but they sneaked my name because NRM would have no candidate and all this happened here. 

This is a very serious matter because they penetrated the Electoral Commission and they did not re-nominate me but on the polling day, my name appeared. That was how the three candidates I stood with took me to court alleging that my name was smuggled in by the Electoral Commission.

When they took me to the High Court, the judge came on the ruling day with two dictionaries and asked the clerk to read the meaning of the word “de-nominate” and then they said the word “de-nominate” works in religion and money and therefore, my nomination stood.

However, when hon. Arumadri went to Court of Appeal, the Electoral Commission failed to interpret the context in which they used the word “de-nominate” and that was why I had to lose in the Court of Appeal and go back for by-elections making me also to pay for both the High Court and Court of Appeal.

Therefore, the integrity of the Electoral Commission should also be addressed by this because these are people who sometimes connive with others and make us suffer. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the contributions. 19 members have contributed and I want to put the question that the question be put. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the Bill be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, tomorrow we shall do Committee Stage for all the Bills because the principles and amendments are the same. 

MS AGABA: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I am alive to the discussions we held here during the Constitution (Amendment) Bill that we popularly called the “Magyezi Bill.” It was during the debate like we have just had and at the Committee Stage, some few issues came in and ended in the report. 

The Rules of Procedure of Parliament allow that if there is an issue that you have not brought to the committee during the consultations, it can come at Committee Stage. However, when we went to court, part of the ruling was that the issues that entered the report that were not part of the original Bill were null and void. That is how the two years extension and others were cancelled.

Madam Speaker, just from the preceding discussion we have had, I enjoyed the debate especially about the academic qualifications for the local council leaders. It is a good debate and it seems everybody supports it and we have the persuasion to even bring it at Committee Stage.

However, this issue did not come in the original Bill presented by the Attorney-General. Therefore, I would like to seek your guidance as we proceed to debate the Bill at Committee Stage, would it be right that we raise some of these issues at that level? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I will make the ruling tomorrow. Honourable members, House adjourned to tomorrow at 2 p.m.
 
(The House rose at 8.30 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 27 February 2020 at 2.00p.m.) 
