Wednesday, 20 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the chair)

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR  
                                                                         
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting. I only wish to remind Cabinet that the ministers who did not answer questions last week are expected to do so tomorrow, this time without fail, and they should not say that there was no notice. The Minister of Defence and the Minister of Health were on the Order Paper last week; they had questions to answer.

2.57
MR STEPHEN TASHOBYA (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you so much, Rt Hon. Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise a matter of national importance that is affecting my constituency, Kajara County, in the sub counties of Ihunga and Kibatsi. These people have experienced an attack of pests in the form of caterpillars which are black and green. The pests have attacked crops such as cassava, sweet potatoes, coffee, grass and many others including bananas. The nature of this attack is that even when animals graze in the fields and on the pastures that have been attacked by these pests, those animals die instantly.

The residents of the two sub counties, specifically in the parish of Nyakibigi, in the cells of Kiziko, have raised this matter through the district to the Ministry of Agriculture and the responsible commissioner in charge of crop protection. It is now about two weeks, no response has been received and pastures and gardens continue to be devastated and animals continue to die.

May I request the responsible minister to undertake an immediate visit to the affected sub counties of Ihunga and Kibatsi to find out the cause of these attacks and also come out with remedies to arrest this otherwise very serious situation. Through you, Madam Speaker, I want to request that next week as you have directed the ministers to respond, that the responsible minister also comes up with remedial measures that have been undertaken to arrest this otherwise very serious situation.

THE SPEAKER: I do not see the Minister of Agriculture here; I do not know whether the Government Chief Whip can undertake to deliver the message. It seems they have been waiting for two weeks for remedial measures from Government.

3.00
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Kasule Lumumba): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker and members. I also want to thank my colleague for raising this. I will inform the Ministry of Agriculture and we shall get the response within one week.


BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE 

THE PETROLEUM (REFINING, GAS PROCESSING AND CONVERSION, TRANSPORTATION AND STORAGE) BILL, 2012

Clause 21

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, yesterday we considered clause 21 and the period for operationalising the refinery was proposed as 20 years; in fact, it was at that point that we adjourned. So we were supposed to conclude on clause 21 by pronouncing ourselves.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I thank the chairman and members. I thought that overnight we would have looked at it and the chairperson would come up with a middle position. The contention was whether to have the five years initially and an addition of another 20 years of a licence, making it 25 years and yet the lifespan of our oil is estimated to be 30 years. We were saying that would mean granting these licenses in perpetuity. Once it exceeds five years, then that already is a lease.

I thought that the chairperson would consider the fact that even if you give 15 years, you will not terminate but you will be renewing every five years depending on the performance of the investment, the performance on the environment, the performance on compliance with the legal framework and so on. So, the 15 years would not mean that we are limiting or taking away. The investor would still be eligible for renewal every five years as and when the need arises. 

I thought it would be better also for the country to retain control over this vital resource. If you have signed off and the licensee has it all in his hands to do what he or she wishes, you will find that at the end of the day the country is the one at loss. I also did consultations and indeed there is no standard that it has to be a minimum of 29 years, even with Ghana and other countries. That is why I would request the chairperson and the minister to reconsider this and go by the initial provision in the Bill.

The drafters of the Bill saw it fit to give the first five initial years and then another 15 years. The drilling is not like our normal drilling; it is done 24 hours. Those drilling machines do not rest. By the end of the 15 uninterrupted years, you must have broken even, and that is why I would say that we go by what was put in the Bill. The position in the Bill was five years, where you set up your machines and facilities, then have 15 uninterrupted years. I would propose that we go by what was suggested by the technical team, the drafter. The 15 years are well within and we should support this, Madam Chairperson.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chair, first and foremost, I agree with hon. Ssekikubo that he has got his worries; they are there. However, we already have countries which have benchmarked the midstream oil, those that have done very well such as Norway. At the same time, he talked of consultations. I think yesterday it was mostly me who disagreed with him on this Floor but he did not take his time to consult me; I do not know whom he consulted on this matter.

Madam Speaker, my fear is that we will make a law which will prohibit investors from coming. The people who invest in this industry are not that many; the companies are not many. These are the same companies in Ghana, Norway and everywhere. So, if  you make a law to prohibit them from coming here, - after seeing that they cannot recover their investment - then that law really would be bad for this country.

I would like to persuade my colleague, hon. Ssekikubo, that let us agree with what is accepted internationally, especially from those countries which are doing very well in midstream oil. Somebody investing US$ 4 billion to US$ 6 billion has to be given ample time to recoup his investment. So, I would plead with you to accept the position of the committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is there no measure for the minister to intervene in case there is a breach?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chair, I want to agree with you entirely, and I think what the minister and the Attorney-General have to assure the House that there exist instruments and ways in which this perennial long term kind of agreement has to be regulated; is it a very five years? What are the investment targets? What are the performance targets? 

The challenge would be that if you give an open cheque without those checks and controls, it can be abused. In most cases, investors tend to be very smart in such agreements that it will be very difficult to throw him out if you do not put those checks from the very beginning. I think that kind of information is what members need.

MR WERIKHE: when you look at clause 31, it talks about suspension or cancellation of a licence. So, if a licensee does not meet the terms and conditions that were used to grant a licence, it is this clause that can actually cause the cancellation.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, you know this country is groaning under the contract with Umeme of a few million dollars, but here we are now talking about billions of dollars’ worth of investment. So, let us not set the noose for ourselves. I was surprised; I was with hon. Mukitale here yesterday and now he turns up to give a contrary opinion yet we had agreed yesterday. Sincerely, why don’t we look at the merits of this point?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to appeal to members to be reasonable and not to make the situation so unconducive that nobody will come. We are competing with Kenya; they have found oil. We are competing with Tanzania. We are no longer alone. I do not know what will happen if we continue with stringent conditions.

MS NAKAYENZE: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. It is clear that when the discoveries were made, the nation knew that there were a certain number of barrels that were underground and each day there has to be a number of barrels to be produced. Given that, I am sure we are able to detect how many it will take us to extract, and that is where we can begin from. If we know that by 20 years our resources will be depleted, then we have to move accordingly.

MS MULONI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I want to thank colleagues for supporting what the committee amended. I just want to give more information so as to make members comfortable and to enable us move on with this clause.

In regard to the amount of oil that we have in place, so far we have established three and half billion barrels from only 40 per cent of the area covered. So, as we move forward we expect more discoveries and, therefore, the period of exploration, development and production will inevitably change. So, these facilities which we are putting in place could even serve beyond, when you look at oil from the neighbouring countries, in the event that we exhaust what we have in the country. However, I believe we will get more reserves and therefore we should be in position to operate beyond the 25 years that we are talking about. 

Two, the Government of Uganda is going to participate in this facility. We have already agreed that it will be a public-private partnership where the Government of Uganda will have 40 per cent and then the private investors would have 60 per cent. So, the government is already involved. 

When we look for investors to come and invest with us, we should be able to give them conditions or provisions which will help them mobilise resources. We are talking of mobilising US$ 2 to US$ 3 billion. That is the amount of money we are talking about. So, when you are looking at investors mobilising resources, they look at the period within which they are going to operate to recoup their investment and earn a return. Of course, all these considerations, much as hon. Ssekikubo is now agreeing with the initial proposal, because we had these discussions, must be made. 

We did benchmarking to look at what period these refineries normally operate, and that is why we agreed with the committee. Also, as the Chairperson and other members said, there are provisions in this Bill that provide for cancellation or suspension of a licence. Likewise, even the Umeme contract has provisions for revocation or cancelling of the contract.  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have three issues to raise. One is that yesterday when we were here in the House, some Members walked out and that even prompted the roll call.  However, I want to bring to the attention of this House the reason as to why some members walked out.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nzoghu, where in clause 21 is that provision?  

MR NZOGHU: It is relevant, Madam Chair. I am building my point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No; are you dealing with clause 21? 

MR NZOGHU: Let me give my input, Madam Chairperson. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Address clause 21.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, it is clearly stated in our rules that when the Speaker is talking, the member must sit, listen and not argue with the Chair. Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to start arguing with the Chair when on the microphone?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, you are not supposed to argue when the Speaker is speaking. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I seek clarification from the honourable minister if she can give us some rough idea as to how long our deposits will last when we are refining them. This is because it has an impact on how many years we will be giving to the company which is going to run a refinery.

MRS MULONI: Thank you, Chair. I explained that so far from the reserves which we have established, the oil which has been discovered is about 3.5 billion barrels. If you consider a refinery which is going to process oil at about 60,000 barrels per day, this could take between 25 to 30 years. However, as I told you, it is only 40 per cent of the area so far which has been explored. This is the oil which is in place. 

The success rate at which we are discovering oil in Uganda is so high; it is 90 and above, almost the highest in the world. So, we believe that as we continue with the exploration, we are going to discover more oil and that means it will take us over a longer period of time or increase the capacity of the refinery if we are to go for that period. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I would like to support your argument. It is good that the minister has mentioned the billions of investment. If you are talking about US$ 3 billion which you are going to invest in Uganda, what does that mean? It means you make a projection, a cashflow projection, which will show that  five years upfront will be the cost of putting up that plant; that is if you make that cashflow projection. That means, if you are giving a person 15 years, already five years have gone according to the billions he is talking about. 

In that event, a cost which is committed in an investment is to achieve an objective. You look at the market. You are investing US$ 3 billion and you are competing with upcoming countries which are going to produce oil. Which company can project US$ 3 billion for 15 years as a lifespan and you say that you are able to renew. 

I want to ask Members, and to urge them; suppose somebody says that they are giving you continuity in Parliament for 20 years and another one comes and says they are giving you renewals every five years you come, which one do you take? You take continuity of 20 years because you are assured. Anybody operating a business must be assured by the projection and the investment in the lifespan of the money you are investing. There is no business person who can invest US$ 3 billion and you say that you are going to renew a licence for every five years. It cannot happen.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Chair, for giving me the opportunity to seek this clarification from the honourable Minister of Energy. The honourable minister argued that because we are going to be getting petroleum from the neighbouring country, the refinery or whatever facility would actually have volumes to process. I understand that the rate of return on investment is dependent on the money you sink in, the volume of actual processing you do, including the volume of oil. Doesn’t that argument of hers, that we have oil coming in from neighbouring countries to feed the facility, actually lend credence to our argument now that there will be much oil, so it will be quicker, the investor will recoup his money earlier than 20 years? Doesn’t she think so, because there will be more oil to process and sell?

Secondly, the honourable minister talks about benchmarking Ghana. One thing that really makes me uncomfortable in this Parliament is when something is right with Ghana, you do not want it. When you think it is what you want, then you refer to Ghana. We talked about the national oil companies of Norway and Ghana. We wanted to borrow the principles, the government refused. Now, you want to borrow what you benchmarked from Ghana yet during the benchmarking visits, you discovered that one of the biggest problems Ghana is facing is the duration of contracts. They said they blundered because they gave very long-term contracts. They have since learnt lessons and they want to review, but they cannot. So, why does Government want to borrow a thing which even Ghana is crying about and they leave out the other ones which Ghana is happy about?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chair, did you go to Ghana?

MR WERIKHE: There are teams which went. I did not go but we got reports. In benchmarking, we had several countries within Africa and outside. When you look at all these countries, they are at 20 to 25 years.

The refinery we are talking about, we are not pegging it to the oil of today only. South Africa has no oil but has three refineries. Actually, these refineries are making money for South Africa. For us in Uganda, if we are efficient we could even process oil for other countries like Southern Sudan, DR Congo. So, a refinery is an investment. It is not only – Madam Chair –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, we did the benchmarking. I have told you South Africa has no oil but has three refineries and these are making money. It is true we can do that but we have to think beyond our oil.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in sub-clause (1), insert the words, “for five years at a time” at the end of the sub-clause. The justification is: to establish a clear and predictable monitoring framework to ensure efficiency of operations. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 25, disclosure of corporation agreements by applicants. In sub-clause (1), insert the words, “in accordance with this Act”-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members! Are you listening to the amendments or you are also conducting small amendments there? 

MR WERIKHE: Substitute sub clause (2) with the following:
“The Minister may require alterations referred to in sub section (1) where-
(a) 	there is lack of sole risk provision or requirement of unanimous voting;

(b) 	there is no area of mutual interest agreement;

(c) 	there is a right of first refusal;

(d) 	where the contractual arrangements directly or indirectly affects- 
(i) the operations of the storage facility;
(ii) the rights pertaining to the access or use of the facilities; or
(iii) applicable tariffs or pricing of purchased petroleum commodities or sale of petroleum products.

(e) 	any other reason as the Minister may deem necessary in accordance with this Act.”

	The justification is: to broaden the scope under which the minister may require the alteration of the co-operation agreement. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27

MR WERIKHE: Amend clause 27 as follows:
(a) 	In sub clause (1), substitute the words “petroleum activities” with the words, “midstream operations” and insert the word, “industry” between the words, “petroleum” and “practices”. The justification is that this is a  consequential amendment to separate upstream activities from midstream operations and to apply the word “best petroleum industry practices” as defined in the Bill. 

(b) In sub clause (2) - 
(i) substitute the words, “petroleum activities” with the words, “midstream operations”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to separate upstream activities from midstream operations. 

(ii) 	Substitute paragraph (a) with the following: “controlling the flow and preventing the waste, emission or discharge of petroleum commodities or petroleum products into the environment.” Justification: to make reference to the proper subject matter of the flow, waste or discharge intended, and to apply the word “environment” in its broad word sense. 

(iii) In paragraph (b), delete the word, “or” appearing immediately after the word “water”. 
	
	Justification: to achieve clarity. 

(iv)	Substitute paragraph (c) with the following: “(c) preventing the pollution of any water well, spring, stream, river or lake by the escape of petroleum commodities or petroleum products, chemicals or any other waste products, discharges or effluent.” 
	
	Justification: to clearly state potential pollutants to water sources within the midstream.

(v) 	In paragraph (d), substitute the word, “it” with the word, “pollutant”. Justification: to clarify what is meant for treatment or discharge is the pollutant. 

(vi)	In paragraph (e), substitute the word, “activity” with the words, “midstream operation”. Justification: to separate midstream operations under the midstream Bill from petroleum activities under the upstream law. (c) In sub clause (3), substitute the number 46(3) with the number 39(3). Justification: to correct a wrong reference.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 27 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 27, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, amend clause 28 as follows: 
(a) 	Substitute the headnote with the following: “Refining, conversion, transmission or midstream storage of authorised substance.”  The justification is: to delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities.

(b) 	In sub clause (1), substitute the word, “may” with the word “shall” and the words, “processing, transportation” with the words, “refining, conversion”. Also, insert the word “midstream” immediately before the word “storage”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to separate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities and to prevent the licensee from using the licence for a different purpose. 

(c) 	In sub clause (2), substitute the words “processing, transportation” with the words, “refining conversion” and insert the word, “midstream” immediately before the word “storage”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to separate midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. 

(d) 	In sub clause (3), substitute the word, “five” with word “ten”.  The justification is: to provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, amend clause 29 as follows-
(a) 	In sub clause (1), substitute the word, “operator” with the word “licensee” where it appears, and substitute the word, “petroleum or gas activity” with the word, “midstream operations”.  The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to separate midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities and to ensure that the regulator deals directly with the licensee. 

(b) 	Substitute the words, “petroleum activity” with the words, “midstream operations” in sub clause (2).  The justification is that this is for consistency. 

(c)	Substitute sub clause (3) with the following: “The cost to the Authority of any action under subsection (2) may be recovered by the Authority from the licensee as a debt due to the Authority and within a time period prescribed by regulation or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.” The justification is: to redraft the sub clause for clarity. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed.

MS ADONG: Thank you, madam Chair. I propose an amendment on clause 29(2) to read as follows: “Where direction given under this section is not complied with, the Authority...”  - we remove the words, “by its servants or agents” - “...may enter into the place where the petroleum activity is being operated...”  The justification is that by saying, “by its servants or agents”, we are repeating ourselves because the Authority works through those agents. 

MS MULONI: Madam Chair, I do not support the proposal of the Member. It is important to leave the words, “servants or agents” to be explicit and to empower the Authority to carry out its work. 

MS ADONG: Madam Speaker, we all know that the Authority exists because of the servants and the structures that exist. Why should we emphasise again by saying, “by its agents or servants”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when the Authority goes to enter a premise, the Authority will not move from Parliament to go there. They send someone with a letter to say, “I am the agent of Uganda Revenue Authority, I have been asked to close your office”. So, that person must be identifiable.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, mine is a bit different. On clause 29(1), they say, “Where a facility is being operated in contravention of this Act, the Authority may, by notice served to the licensee of the facility, direct the operator to take, within a reasonable time limited by the notice, all necessary steps to cease operations and to dismantle, to the satisfaction of the Authority...” 

The amendment I want to cause is based on the fact that that our operations are in a very sensitive Albertine Graben area. The moment a facility is being operated in contravention of this Act, say it is disregarding environmental concerns, and it is within the Albertine and the Great Lakes, to safe guard against this I would propose that we delete, “take, within reasonable time limited by the notice, all necessary steps” because that is giving leeway within which further destruction would be occasioned. 

It is better, once a notice has been served to the licensee of the facility, to direct the operator to cease operations and to dismantle, to the satisfaction of the Authority, any plant and equipment used for purposes of petroleum or mid-stream operations. The moment you delay, you allow even further room and it could cause an irreversible impact. This is a very sensitive region and the eco system is badly damaged.  So, I would think that once it is established, a notice must be given to direct the operator to cease operations but not to, even after that, allow time. Madam Chairperson, I propose that we delete the words “to take, within a reasonable time limited by the notice, all necessary steps”. I beg to move.

MR WERIKHE: First of all, we have talked about constructing a refinery taking five years, what of dismantling? It is true that you can give notice but you should allow time where the necessary steps are taken in order to dismantle. You are not going to dismantle on day one the moment you issue a notice. It is very difficult. I believe that this sub clause takes into account all these. If you are going to take five years constructing a refinery and you want to dismantle the refinery and really deliver it away safely, you will not do it within a day. It is impossible and that is what actually happens.

MR SSEKIKUBO: That is not the spirit of this provision. The dismantling is to dismantle to the satisfaction of the Authority. It is not that you completely do away with the facility but those offending sections of the facility are the ones to be eliminated. If the chairperson is considering this, even the word, “may” should have been replaced with “shall” so that it is mandatory. The stopping must be forthwith. If there is any contravention, this could have dire consequences; it could be a spillage or anything worse than you want the House to believe. 

Once there is any contravention, and indeed it has been established, by notice halt. It is not to say that we are meaning that we dismantle the facility; no. Those areas that are contravening are the ones where an urgent stop must take effect. Short of that, you will find your waters polluted because you are waiting for the period within which to curb the operations. You could find your flora and fauna destroyed beyond.

So I think now that we are working in a very fragile environment, - the eco-system, this Albertine Graben, is very sensitive - immediate efforts should be taken. That is why I propose that members have a look at this clause 29 and really move in time to stop the damage that could be occasioned. 

DR EPETAIT: I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. If your read the intent of that clause 29 (1), we are talking about an operator who has contravened this Act. For goodness’s sake, why would we give reasonable time for somebody to continue contravening the Act? The proposed amendment by hon. Ssekikubo is indeed intended to help the Authority to bite where the operator has offended. We do not have to give a subjective period for the operator to cease operation.

I would like to convince the minister and the chairperson of the committee to accept that amendment. On that note, if you look at sub clause (2), I will propose that we use “shall” where a direction under this section is not complied with. You know, if an operator has refused to comply with the directions of the Authority, the Authority by its servants or agents shall enter - I want to propose that the Authority be given a mandatory entrance in order to intervene in case the Act has been contravened.

Madam Chair, I am seeing that the minister and the chair are in consent with us over this – (Laughter) - and I think that it is really in order. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Actually, the worry of hon. Ssekikubo is already catered for. When you read sub clause (1), it says, “Where a facility is being operated in contravention of this Act, the Authority may, by notice served on the operator of the facility, direct the operator to take, within a reasonable time limited by the notice…” The reasonable time is limited by the notice; in other words, we are giving the operator the flexibility to determine the weight of the work that is supposed to be done or dismantled. So, I think here it is already catered for. 

If the Authority decides or determines that in their assessment, this facility may take five days, in the notice they would write that, “We are hereby giving you five days to dismantle this facility.” So it is already catered for here because it will be indicated within the notice according to the assessment done by the Authority. I think hon. Ssekikubo should concede that it is already catered for.

MRS MULONI: I thank you, Madam Chair. In addition to what my colleague has just said, normally when you are in contravention, the first thing that you do if you are given notice is to remedy or to make good whatever contravention. So, what this clause is saying is that where a facility is being operated in contravention of this Act, the Authority may, by notice served on the operator of the facility, direct the operator to take within a reasonable time limited by the notice. So, that communication is made to give the operator time to remedy. In the event that they do not, you then enter the facility and carry out your duties as an Authority.

MR SEBUNYA: I thank you. I would like to support hon. Ssekikubo but at this time, we are guessing. There are so many processes that we have not experienced before as this is a new industry. So, if we assign time like a month or two, there are so many things that we do not know. So, I would propose that we stay this because we are not casting this law in stone; we can amend it in future as and when we see the situation applying. Otherwise, if we lock ourselves in a process, we have never dismantled a refinery, and we have provisions in the regulations that we shall allow the Authority to make regulations that are particular and specific to the activity. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But honourable members, just on a general note; is it possible to terminate a contract without notice?

HON. MEMBERS: No.

MS ANNE MARIA NANKABIRWA: I thank you, chairperson. I would like to support hon. Ssekikubo on this note. According to the sub clause, it is not dismantling the whole refinery. When a contract is being signed, first of all, there is a field development plan. The licensee must present even the equipment, because there is some equipment that the Authority may not accept in relation to the environment and the chemical composition. 

Now, in view of this, I think there was some bit of oversight. There is one problem; we may not fix the lower threshold of the time in the notice but it is very prudent that we determine the higher threshold because there might be a problem of compromise in the Authority itself. I think we, as legislators, need to look at this clearly. What time can we set? We may set six months, for example because we have not defined in the Bill something called “reasonable time.” (Interjection) Madam Speaker, I need to be protected. (Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Is the honourable member - (Interjection) - Why can’t you listen? (Interjection) I am not arguing journalism; this is engineering.

The procedural matter is that the member holding the Floor participated in the deliberations of this report. I do not know whether it is right for her to start debating on the Floor of this Parliament when she is actually a member of the committee. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I am following up on your observation whether termination can be effected without notice. I wanted us to look at clause 31 of the same Bill. You have to read 29 together with 31 because 31(2) is a little bit more exhaustive and it says: “For the purposes of subsection (1), the licensee shall not be treated as in default unless the Minister has served on the licensee a notice in writing giving the particulars of any default complained of and the licensee has not within a reasonable time specified in the notice remedied the default, or where the default cannot be remedied, offered to the Minister in respect of the default adequate compensation.” 

Madam Chair, these are some of the basic principles of natural justice, that the person in default is given an opportunity to remedy the fault or even to be heard. These are capital intensive projects involving a lot of money, unless you want to send away these investors. (Interjections) We need them. Don’t we need them? I beg to submit.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chair. I find myself agreeing with the Attorney-General and with a heavy heart, as my brother hon. Ssekikubo would say, disagreeing with the proposal made by hon. Ssekikubo. Even when he rose, as he was explaining, I understood it just the way he did, but - (Interjection) - It cannot be exact because we are not sharing the substance between our two ears but it can be approximate. (Laughter) This is in good faith. 

When there has been a contravention, I think what this law is proposing is to give an opportunity. If you remove the reasonableness in legislation, you will become a dictator. In this case, the picture being portrayed that you are in contravention is dismantle and go. Are we talking about a chapati seller or a refinery that is about oil with mass investment? Are you talking about a kiosk downtown in Kampala? What are we talking about?

I would love to implore my colleagues, and honestly so, that this is supposed to give a possible means to remedy if there has been any contravention. The reasonable notice here is actually limited by the notice given. The reasonable time is limited by the notice. Who of us here know the timeframe the Authority is going to give to the defaulting licensee? It is based on the magnitude of the work assessed by the Authority. Can we ever legislate on this without getting into speculation? Madam Chairperson, that was my fear. 

On the other note from the doctor, whom I rarely disagree with, when he said we should substitute the word “may” with “shall”, actually in my mother tongue, the word “shall” sounds better. In this regard, I think the word “may” is not only – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, it is imperative that even when we are sharing ideas from various backgrounds, we accord each other dignity and decorum. For a Member to impute that a Member made a proposal basing on a mother tongue, that he is not well schooled, that this is the literal interpretation attached to the word; is the Member in order to proceed in a way that would cast doubt and even stifle the lively debate that this House is enjoying, in spite of our backgrounds?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the Member was referring to his own mother tongue, not the one of hon. Epetait.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you. Madam Chair and honourable colleagues, I just want to draw your attention to how we are proceeding on this. The issue of environment, for heaven’s sake, is about life and death to all of us. It is our duty to protect it and not to allow it to be put on experimental basis. If I hear from my colleague, hon. Kasule, that we do not know how we are proceeding, that we are experimenting on how we are going, I would think that is a personal view but not the government position. 

A functioning government undertakes an activity which is well researched, planned and projected. If that is the case, I do not see why the government is giving a vague period of time in this scenario. I would have thought, with the projection, they should have proposed that within this period of time, the investor would have made up on the wrongs on the environmental issues - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Anywar, I think you are driving us in a different direction. It could be a breach of failing to pay or feed his workers.

MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Chair, I conclude –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Member, you are just driving us further from the text of the law.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Chair, I was passionate about environment that is why I singled it out. My prayer is that we should not wait for when things have already gone far. I want to believe that all these activities will be monitored and evaluated as the process goes on. We do not need much time to make it good, whether environmental, health or safety and the like. If we put in place a close monitoring process, we will catch up with all this mischief before it goes out of hand. Therefore, the minister or the government will not need that unspecified time to make it good to the investor. 

I pray, Madam Chairperson, that my honourable colleague considers this in good faith. It may make her work and also that of government easy to conclude in case of eventualities or even to tighten the monitoring and evaluation process as the process goes on. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not think it is also right for us to tie the hands of the Authority even before we set it up. I now put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR WERIKHE: In clause 30, sub clause (2), we propose to substitute the words, “the obligations” with the words “terms and conditions”. Also, insert the words “and disposal” after the word “decommissioning” and delete the words “and the conditions on which it has been granted.” The justification is that in the midstream, emphasis is put on terms and conditions as contained in the licence and to delete redundant words. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, amend clause 31 by inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The Minister shall inform Parliament of the suspension or cancellation of the licence within fourteen days of service of the notice in subsection (1).” The justification is: to update Parliament on this development. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute sub clause (2) with the following: “(2) Where a condition of the licence, which may include decommissioning and disposal costs has not been fulfilled, the licensee shall pay the amount which fulfilment of such condition would have cost the licensee if the work had been completed.” The justification is that the midstream license contains terms and conditions and the provision should reflect this. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, amend clause 33 as follows: 
(a) In sub clause (1), substitute the words “petroleum, refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage” with the words “midstream operations.” 

(b)	In sub clause (2), substitute the words “petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage” with the words “midstream operations and midstream storage.”

(c)	In sub clause (3), substitute the words “petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage” with the words “midstream operations and midstream storage.” 

(d)	In sub clause (4), substitute the words “petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage” with the words, “midstream operations and midstream storage”. 

(e) 	In sub clause (5), substitute the words, “fifteen thousand” with the words, “five hundred thousand”. 

The justification for sub clause (5) is: to provide for a more deterrent penalty. For sub clauses (1) up to (4), the justification is that these are consequential amendments to separate the segments of the petroleum value chain. I beg to move. 

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I just want to seek clarification from the chairperson of the committee. He says substitute with the words “midstream operations and midstream storage”. Isn’t midstream storage part of midstream operations? Why do you keep on saying midstream operations and midstream storage if the storage is part of the midstream operations?

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chair, I agree with my colleague. If we go to the definitions clause, we are talking about midstream petroleum operations. So, it should not be just substituting with “midstream operations” but it should be substituting with “midstream petroleum operations”. So we should be trying to delete and substitute with “midstream petroleum operations”, which fits into the definition clause. I also agree with the colleague that we do not need to repeat ourselves because storage is part of the midstream petroleum operations.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in the interpretation clause, these two words are defined separately. Yesterday, I read out to honourable colleagues the meaning of midstream operations but I think I may have to repeat this: 

“Midstream operations mean planning, preparation, installation and execution of operations related to refining, conversion, transmission and storage of petroleum products including cessation of operations and decommissioning of facilities.” That is midstream operations. “Midstream storage means the storage of petroleum commodities or petroleum products at a facility for the purpose of refining, conversion or transmission.” So, we have these in the interpretation clause. There are two separately defined words. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, amend clause 35 as follows- 
(a) 	Substitute the head note with the following: “Methods and practices for midstream storage.” The justification is: to use the words, “midstream storage” which is defined, and to differentiate it from the storage covered under the upstream Bill. 

(b) 	In sub clause (1), substitute the word “petroleum” with the word “midstream.” The justification is: to use the word midstream storage which is defined and to differentiate it from the storage covered under the upstream Bill. 

(c) 	In sub clause (1)(d), substitute the words “charges for services rendered” with the words “tariffs charged.” The justification is: to use the word “tariffs” as defined in the Bill. 

(d) 	In sub clause (2), substitute the word “charges” with the word, “tariffs” and insert the word “midstream” before the word “storage”. The justification is: to delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities and to ensure that the regulator deals directly with the licensee, and also to use the word “tariff”, which is defined in the Bill. 

(e)	 In sub clause (3), insert the words “commodities or products” at the end of the clause. The justification is: to use the words as defined in the Bill. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I just wanted to check your (c). There is no (1)(d); there is (1) (a), (b), (c) but there is no (d). Are you introducing a new (d)?

MR WERIKHE: Yes, we are introducing a new one, Madam Chair. It is supposed to be (c), Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, it is 1(c)?

MR WERIKHE: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 35 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, amend clause 36 as follows: (a) Substitute the headnote with the following: “Methods and practices for transmission of petroleum commodities or products.” Justification: It is a consequential amendment to separate the midstream transmission covered under this Bill from transportation in the upstream Bill.

(b)	 Delete the words “transportation or”. Justification: Transportation only applies in the upstream and downstream and not in the midstream.

(c) 	In paragraph (b), delete the words “transportation or” and insert the words, “commodities or products” after the word, “petroleum”. The justification is that this is consequential upon the separation of the upstream from the midstream petroleum value chain.

(d) 	In paragraph (c), substitute the words “charges of” with the words “tariffs for”. Justification: To apply the appropriate word “tariff” as defined in the Bill.

(e) 	In paragraph (d), substitute the word “charges” with the word “tariffs” and delete “transportation or”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to separate the midstream transmission covered under this Bill from transportation in the upstream law. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, in clause 37(1), delete the word “petroleum”. The justification is that this is a consequential amendment to separate midstream operations from upstream activities.

In sub-clause (2), substitute the word “extra ordinary” with the word “extraordinary”. This is just a grammatical correction; it is one word. Justification: To apply the proper word “extraordinary” instead of “extra ordinary”.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 37 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, substitute the word “petroleum” with the words, “midstream operations”. This is to distinguish the midstream register from the register established under the upstream Bill. (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chair. Clause 38 is about register of licences. It says, “The Minister shall cause to be kept a register of all licences issued under this Act called the petroleum register, in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.” 

I propose to amend the clause by inserting a new sub clause (2) to read as follows: “The Authority shall, at the end of every financial year, – or the Minister – publish in the Gazette a complete list of persons to whom licences were issued, including their names, physical addresses and contacts.” Once you keep a register, it is also important, for purposes of transparency, to publish the persons to whom these licences have been given and their proper addresses so that the country can know how we performed and how we can proceed. I beg to move.

MR KAFABUSA: Madam Chair, we could even improve on this, which is actually in the Bill, to accommodate the interest of hon. Ssekikubo. (Interjection) He is the one who has moved the amendment. I propose to amend as follows: “The Minister shall cause to be kept a register of all licences issued under this Act, called the midstream operations register, which will be accessible to the public in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.” This will be available anytime one wants to look at it; one should not wait until the end of the year but they could access this any day or anytime.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Chair, I can make an improvement on what the committee chairman has proposed. We can actually do both. What you are proposing – a register - can be kept but also the publication in the Gazette at the end of the year can be done. You know how much we have struggled even at the level of Parliament to access some documents relating to oil matters. So let us do both. You have actually made an improvement; you can keep a list that can be accessed anytime but also publish in the Gazette at the end of the year.  

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chair, if this register is availed to the public at any one time, that means it has to be published. (Interjection) Yes! It is not only at the end of the year. You are saying that if we have the register available to us at the end of every year, it will be limiting us as the public. Why don’t we require the Minister to have this register available to the public at any one time? It means it will be published.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Werikhe, I think what hon. Ssekikubo wants is an account of who has received a licence during the course of the year. You could, for example, close this year and say these 30 people got licences and the next year another group. I think that is it – those who has received throughout the year. 

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chair, if it is in the course of the year then I support hon. Ssekikubo, but not the licences - We have got the Access to Information Act, which is in place; we can access this information anytime we want. For those licences within that year, they can be in the Gazette; I think there is no harm.

MRS MULONI: Madam Chair, as the committee chairperson had expressed, that since this information shall be accessible to the public anytime, should Members feel that in addition to that we should have it gazetted, I have no problem with that. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed by the committee chairperson and by hon. Ssekikubo.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in sub clause (3), substitute the word “petroleum” with the word “midstream”. This is a consequential amendment.

In sub clause (6), substitute the word “one” with the words “three hundred”. Justification: To provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 39 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, before clause 40 there is Part V, “Petroleum Acquisition and Pricing”. Amend part V as follows: Substitute the cross heading with the following:  “Acquisition and pricing of petroleum commodities and products.” The justification is: to bring out the distinction between midstream operations and upstream petroleum activities.

In clause 40 - 
(i) 	Substitute the head note with the following: “Acquisition and pricing of petroleum commodities.” 

(ii) 	Substitute for sub clause (1) the following:  “Whenever available, a refinery or conversion plant in Uganda shall give priority to petroleum commodities produced in Uganda.” The justification is: to drop redundant words.

(iii) 	Substitute sub clause (3) with the following:  “The pricing of petroleum produced shall be in accordance with the method prescribed by regulations and shall take into account world market pricing based on arm’s length principles.” The justification is: to mandate the minister to prescribe the pricing of petroleum produced in the midstream. I beg to move.

MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, I just want to confirm something from the chairman. I heard him say that the title should read, “Acquisition and pricing of petroleum commodities and products”. I just want to confirm that he stopped at commodities.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, to confirm to the honourable minister, I stopped at “petroleum commodities”; I did not transcend that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, can you read what you want us to amend? What do you want it to read like?

MR WERIKHE: In clause 40, the head note in the Bill is, “Crude oil or gas acquisition and pricing.” What we propose is, “Acquisition and pricing of petroleum commodities.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, in Part V you wrote, “Petroleum acquisition and pricing.” I do not know whether you are substituting this for Part V.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, part V in the Bill is “Petroleum acquisition and pricing”. The proposed amendment we are making is, “Acquisition and pricing of petroleum commodities”.  That is what we want. Delete the word “products” for it to read, “Acquisition and pricing of petroleum commodities.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, the original clause 40(1) reads, “Whenever available, the refinery or gas processing and conversion plant shall obtain crude oil or raw gas from Ugandan sources.” The proposed change is saying, “Whenever available, a refinery or conversion plant in Uganda shall give priority to petroleum commodities produced in Uganda.” 

The meanings of the two are different. The other one says that the crude oil or raw gas will be obtained from Uganda. The proposed change says “shall give priority”. I think those two words are a bit different. I would propose that we use the previous words saying, “Where available, a refinery or conversion plant in Uganda shall obtain petroleum commodities produced in Uganda”. That will give the same meaning as the previous one. But when you say, “shall give priority”, the refinery operator might say “well, according to me even though the priority was to Ugandan products, under the circumstances I decided to source the crude from DRC or Southern Sudan.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is referring to the original version of 40, sub clause (1). He thinks it is more protective.

MRS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, I get the issue that is brought out by the honourable member but what the chairperson was reading- the amendment - gives Ugandan petroleum commodities the priority. This means we do not restrict the processing to only petroleum from Uganda. That is the difference. This amendment provides room for getting petroleum from outside Uganda but giving priority to Ugandan petroleum commodities. That is the difference.

MS KAMATEEKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would propose to amend subsection (2) to include, “with authority of the minister”. So, it should state, “...the refinery or gas processing and conversion plant may obtain crude oil or raw gas from outside Uganda with the authority of the minister.”

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, we are doing business and this is the business being carried out - there is a refinery, which I have set up and in an event that maybe the products in Uganda have delayed or are not there and in Congo they are available, I can bring these commodities, refine them and continue with the business. But if you are going to tag the business to the minister, I think we are stretching it very far. So I would appeal to my colleague to drop it.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I think one of the reasons why we want a refinery in Uganda is to make sure that our oil is refined here and we use the products here. However, in the event that Kenya has got cheaper crude oil than Uganda, do you want to tell us that ours should remain here unutilised and this person goes to Sudan to pick crude oil for Uganda? I was of the view that they should only import from outside when ours has been exhausted or is not available. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, suppose I have a lot of capacity and I can process the Ugandan oil and I even have extra capacity to process for Sudan, why do you want to stop me? Assuming the Ugandan one is moving but I have extra capacity for Sudan, which I am not using, why should you stop me? I am working for both.

MR LOKII: Madam Chairperson, I liken this situation to  Quality Chemicals; I think it was yesterday or the day before in papers were they were packaging drugs that they import from outside Uganda and they named or branded them as products that are produced in Uganda. I think it is important that even as we promote trade, we must not create an open window for people to undermine our own that we have put in place. On the contrary, what is evil about making the minister have control? I think it is important for us to think about that.

We have had situations in Uganda where products are not produced in Uganda but they are just brought in to be branded “made in Uganda” and yet they are not Ugandan products. So, in this case, we want to make sure that the refinery is protected first and foremost to serve the purpose for which it was established in Uganda and then at a secondary level, be able to provide services for other members within the region. I think that is what the spirit is. Thank you.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to support the committee that we should give priority to the Ugandan oil. However, just in case we have excess capacity to process other oil products from other countries or other regions, we can do it. 

Also, for the second amendment proposed by hon. Kamateeka, I would like us not to take on the ministers. These are operations. You say ministers are corrupt; supposing the minister stops the refinery from processing anything because he wants something. So, please do not put the devil - (Laughter) - do not allow our ministers to be used in the oil refinery processing operations. I thank you. 

MRS TEOPISTA SSENTONGO: Madam Chairperson, we are aware that Uganda is a liberalised economy, and with external business coming into Uganda, we are assured of having some taxation from it; so I do not see anything bad. I think let us leave it at that.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Chairperson, I think there was some omission on the part of the chairperson. He went straight to read the amendments to clause 40 but then there was an amendment that was proposed to the cross heading of Part v- (Interjections)- because when you decided to delete products again-

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have done that.   

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, you raised this issue and we accordingly amended the cross heading of Part V. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, honourable members, I put the question that clause 40 be amended as proposed. 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42

MR WERIKHE: In sub clause (1), insert the words, “for petroleum commodities and products and may further direct” immediately after the word, “requirements”. Also, insert the words “commodities or” immediately after the word “petroleum”. The justification is: to ensure the security of domestic supplies and widen the scope to cover petroleum commodities.

In sub clause (3), insert the words “commodities or products” immediately after the word, “petroleum” and insert “(1) and” immediately after “40”. The justification is: to use the term “petroleum products” as defined in the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 42 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR WERIKHE: Substitute clause 43 with the following:

“(1)	Subject to Article 26 of the Constitution, in case of war, threat of war, natural disaster or other extraordinary crisis, the Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, direct a licensee to place petroleum commodities or products at the disposal of the State. 

(2) 	Section 40 and 41 shall apply to the pricing of petroleum supplied under subsection (1) unless the particular situation warrants otherwise.

(3) 	In case a situation under subsection (2) occurs, the Minister shall, in consultation with the Minister responsible for finance and the licensee, determine the price. 

(5) The Minister shall make a report to Parliament within six months of the occurrence of war, threat of war or other crisis referred to under subsection (1).” 

The justification is: for consistency with what was passed in the upstream Bill but also to specifically ensure that the right to property is respected with regard to Article 26 of the Constitution, state interests are taken care of during war or other crises, and to enable relevant stakeholders get involved in determining the price and to appraise Parliament with regard to what transpired in the sector. I beg to move.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I want to propose a deletion on the head note of clause 43. I want to propose that we delete “etc” because this can be abused or misused. So it should read, “Supplies or deliveries in case of war, threat of war and other crises.” Let us delete “etc.”

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the honourable member. We had said that wherever “etc” appears it is deleted as a consequential amendment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. 

MR NZOGHU: I want some clarification from the chairperson with regard to the six months which the minister is required to make a report in case there is a threat or warlike situation. It was not clear, Madam Chair.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You want to understand the rationale for that provision?

MR NZOGHU: Yes, because as far as I understand, you cannot give a period of six months if there is a threat of war. I think it should be at the time when the threat is there and then the report should be submitted as immediately as possible. That is what I thought. Six months is such a long period.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Not beyond six months.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I was reading the amendment by the chairperson on 43(1). It says, “Subject to Article 26 of the Constitution, in case of war, threat of war, natural disaster or other extraordinary crisis, the Minister may, with the approval of Cabinet, direct a licensee to place petroleum commodities or products at the disposal of the State.”

Madam Chairperson, there is really not much difference between the Minister and Cabinet. The Cabinet and the Minister are one and the same. I propose we say, “...the Cabinet may, with the approval of Parliament, direct a licensee to place petroleum commodities or products at the disposal of the State.” You can even improve on that and say, “...which will be paid for by the State”, so that this investor can be secure that in the circumstances where his petroleum is seized, he can be compensated accordingly. 

My substantial amendment is that Cabinet should do with the approval of Parliament in case of a state of war because that is in the spirit of Article 26 of the Constitution. Even in this manner, let that decision be taken by Cabinet with the approval of Parliament. We should take that as a principle because once you say the minister and Cabinet, they are one and the same. However, in case of such a threat, it is proper and important that the full Cabinet takes a decision. So, it should be, Cabinet, with the approval of Parliament, direct a licensee to place petroleum at the disposal of the state. I really find this to be important.

MR NASASIRA: I just want to know from hon. Ssekikubo how Cabinet is going to direct. Cabinet directs through the minister. If we amend that one according to you, we are going to end up saying that Cabinet shall make a report to Parliament. I do not think it will work. That is not good legislation at all. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I am also happy because hon. Ssekikubo is citing Article 26 of the Constitution. In the case of Article 26 of the Constitution, for instance the case of compulsory acquisition of property, the procedure is well laid out. I do not know anywhere in that article where the Executive has got to come to Parliament for approval.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Also, honourable members, when the Cabinet directs, they come here through the minister. That is why the minister is the one signing the Bills and so forth. 

MRS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. You have wisely suggested that the Cabinet comes here through the minister and it is true that the Cabinet comes here through the minister. However, now we are talking about approval. If we are talking about approval, must the same Cabinet be the one to approve or Parliament? The normal practice is that, like for Budget, the minister brings it and then Parliament approves. I thought it wise for the Parliament to remain with an approval role. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Chair, I think we can agree that Cabinet can discuss this but the minister brings the proposal to Parliament for approval. In that way, Parliament will be able even to receive that report, make an assessment for how long it will run, how much of the product we would want; and in terms of money and assignment, we would be able to be briefed about the status quo which has warranted the government to take this action. 

So, my take on this amendment is that we allow the minister to bring the proposal to Parliament and then we approve. In this way, we will also be part and parcel of the undertaking authorising, and we will be in the know of what the government is undertaking even if it is during the war or any calamity. We represent the very people who are supposed to approve.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, you may have to look at the past upstream Bill because this is more or less - maybe the chairperson did not point it out - a consequential amendment. In the upstream Bill, we passed a similar clause as being proposed by the chairperson and the reasoning during that time, because I was in this Parliament, was that sometimes during circumstances of war, for example, it is very difficult to recall Parliament to pass a proposal of this nature. So, let us look at the upstream Bill.

MR WERIKHE: Chairperson, we passed a similar clause under clause 119 of the upstream Bill. Clause 119 in the upstream Bill talks about supplies in case of war, threat of war or other crises. This one was derived from the upstream Bill for consistency because the two Bills are working in tandem.

Madam Chairperson, I am surprised because hon. Ssekikubo was co-chairperson to me in Entebbe and we adopted this provision without any amendment. It was agreed that since we had –(Interjections)- All members who attended that adopted this. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Part VI is on cessation of petroleum activities. Amend Part VI by substituting the heading with the following: “Cessation of midstream operations.” Justification: this part deals with cessation of midstream operations. 

Substitute clause 44 with the following:
“(1) A licensee shall submit a decommissioning plan to the Authority-
(a) 	before a licence to install and operate a midstream facility expires or is surrendered; or 
(b) 	before the use of a midstream facility is terminated permanently.

(2) 	The plan referred to in subsection (1) shall contain proposals for continued operation or shutdown of the mainstream facility and decommissioning of such facilities and any other information prescribed by regulations.

(3) 	The decommissioning of the midstream facilities referred to in subsection (2) may constitute further use of the facilities in the midstream operations, other uses, complete or part removal and disposal or abandonment.

(4) 	The plan shall contain the information and evaluations deemed necessary in order to make a direction under section 47.

(5) 	The Authority may, on receipt of the plan, require further information and evaluations, or may require a new or amended decommissioning plan. 

(6) 	The licensee shall update the decommissioning plan- 

(a) 	in conjunction with any subsequent application for a permit, to make additions or substantial changes to the facilities;

(b) 	whenever the expected method or costs of carrying out the decommissioning work have changed significantly as a result of new techniques for the work becoming available;

(c) 	where the previously assumed techniques are no longer permissible or considered adequate;

(d) 	when requested by the Authority, within a reasonable time limit specified in the request.

(7) 	Unless the Authority consents to or directs otherwise, the decommissioning plan shall be submitted at the earliest four years, but at the latest two years before the time when the use of a facility is expected to be terminated permanently.” 

Justification: for consistency with what was passed in the upstream law. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute sub clause (1) with the following: “The Minister may, by regulations establish a decommissioning fund for one or several types of facilities used for midstream operations or midstream storage.” Justification: to expressly provide for a separate fund for the midstream operations. I beg to move.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, thank you. I thought initially, it was mandatory for the minister to specify by regulation how the decommissioning fund would be run. We have now shifted to just providing options with the word “may”. Is that what you intend to achieve, chairman? In sub clause (1) you say, “the minister may, by regulation.” Initially, we had thought it was mandatory, “the minister shall”. Are we now intending to make it optional? In which case, I would differ from you. 

I think matters of the decommissioning have a serious environmental implication and it should be, “the minister will do” or “shall do” what it takes. If the chair agrees with me –(Interjections)- Chair wants me to sit down. So, let the chair say what I want to say. (Laughter) I will sit.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I concede. I think we can take the amendment of hon. Alaso.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 45 be amended as proposed by the chair and as amended by hon. Alaso.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 45, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47

MR WERIKHE: Clause 47 is on the disposal of decommissioned facilities. In sub clause (4), delete the words, “and the owner of a facility” and insert the words, “of a facility” after the word, “disposal”. 

In sub clause (7), substitute the words, “petroleum activities” with the words, “midstream operations”. 

Substitute sub clause (9) with the following: “(9) Where the decommissioning fund does not cover the costs of implementation of the decommissioning plan, the licensee shall cover the additional costs and expenses.” Justification: the redraft is for clarity and delineation of the different segments of the petroleum value chain. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 47 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 47, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 48

MR WERIKHE: Clause 48, removal of property by a licensee. 

(a) 	In sub clause (1), insert the word “shall” immediately after the word, “Authority”. Justification: for clarity.

(b) 	In sub clause (1)(b), delete the words, “to plug or”. The term “plug” is used under the upstream segment. 

(c) 	In sub clause (1)(c), substitute the words, “natural resources in that area” with the words, “environment”. Justification: for clarity. 

(d) 	In sub clause 3, substitute the word, “one” with the word, “five”. Justification: to provide for a more deterrent penalty.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 48 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR WERIKHE: Clause 49, removal and sale of petroleum by the Authority. Substitute clause 49 with the following: 
“(1) Subject to section 52 and by the approval of the Minister, where a direction given under section 47 or 48 has not been complied with, the Authority may- 
(a) 	do or cause to be done all or any of the things required by the direction to be done;
(b) 	remove or cause to be removed, in such manner as the Authority deems fit, all or any of the property from the area concerned;
(c) 	dispose of, in such manner as the Authority deems fit, all or any of the property from the area concerned; and
(d) 	if the Authority has served a copy of the notice by which the direction was given on a person to whom the Authority is satisfied to be an owner of the property or part of the property, sell or cause to be sold by public auction or otherwise as the Authority deems fit, all or any of the property referred to in this section that belongs, or that the Authority believes belongs, to that person.

(2) 	The Authority may deduct from the proceeds of a sale of property under subsection (1)-
(a) 	the costs and expenses incurred by the Authority under that subsection in relation to that property;
(b) 	the costs and expenses incurred by the Authority in relation to the doing of any act required by a direction under section 47 or 48 to be done by the person, notwithstanding that the person has been convicted of an offence under section  48(3); and 
(c) 	the fees or amounts due and payable by the person under this Act for a licence. 

(3) 	The costs and expenses incurred by the Authority under subsection (1)-
(a) 	where incurred in relation to the removal, disposal or sale of property, is a debt due by the licensee to the Government; and 
(b) 	if incurred in relation to the doing of anything required by a direction under this Act to be done by a person who is or was a licensee responsible for the disposal, is a debt due by that person to the Government, and to the extent to which they are not recovered under subsection (2), may be recovered in a court of competent jurisdiction.

(7) 	Subject to subsection (3), no action shall lie in respect of the removal, disposal or sale of property under this section.” 

	Justification: for consistency with what was passed in the upstream Bill. I beg to move.

MR WAFULA: Madam Chair, I wish to add to clause 49(2) a (d). It ends at (c) but I want to add (d) to state as follows: “Any amount due and payable by court order for environmental damage sustained as a result of the licensed operations, in accordance with section 62 below”. 

Justification: this addition is intended to ensure that outstanding debts for environmental damage are paid out of the assets before the licensee receives compensation for the sale of these assets. The addition is supplemented by revisions to section 62 and the two are intended to work together to provide greater protection to victims of environmental damage, shifting the burden for recovering adequate compensation to the licensee rather than to the victim.   

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, I do not know whether I have understood you. Does that fall under the heading, “removal and sale of property by the Authority”?

MR WAFULA: Yes, it falls under clause 49; I am just making an addition.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am wondering whether it should not find another home. 

MR WERIKHE: I think when we get to compensation due to pollution, it will be taken care of. But here, under removal and sale of property by the Authority, it may not work well. I also invite the honourable colleague to look at clause 4, compliance with environmental principles and safeguards.  That is what we passed. Study that one and we can always come back to it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: We can note it and then bring it up when we are dealing with Part IX.   

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, this particular clause is being amended in reference to 47 and 49, and 47 talks about decommissioning. I would like to propose, and I hope I will be helped in this, that among the recoverables under this section we provide for an amendment 8 in regard to costs in regard to the decommissioning fund for facilities used for midstream operation and midstream storage. 

As I said earlier on, in the amendment on clause 47 we looked at the decommissioning fund - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are on clause 49.

MS ALASO: Yes. This particular amendment is looking at both clauses, isn’t it?

MR WERIHKE: Clause 49 is on removal and sale of property by the Authority.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, this removal and sale of property as proposed in the Bill is arising from failures in clause 47 and 48. In clause 47 - I am sorry but the paper work is too much here - we are talking about the decommissioning fund. I would like to think that if a licensee fails to honour obligations in regard to the decommissioning fund, when property of that licensee is being removed or sold, a portion of the proceeds should then be put to the decommissioning fund to honour or to meet the obligations of that licensee in regard to clause 47. That is my proposal. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: If it does not do harm, I think the chairperson should agree to the amendment because it is concerning the auctioned property. Now, before you hand over this amount to the owner, what both members are proposing is that if there are costs or liabilities elsewhere, why do you wait for clause 62? Once you have it and the property is being disposed of or auctioned, these others should be settled. 

The environmental damage I know would be catered for, but now under clause 49, once there is a removal and sale of property by the Authority for various reasons, members are putting a safeguard that please check. Before you hand over the balance to the owner of the assets, he should make good on these outstanding liabilities. I think that you can as well strengthen it elsewhere but it does no harm once provided for here. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I think hon. Wafula Oguttu has a point but it must be placed where it is supposed to be. A court award is a liability to a company and if it is a liability to a company, it must be put in a place where there are liabilities for damages, which is clause 50. Anybody disposing the liabilities, if you look at the balance sheet, you look at the indebtedness of that company and under the indebtedness of that company, there must be court awards that have been made within the damage. 

So I think it would be prudent if it is placed where it is supposed to be. Clause 49 says, “Removal and sale of property of the Authority.” There is another clause, clause 50, where there are liabilities, and court awards are liabilities so I think they could be put under clause 50.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, we have just looked at an amendment and the passed it. If you go back to page 41 of the harmonised version of amendments, we looked at proposals on what should be deducted if property of a licensee is being sold and removed. There is a listing on page 41, on obligations it should primarily meet. My argument is that one of the obligations it should primarily meet is the obligation to the decommissioning fund. Under the provisions for issuing of the licence, which we looked at earlier, and under the clause which looked at the decommissioning fund on page 41, we already mentioned the decommissioning fund. Actually, in my simple thinking, it would be something consequential; you will just be listing the obligations. 

You cannot run away, fail to meet your obligation and leave us with the challenge of decommissioning and then when the Authority auctions property, decommissioning is not a priority. We would like to make decommissioning a priority from the proceeds that are going to be obtained when the sale takes place.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, first all, under clause 47 which we have just passed, sub clause (9), which is under decommissioning, says, “Where the decommissioning fund does not cover the costs of implementation of the decommissioning plan, the licensee shall cover the additional costs and expenses.” 

Now, when you go to clause 49, it says, “Subject to section 52 and by the approval of the Minister, where a direction given under section 47 or 48 has not been complied with, the Authority may-”  This is what we passed in the upstream. 

MS ALASO: Do I take it that the chairperson actually agrees with my proposal because all he is outlining is actually a justification. If you look at clause 47 (9), which you have just addressed, you are saying, “Where the decommissioning fund does not cover the costs of implementation of the decommissioning plan, the licensee shall cover the additional costs and expenses.” That is good if the licensee honours his or her obligations to the end. Now, if the licensee does not honour those obligations to the end the Authority is going to intervene by selling the property; when it sells the property, then it should be duty bound –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I thought that to flow very well and even for the record of the Hansard, what we are dealing with is clause 49 with the amendment of hon. Wafula Oguttu. I thought that is what we were dealing with because we have not disposed of the amendment. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. We have acknowledged his proposal and asked him to revise it under part XI.

MS KAWOOYA: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I heard the chairperson of the committee, where I am a member, saying that he does not have a problem with what hon. Wafula Oguttu and other colleagues are raising. Now, the issue seems to be where that proposed amendment should be placed. Should it be placed under clause 49 or clause 50, which is dealing with liabilities and damages?

We are saying that in case a, b, c or d is not done, this should be done. In principle, I see that the problem is where the amendment should go. That is why the chairperson of the committee said that if hon. Wafula Oguttu could wait and we reach that stage, then his proposal can be accommodated. If we could move in that direction, then maybe it could make us move because in principle, the chairperson and the proposal are in agreement.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the amendment of hon. Wafula Oguttu is in abeyance pending Part IX. Hon. Alaso, we are looking at something different.

MR WERIKHE: I think we better pronounce ourselves –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to

Clause 50

MR WERIKHE: Clause 50, Madam Chairperson, liability for damages for disposal of decommissioned facility. In sub clause (1), substitute the words “person under obligation” with the words “licensee obliged”. Justification: for clarity.

In sub clause (2), delete the words “or owner” wherever it appears. Justification: the licensee will be responsible to the government. 

In sub clause (4), substitute the words “the owner and the state” with the word “minister”, and the word “State” with the word “government”. This is so that the minister undertakes activities or actions on behalf of government. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 50 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 50, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 51, agreed to.

Clause 52, agreed to.

Clause 53

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 53, state participation in petroleum activities. Substitute the head note with the following: “State participation in midstream operations”. Justification: to delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. 

In sub clause (1), substitute the words “petroleum activities” with the words “midstream operations”. Justification: to delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 53 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in sub clause (2)(a), substitute the word “petroleum” with the word “midstream”. Justification: to delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. 

In sub clause (5), delete the words “for a” and substitute the word “one” with the words “ten thousand”. Justification: to correct language and provide for a more deterrent penalty.

MR KASIRIVU ATWOOKI: Madam Chairperson, I want to amend sub clause (5) to say, “A person who contravenes sub section (1), (3) and (4) commits an offence”. This is because sub clause (1) is about giving priority to Ugandan citizens, (3) to companies and local products being purchased, and (4) is only about providing information. So, I would propose that sub clause (5) is amended to provide for (1), (3) and (4) for someone who commits an offence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: He is proposing that in clause 54(5), instead of just sub section (4) you add sub section (1) and (3) as areas of offence, in addition to (4).

MR KWEMARA: Madam Chairperson, we are trying to provide for Ugandan entrepreneurs to offer goods and services. However, in sub clause (2) we say that the entities referred to in subsection (1) shall have adequate resources and capacity to add value to the petroleum operations carried out by the licensee, and in (b), they should be approved by the Authority in accordance with the criteria prescribed by the minister. 

I am wondering what happens if the local companies or the Ugandan entrepreneurs do not qualify to supply the goods and services. I suggest that we borrow a leaf from Ghana because I understand that the committee benchmarked Ghana. They say that in the event of a Ghanaian company not qualifying, at least there must be provision for participation of a Ghanaian citizen with an interest of at least five per cent. 

Circumstances may arise where we do not get any company that qualifies. Can we put a provision where we say that that company could twin with another company and the other company becomes the holding company?

In sub clause (3), the licensee and sub-contractors of the licensees shall give priority to the purchase of local products and services from Ugandans wherever they are competitive in terms of price, quality and timely availability. Circumstances may arise and somebody can say you are not competitive enough as far as price and quality is concerned. Do we have any way we can help our local companies? Do we have anything like a preference percentage or do we have anything like a preference ceiling? Can we say a 10 per cent price increment will be reasonable? We need some form of affirmative action here so as to give opportunities to our local companies. Thank you.

MS ALASO: Madam Chair, this matter of local participation, provision of goods and services by Ugandan entrepreneurs is actually a very crucial matter. Last time we had moved an amendment and the House accepted it, to specify what we called Ugandan companies and competencies. We really thought we had tied this up but it seems that in the spirit of consequential amendments and carry-forwards from upstream, this particular one has been lost. I think there was general agreement in the House about local participation.

I would like to request, if it would please the Chair, to stay over this clause and then give us time to go back and look at what we passed on the upstream and seek to transplant it, to customise it somehow, so that we take care of our Ugandan companies and our interest. Otherwise, in the oil sector, what I hear now is that local companies have been edged out. People are bringing cleaners, tomatoes, potatoes, everything from outside Uganda. I think if we do not tie it up here, we are in big trouble; we will not participate in the oil industry.

So, if it will please the Chair, I would like to pray that we stay over this so that we go back on this matter with the chairman and the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chair, you know this matter is quite crucial. You know, in sub clause (3), it is the licensees and the contractors who will determine the price, the quality; we can be out punched here. They can raise the standards so high that no Musoga can provide these things. It is very serious, by the way.

MR SEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chair. I do not dispute any of the proposals but as we said, thou shall not tempt the briefcase businessman who shall take advantage of our legislature to the extent that we may say 5 percent mandatory; it means you just shop for anybody. There are people who are smart and have a share in every local company you may think of, and the local Musoga or Muganda or Munyoro will not be able to have this ingenuity and enterprise of having a smart briefcase man who has all the shares given to him as local content. 

So, as we legislate or stand over it, we must be sure of not tempting the devil that these people, instead of looking at the principle, just look for anything and say, “we can supply eggs” when actually these people do not have any eggs and they have shares in the company. That is my contribution. I beg to move. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I am looking at sub-clauses (4) and (5). Under sub-clause (4), I have trouble with the reporting period because they are saying that within sixty days at the end of each calendar year, “…there shall be provided an Authority with a report of its achievements and its contractors and sub-contractors.” I am looking at the essence of why this report they submitted is to the effect that if there is any way that maybe the local contractors are being marginalised then action should be taken; but in the event that it takes a complete year, then that is when the report is done. I think one year down the road is such a long period and I feel that this time should be revisited and possibly, we would have taken it to six month so that within the next six months, some action or revision can be made to that effect. 

Under sub-clause (5), we are talking of a person who contravenes the above sections and the subsequent amendments, which my colleague gave. I can see that the fine is not actually commensurate with the kind of offence that will have been committed. For example, we are looking at 100 currency points and then you are correlating it with three years. A hundred currency points in Uganda is peanuts; it is small money; and I thought that the essence of this is to the effect that whoever contravenes must really feel the pinch that when he has been found guilty, then he must part with reasonable money so that he does not repeat that mistake next time. I was, therefore, making an amendment that we raise it from 100 currency points to at least 500 currency points. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, what do you say about this? 

MR BYABAGAMBI: I have a problem with sub-clause (3) - the price. They are competitive in terms of price, quality, and timely availability. I have a problem with price. The reasons are that this is a landlocked country where the costs of production are high, and there is likelihood that goods produced here may be more expensive than goods produced say in China, as we have seen. I think we should tag ourselves to quality and timely availability, but for price, the moment you put price, then we are automatically  opening up markets for China because there is no way we can beat China in price; never! Never! 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would like to give information to the honourable minister that from my assessment and from my background as an Economist, it is not because Uganda is a landlocked country that the prices are high; it is because of the tax regime in Uganda that the prices are high –(Interjections)– yes, majorly, here in Uganda, it is because our commodities are over-taxed and that is why the prices have gone higher than any other country. It is not about being –(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chairperson, I doubt the Economics that this gentleman studied –(Interjections)– okay, I have withdrawn that statement, but it is very clear that transportation of raw materials from Mombasa to Uganda adds almost 33 percent on the cost, which is very high for a landlocked country. Also, when you look at the cost of other factors of production, that is energy, labour and others, you find that goods produced in Uganda are more expensive than goods in china. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Mr Chairman, are you satisfied with your minimum amendments of language or are you taking into account the concerns of the Members? 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we are capturing all the issues being raised so that we can make a response.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Well, can you do so now? 

MR WERIKHE: The minister wanted to come first.

MS MULONI: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate the Members’ concerns, but before coming here, every effort was made to try and internalise all these Clauses and modifications were made. Despite that, if you look at the provisions of this clause, they are looking at provision of goods and services by Ugandan entrepreneurs, and it is in everyone’s interest that what is provided for here takes into consideration our local suppliers and effort is being made to ensure that they build capacity so that they are able to compete and provide standard goods and services in the petroleum sector.

I realise that many Members are coming up with new amendments on this clause. I would request that any new amendments are provided in writing to you so that the committee can look at them and we find a way of harmonising them. There are very many new amendments that I have heard being proposed on almost every part of this clause. 

So, it is okay. We can stand over it, but let Members provide amendments in writing to you as soon as we finish the session so that –(Interruption)- no, I am proposing, and it is important because the Chair is the point of convergence. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, when we were doing the COSASE report and you brought in several amendments, we agreed that it is better if you put them in writing so that Members can share them and we comprehend what we are doing. Sometimes, we make discordant rules because everybody is coming orally. It is just that people have stopped writing the amendments, but it is part of our practice here. So, if you have good amendments, please, present them in writing and then they can be considered. 

Sometimes, it is hard to coordinate oral amendments. Even for me, I sometimes wonder what law we are making. Maybe, it is even discordant. So, please, let us stand over this. Members who have proposals, please, present them. 

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose as a way forward that even as we give you a copy, it would be good if we have an opportunity just to interact with the chairman and maybe the minister. We could even simplify work and come out with a very harmonised version before we get back to the House.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would be happy if you organised yourselves.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, the way we have been proceeding is exactly in line with what she has said. Amendments are made in writing and they are sent to us – of course, they are written to you but they are given to us for processing. And in the process of studying these amendments, we interact with the sponsors of these amendments. So, as a committee together with the minister, we shall be able to interact with colleagues who have amendments. They must be in writing so that we study them and then be able to discuss with the various sponsors and process the agreed position, which will be submitted to the Committee of the Whole House.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, clause 54 is stood over. Let us have clause 55.

Clause 55

MR WERIKHE: a) Under sub-clause (1), insert the words “under this Act” immediately after the word “licence” and delete the word “petroleum” appearing after the word “midstream” on the last line. 

The justification: To delineate the midstream operations from the upstream petroleum activities.

b) Delete sub-clause (2) and insert the following new sub-clauses immediately after the current sub-clause (2): 

“(2) The Authority shall, with the approval of the minister, provide guidelines to the licensees in regard to the training and recruitment of Ugandans in midstream operations.” 

“The training and recruitment programme shall provide for the training of Ugandans in all phases of midstream operations. This is a new sub-clause.”

(3) “Where a programme or a scholarship proposed to be awarded under this section has been approved by the Authority, it may not be varied without the permission of the Authority.”

(4) “The licensee shall submit to the Authority a report on the execution of the recruitment and training programme under this section.”

The justification: To modify the training programme for purposes of the midstream operations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, a) Under clause 56, sub-clause (3), insert the words “and transfer” immediately after the word “transfer” and delete the word “petroleum” appearing in the last line. 

The justification: To bring out clearly, transfer of knowledge in the midstream segment of the petroleum industry.

b) Delete sub-clause (4). 

The justification: To avoid putting responsibility on Government. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 56 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57

MR KAFABUSA: Madam Chairperson, clause 57 is about the use of licence as security. 
    (a) In sub-clause (1), substitute for the word “activities” the word “operations”. 

	The justification: To restrict application of the clause to midstream operations.

    (b) Delete sub-clause (2). 

The justification: This provision can easily be abused. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 57 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 57, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 58, agreed to.

Clause 59

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, a) Under sub-clause (1) insert the words “vehicle, locomotive or craft” immediately after the word “vessel”.

b) 	Under sub-clause (2) substitute for the words “issue rules” the words “prescribe regulations”; and for the words “petroleum activities” the words “midstream operations”.

c) 	In sub-clause (3), substitute for the word “rules”, appearing at the beginning of the sub-clause, the word “regulations”.

The justification: To empower the minister to prescribe regulations in the midstream petroleum segment. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 59 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 60

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Under clause 60: “Liability of the licensee for pollution damage.” Under sub-clause (1), substitute for the words “in petroleum activities” the words “from midstream operations”.

The justification:  To clarify that the liability for pollution in this Clause is in regard to midstream operations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 60 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 60, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 61

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, under sub-clause (1), substitute for the words “petroleum activity” wherever they appear the words “midstream operations”. Substitute for the word “activity” the word “operation”.

Under sub-clause (2), substitute for the words “petroleum activity” wherever they appear the words “midstream operations”. 

Substitute for the word “activity” the word “operation”.

The justification: The damage envisaged in this clause is in regard to midstream operations. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 61 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 61, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 62

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute for Clause 62 the following: 

    1) The liability of a licensee for pollution damage may be claimed in accordance with this Act and any other applicable law.

    2) Liability for pollution damage may not be claimed against - 

    (a) any person who, by agreement with the licensee or his or her contractors, has performed tasks or work in connection with midstream operations.
 
    (b) any person who has manufactured or delivered equipment to be used in midstream operations.
 
    (c) any person who undertakes measures to avert or limit pollution damage or to save life or rescue values which have been endangered in connection with the midstream operations unless the measures are performed in conflict with prohibitions imposed by a public authority or are performed by a person other than a public authority regardless of express prohibition by the operator or the owner of the values threatened.
 
    (d) any person employed by a licensee or by a person referred to in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c).

    3) Where a licensee has been ordered by a court to pay compensation for pollution damage but fails to pay within the time stipulated by the judgement, the party that has sustained damage may bring an action against the party that has caused the damage to the same extent as the licensee may bring an action for recourse against the party causing the damage.

    4) A licensee may claim compensation from the party causing pollution damage to the licensee to the same extent as the licensee may bring action for recourse against the party causing the damage.

The justification:  To be consistent with what was passed in the Upstream Bill. I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I thought that it is now important that our honourable colleague is given an opportunity to come up with his amendment because this is where we placed it. And as he does, I seek clarification on clause 62(2)(a), which states, “Liability for pollution damage may not be claimed against any person who, by agreement with the licensee or his or her contractors has performed tasks or work in connection with midstream operations.” This appears to cushion the sub-contractor. I do not know why Parliament is pronouncing itself on this, because we are now making the sub-contractor get away with it by virtue of the fact that he is in agreement with the holder of the licence - the licensee to perform those activities. Aren’t we creating a gap for abuse under 62(2)(a)?

THE CHAIRPERSON: But I do not know. If you remove this clause, it means that you are leaving the licensee and going to the contractor to make good your damages. That is what would happen. I think what the chairperson is trying to do is to limit the liability to the contractor and not look for the smaller people.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I think with that clarification, both should be strengthened. Do not let one get off the hook; whether the licensee himself or the sub-contractor. As they are involved individually or together, do not allow any of them to get away with it. As long as you are looking at the environmental safeguards and protection, do not allow this person to get away with it, for him or her to say, “no, my recourse is with the licensee.” 

In the process and by the time you get to the licensee, a lot of damage, which could be irreparable, could have been done. I think we should not allow any premise for damage. Let us say, the sub-contractor or the licensee in whatever form. Do not allow anyone to say, “Okay, you can go and damage. I am waiting for the licensee who is in Europe or elsewhere, I will get him.” I think it is not good to allow that leeway.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know. That is violating the principle of vicarious liability.

MS ADONG: Madam Chairperson, I also rise to support the position of hon. Ssekikubo by saying that both the licensee and the sub-contractor should be made liable. In a scenario where the licensee has closed operations and has left the sub-contractor to carry out other activities like de-commissioning and others and they cause damage, what will happen? It may also encourage defiance on the part of the sub-contractors. Some of these contractors can be stubborn, when they know very well that it is the licensee who will be held responsible. So, I support the position that both the licensee and the sub-contractors take responsibility.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, can you explain the principle of vicarious liability; because if I have no relationship with you, I do not know why you would look for me? I do not know you.

MS MARIAM NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also rise to support hon. Ssekikubo’s position. Much as you are indicating that there is an introduction of vicarious liability, if it is damage on the environment, I would agree with hon. Adong that we cannot wait for the licensee to pay the damages. The person who is sub-contracting from the licensee should be able to oblige with the rules and conditions of that contract. 

So, in this case, I would like to suggest that (a) be strengthened to include both the licensee and the person contracted so that they all incur these costs once damage is caused. This is because we have to put safeguards. Nobody should use that loophole and say, “I was contracted to do this and that and I am not supposed to do this and that.” It should be clear that the two are obliged to fulfil these regulations. Thank you.

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I understand what hon. Ssekikubo and my colleagues are raising. It is an extremely valid point and because I come from the practical world of business, it is a loophole that could be exploited and it has been exploited many times. However, as a government, we are safer dealing with the big fish, because if you have the head of the demon in your hands, whatever the legs below do, you have the main guy and it is easier to take him to court and get whatever damages from him. He can then internally sue the company he contracted for any wrongdoing.

So, from a management point of view, as long as we have the main licensee and he is desirous of continuing doing business and he is a person of international stature with other business locations in other countries like most of these oil companies do - Total has operations in Uganda, but it also has operations in other countries. So, they will not risk their name and health and safety standards for a small suit like that.

Therefore, I would like to comfort honourable colleagues that we go with the proposal of the chairperson.

MR SSEKIKUBO: You see, Madam Chairperson, the practical part of it is that there are circumstances where the main company becomes a commission agent, and by the time you realise it, you have someone here who will tell you, “No, you have no contract with me. Seek from the one you contracted.” I tell you, as we go through this oil business, such companies are going to emerge and they are very many. So, for avoidance of doubt, you can say individually and severally -(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to thank my honourable colleague for giving way and inform him that while we are debating here to make this law specific for the oil industry, we have several other laws that govern the environment and use of the environment. So, if at all a small company that was contracted in Uganda damages our environment, we might not specifically use this law, but several other laws, which we can use to reprimand that company.

MR MUZAALE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like first of all to support my brother hon. Tanna on what he has said. If we leave a loophole that the main contractor cannot take responsibility for the risk he has caused – because, first of all, when you take  a contract, you are the main contractor. If you sub-contract to any other person, it does not mean that you have given out your responsibility. If we leave that loophole, it will mean that the main contractor will look for very risky areas and say, “Company A, B, and C can you come and I give you this contract?”

At the end of the day, you will find that the small sub-contractor has landed into problems because he has been sub-contracted for a small job and if there is risk that arises out of it, he will not able to pay for the damages. Therefore, I would suggest that the risk be left to the main contractor. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MS AOL: Madam Chairperson, we still need clarification. In a situation where we leave out the sub-contractor and yet it is the sub-contractor who is on the ground, in case of problems such as pollution, the people on the ground are the ones who will suffer. Is it too bad to include the two; the sub-contractor and the licensee? What is the problem if we include both?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what is the locus standi between you and the sub-contractor?

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I think this will help colleagues to make a decision. Under clause 4, “Compliance with environmental principles and safeguards,” we agreed that no matter what happens to a sub-contracted person, the licensee would be held responsible. I will even read. Let me quote sub-clause (3); “A licensee shall contract a separate entity to manage the transportation, storage, treatment or disposal of waste arising out of midstream operations.” 

Now, under sub-clause (4), we went on to pass this provision, “For avoidance of doubt, the licensee shall remain responsible for the operations of the entity referred to under sub-clause (3)” We were holding the licensee responsible. That is what we have already passed under the environmental principles and safeguards.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 62 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 62 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Clause 64 - jurisdiction. Insert the words “commodities or products” immediately after the word “petroleum” and delete the words “or where damage has been caused,” appearing at the end of the clause. 

The justification:  To accommodate petroleum commodities or products as used in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 64 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I was supposed to have come in under part 9.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we had said you would bring it in.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I have been looking for where to insert my amendment and I think it was difficult because my consideration was that if there are any court dues - some money to be paid on order by court and it has not been paid, it should be paid by the Authority. That is why it was coming under clause 49. Under part 9, it does not come in at all. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: It does not fit under part 9.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: It does not fit in, Madam Chairperson. My concern is if you go to clause 49 -(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, I have been listening to hon. Wafula keenly. In his proposal, he says that he is looking at a scenario whereby, should an oil company or its agent be taken to court and there is a court order and the court declares that particular entity liable, then at the stage of decommissioning, whatever proceeds the Authority collects, we must include them in the law; that should there be a court order, that money should be reduced. 

However, in my own understanding of the legal system in this country, that is obvious, because you automatically garnish whatever proceeds or you can attach property if you have a court order. So, how can we include in a law, and we are enforcing a court order in the law? It is not making sense. 

Therefore, I would like to seek clarification from the legal minds in the House. Maybe the Attorney-General can help us clarify how we can include - because I think implementing a court order is obvious and the rules of the courts of judicature in this country are clear about how a court order shall be implemented. So, how can we include it in the law? It is a clarification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Wafula, what mischief are you trying to cure?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: What I am trying to cure is that if a company has been wound up and the Authority is selling its assets, I would like anybody who has claims - who has outstanding compensation outside that of the court order, especially as a result of environmental damage, that they too are on the list of people who should be paid before any balance is given to the licensee. That is what I am trying to cure. 

And this is important, that even if it is obvious as hon. Tanna is saying, it should be stated as well because even the others - there are some people who have been enumerated here, but it is obvious that they will also have to go to court. We are saying, the Authority is selling the assets of a licensee, but he has pending bills to pay as a result of a court order and he has not paid, and maybe he is already on his way out. 

So, the person who is asking for damages from this licensee should go to the Authority also to be paid.
 
MR TANNA: Madam Chairperson, to the best of my knowledge, hon. Wafula Oguttu’s concerns are catered for under dissolution of a company under the company law. That anybody who is demanding money when a company is dissolved should be cleared first before the shareholders receive the balance. It is catered for. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: When a company goes into receivership?

MR TANNA: Yes, exactly.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I think hon. Wafula’s proposal was that in the event of the removal and sale of property by the Authority, under clause 49, that is where he originated it. To say that other than the environmental damage and making good of the damage - that is why it was important that he was accommodated within clause 49 - he is saying that in the event that a property is auctioned by the Authority or it is removed or disposed of in whatever manner, it must make sure that it makes good any damage to the environment before you can get the balance due to the licensee back; you deduct it. It was at that stage that he was saying, yes, you can have environmental safeguards, but it does no harm to cross-check and you bolster protection of the environment. 

If I got him well, it was at that stage. You may say it was catered for under clause 49 or under clause 4, but that was the gist of his proposal. And to all of us, before someone is allowed to carry away the balance of the money after the auction or removal of the facility, that should be cleared first.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what about those who may be claiming money for goods and services, how do you cater for them? Are you going to also say even the salaries, even the goods and services, the suppliers of tomatoes and suppliers of this – Is that what you are going to say in the law? Because if we are talking about judgment in the environment, the supplier of food will say I also owe, the salary will say I also owe. The askari will say, “You have not paid me for three months.”

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Having listened carefully, you posed a question, What is the proposal by hon. Wafula trying to cure? And we have listened to hon. Tanna’s information and he is saying that what hon. Wafula is trying to move is catered for somewhere. Now, for clarity or repetition for the sake of it, we can see that hon. Wafula’s proposal is already taken care of within other company laws. 

So, I propose that you put a question and we move so that the other law is there. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 64 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 64, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 65

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, a) Under sub-clause (1) substitute for the words “petroleum activities” the words “midstream operations.” 

(b) Under sub-clause (2) substitute for the words “petroleum activities” the words “midstream operations”. The justification: The safety aspects under this clause are in regard to midstream operations.

    (c) Insert the words “and evaluate risks” immediately after the word “identify”. 

Delete the words, “evaluate the,” immediately before the words, “risks associated.”

The justification: To provide for evaluation of both hazards and risks in the mainstream operations. I beg to propose.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 65 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 65, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 66

MR WERIKHE: Clause 66 a) insert the word, “shall,” immediately after the word, “operator.” 

The justification: to apply the word to paragraph (b) as well, making it a mandatory requirement.

b) In paragraph(a)(i) substitute for the word “installation,” the word, “facility.”

c) In paragraph(a)(ii) insert the words, “the facilities,” immediately before the word “environment.”

The justification: To use an appropriate word “facility” which is defined in the Bill and to include protection of the facilities by the operator. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 66 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 66, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 67

MR WERIKHE: a) In sub-clause (1) substitute for the words, “petroleum activities,” the words, “midstream operations.” 

b)In sub-clause(2), insert the words, “or emergency,” after the word, “accident.” 

The justification: I It is a consequential amendment to separate the midstream from the upstream petroleum value chain and to widen it to include emergency situations. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 67 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 67, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69

MR WERIKHE: In sub-clause(1), substitute for the words, “petroleum activities” the word, “midstream operations”.

The justification:  To delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 69 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70

MR WERIKHE: a) Substitute for the head note the following, “suspension of midstream operations.”
 
b) 	In sub-clause(1), substitute for the words, “petroleum activities,” the words, “mid-stream operations.”

c) 	In sub-clause(2), substitute for the words, “petroleum activities,” the words, “midstream operations,” and substitute for the word, “activities,” the word, “operations.” 

The justification: A consequential amendment to separate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 70 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 70 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72

MR WERIKHE: a) In sub-clause(1), substitute for the words, “petroleum activities,” the words “mid-stream operations.” 

The justification: The qualifications in this clause apply to mid-stream operations. 
b), insert the following new sub-clause immediately after sub-clause (2); “(2) The minister may, by regulations, prescribe the qualifications required for different types of midstream operations.” 

The justification: To empower the minister to prescribe qualifications for the midstream operations and to ensure that the licensee employs adequately qualified personnel. I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 72 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 72 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 73

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute for Clause 73 the following:

“73) Commission of inquiry

(1) 	Where an accident occurs which the minister considers to be serious in connection with midstream operations to which this Act applies, the minister may appoint a commission of inquiry under this Act to inquire into the accident and shall make public the results of the investigation.

(2) 	The minister shall lay before Parliament a report of the inquiry made under sub-section(1.) 

(3) 	Sub-section (1) applies to incidents in the operations which have led to serious danger including loss of life or major damage to property or pollution of the environment.

The justification: To be consistent with what was passed in the Upstream Bill.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, Clause 73 regards the commission of inquiry where an accident occurs which the minister considers to be serious. Unfortunately, in the submission of the chairperson, he does not give us the timeframe within which such a report shall be made public. Once a report is compiled, it can remain unpublished forever. 

So, I propose that since the environment is core and very sensitive to lives, particularly of those affected individually by the pollution, I thought we would put a timeframe so that people can know that there is a commission of inquiry and its results shall be made public within such a period of time. I propose within six months, once the report is compiled.

THE CHAIRPERSON: After the report has been completed.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Yes, it should be made –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any harm in that? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: It should be made public because once you do not do that, this report can remain forever. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is there any harm after it has been completed, in publishing it within six months? 

MR WERIKHE: I have no problem, but the timeframe of six months, I do not know whether we should tag it to a timeframe.

THE CHAIRPERSON: After completion of the commission. Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 73 be amended as proposed by the Chair and also as proposed by hon. Ssekikubo.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 73, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 74

1) Amend Clause 74 as follows: Substitute for the words “holder of a licence in crude oil, refining, gas processing, transportation and storage” appearing on line 1, the word, “licensee,” and insert the words, “which shall be” immediately after the word “Uganda.”

The justification: To simplify the provision.

(2) Substitute for paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), the following:
 
    (a) Updated information regarding ownership of the licence;

    (b) the inventory and volumes of petroleum commodities refined, converted, traded, transmitted or stored;

    (c) use of petroleum commodities and products;

    (d) different structure and rates for third party use of the facility; 

    (e) capacity and efficiency of the facility;

    (f) specifications of petroleum commodities and products having been refined or converted in the facility.

The justification: To modify the clause in order to suit midstream operations.
3) In paragraph(g) substitute for the word, “race,” the word, “nationality.”

The justification: To apply an appropriate term and for simplicity and clarity. 

I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Whereas it is mandatory to have this information on reports and records, I think it is left large and at the discretion of the licensee and I would, therefore, propose a new sub-clause which would read: “Intentional errors or omissions to these reports, records and data shall constitute an offence under Section 79”, because they can play with these figures, they can make intentional errors, they can withhold some of these. They should do it knowing that you do not just have a depository of any data. Put a sanction that should someone mislead in the reportage, there is a sanction to it. I beg to move. 

MS ALASO: No, chairperson; it is on a different matter. Maybe we dispose of the proposal first; the one of hon. Ssekikubo.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you understood the proposal? I think he was saying that – is it intentional omission or commission should constitute an offence; deliberate act. 

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: I do not want to contradict hon. Ssekikubo, but what he is referring to is intentional omissions or commission. That means there are laws in the Penal Code for which you can be charged; say for supplying false information. We do not need to re-legislate about this matter. 

So, if you intentionally give us false information, that is a criminal offence. So, I want to allay his fears that if somebody did that, then they can be criminally prosecuted. 

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to support hon. Kasule because with information and data, we have a process called “reconciliation”. And there is a provision within the reconciliation process for errors and omissions which are not deliberate. Which yardstick will you use to pick out those which are intentional and those which are not? Someone might fall victim to this yet we know that all information and data proved on a record can be proved by auditing. And if it is proved, the auditors within that department can prove that it was intended. But to legislate in a way that determines intentional errors and omissions is very difficult for me. It cannot be measured. 

MS MULONI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What hon. Ssekikubo has raised is a criminal act, which is dealt with under the Penal Code Act. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, there are many provisions that we have covered that are also covered elsewhere. In this particular matter, information, data, reports and records are at the heart. And you do not necessarily have to pursue this person using a different law. For the Authority which shall be using this information, and the government which will rely on this information – hon. Kakooza, I want to draw your attention to this. Take this positively. 

Madam Chairperson, I would propose that in such circumstances, it is critical to have reliable data information. And I can tell you companies use a word, which I do not want to use here. They play with figures and data; they have separate sets. One is official and the other operational.

MR KAKOOZA: The moment you say, data and records, there must be a way they reconcile them within their management system. The audit department there must highlight the flaws and controls within that system; that is the work of the auditors. 

I know that there must be some errors and omissions and you cannot set a yardstick for errors and omissions. For example, you can add 7 plus 8 and give a wrong answer. However, reconciling that error is the work of the auditor. It might not be intentional, but still it is an error. That is why in accounts we say, errors and omissions can be reconciled and that information can be corrected –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA: Companies, especially if their process damages human life or cause environmental degradation, they never keep such records. So, you have to force them to keep those records. For example, there is a tea factory along Jinja Road, which was using chemicals which harm people. They did not keep records that those chemicals were harming their workers. 

So, we are legislating for the people of Uganda. Some of us, however, seem to be legislating for inventors, which I think is unfortunate. 

MR KAKOOZA: That information is correct; that is why we passed the Auditor General’s Act. But where Government or any private organisation – in section 8 - where Government has a controlling interest, it, must be audited. You must have auditors within and without. And I know that you cannot differentiate between one who has committed an offence out of error or omission. 

Once records are checked and they are not consistent with the system, then someone is bound to find a fault and the responsible people are liable within other sections of the law. 

MR PETER LOKII: I would like to seek clarification from hon. Kakooza. He says that there is always room for error, which is not deliberate. What happens in a situation where there is deliberate error or omission? How is that taken care of in the law? 

MR KAKOOZA: If there are errors which are intentional, they are proved by the records. (Interjections) The major controls and flows are determined by the auditors within the system and they can know. For example, people who are on PAC have been perusing documents and they have been able to find out that the documents presented are faulty and whether it is deliberate or just by error. 

Once it is intentional, the controls within that system are ready to identify them. But where there is a reconciliatory method to make the record clear, I do not think we should legislate on that. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The point raised by hon. Ssekikubo needs further consideration because manipulation of data can be very dangerous for this industry. I want to propose that we stand over it and go and check whether it is comprehensively covered or there is a need to have further input on this. But protection and manipulation of data is a very serious issue that we should have consider further. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I direct the movers of the proposal and those interested to sit with the chairperson and review those provisions. So, we stand over clause 74. We have stood over clause 74 entirely. (Ms Aalso rose_)

Hon. Alaso, you will make an amendment to clause 74 when we come back to it. 

Clause 75

MR WERIKHE: Substitute for clause 75 the following: 

“Where a licence is terminated or revoked or expires, the person who was the licensee immediately before the termination, revocation or expiration of the licence shall immediately deliver to the Authority in a format acceptable to the Authority –

    (a) all records and data which the licensee maintained with respect to the licence;
    (b) all plans, maps and technical designs of facilities which were prepared by or on the instruction of the licensee;

    (c) all tapes, diagrams, profiles and charts which were prepared by the licensee; and

(d) such other documents as the Authority, may, by notice given to the licensee, require him or her to deliver.”

The justification: To broaden the information to be provided by the licensee to include technical designs and data and be consistent with what was passed in the Upstream Bill. I beg to move.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on (a). I wish to add, after “…licence…” that “all records which the licensee maintains with respect to the licence including those records related to any environmental damage or damage to human life and health or safety of people” because they do not keep records. Like I said earlier, these companies do not keep records and we would like to state that they should keep records, if there have been environmental hazards as a result of their work. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: He wants to add to (a) the need to include reports on occupational and environmental hazards that have occurred during the duration of the licence. Because he is handing over on termination - this is the record he is handing over when the licence ends.

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: As we were deliberating on whether to stand over this clause –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which one? No, no –    

MR SEBUNYA: We have not stood over –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We stood over clause 74 and we are now handling clause 75.

MR SEBUNYA: Okay. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have a problem with that addition?

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: I have moved an amendment and I think that it is a very serious amendment.

MR NASASIRA: I see hon. Wafula Ogutu’s point. However, I want to be reminded from the beginning whether we mentioned what records should be kept by the licensee - because if all records were defined earlier, the old records would now cover it. But I understand the point that you are trying to raise could have been covered earlier if we had said what records the licensee should be keeping, and then when you come now and say that all records, then you know you are covered. But I do not know whether we kept that one. It is something we need to find.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: It does not harm us to introduce it at this time and require companies to keep these records, unless – I personally think it is a serious point that companies are obliged to keep records on environmental damage caused by them during their operations and damage to human life; and when they are handing over, they should hand over those records. 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I agree, but there are very many other things which the licensee keeps records of and in the case of environmental matters, clause 4, which we have already passed, is a very comprehensive clause, and it has been amended by the chair, but in the principal Bill, it reads, “A licensee and also a person who exercises or performs functions, duties or powers under this Act in relation to petroleum activities shall take into account and give effect to the environmental principles prescribed by the National Environment Act and other applicable laws.” 

Now, all these laws on environment are applicable to this licensee and he/she must comply, and that certainly means keeping records.

When you come to clause 75 under (a) which we are trying to amend, it states, “Where a licence is terminated or revoked or expires, the person who was the licensee immediately before the termination, revocation or expiration of the license shall immediately deliver to the Authority in a format acceptable to the Authority”; because the Authority will come in and say, “This is the format.” And even in (d), it states, “Such other documents as the Authority, may, by notice given to the licensee, require him or her to deliver.” That includes everything and in (a) it states, “All records and data which the licensee maintained with respect to the licence”. I think to go into those details, hon. Wafula Oguttu, is to really micro-manage this Bill when in fact, the main principles are well laid out.

MS ADONG: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think that the Member’s concern is covered in part (d) where it states, “Such other documents as the Authority, may, by notice given to the licensee, require him or her to deliver.” I do not see a point where we legislate for the worst to happen; where we want the licensee to damage the environment and keep the records or kill human beings so that they can keep the record when we do not hope that people should die in the process of the operation of the midstream. I thank you.

MS ALASO: Actually, the reason we legislate is for the worst. We want to present worst case scenarios so we build barriers and we say, “Do not go that side. If you do that, we will do this to you.” That is the reason that we legislate. I would like to implore hon. Adong to support this provision well aware that even in her constituency, there is a waste dump that is not being attended to and we need such records.

It is known to us in this House that any matter that you wish to push aside, leave it to generalities. If it be a matter of gender, they will say that it is taken care of. It will be assumed. Somebody will imagine that you have a gender concern and nobody will do it. Even now, on matters of environment, we cannot afford to generalise. The best we can do is to be very specific, and in my own view, it does no harm. 

We have listed where we need information. What harm does it do to this country to just add one sentence that we will require of this licensee information in regard to safety and failures of environmental management, because, when we are issuing permits - if you recall, in the Upstream Bill, we even said that on matters of reconnaissance, you have to take cognisance of breeding patterns of birds - we already accepted the principle in our heads that it is important. Why do not we accept that we now need records and we move forward?

 MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to invite colleagues to look at clause 4; “Compliance with Environmental Principles”, and this is the Clause, which actually handles all environmental matters and we passed it. Even when we were in Entebbe, when we were trying to harmonise, I remember these issues came up. We agreed that what we had adopted in the Upstream Bill should actually apply to this one. And indeed, clause 75 as enshrined in this submission, is what was passed in the Upstream Bill.

If we are now going to have environmental issues scattered all over the place when we have a comprehensive clause compliant with environmental principles and safeguards, and this was passed –(Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: We are saying that since you have complied in clause 4, you should have kept those records. We are saying, handover those records when you are leaving. What is wrong with that?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, since we have stood over clause 74 - I have information we shared with hon. Adong when we benchmarked somewhere and they told us that all information and data is a property of Government. Since we have not passed clause 74, let Members think about making this data used by the licensee the property of Government. 

In clause 75, we shall be specifying the records we require. But in clause 74, we shall have stated that all information used by the licensee is the property of Government because this property is very important and it is traded internationally. So, we should safeguard it for Uganda and for Ugandans. 

So, since we have stood over clause 74, let us think in the direction of making this information mandatory, the property of Government, and it shall be made easier in clause 75 in specifying which information we require.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You are proposing that when we review clause 74, we should add the issue of the health report and the environment report as part of the reports required. Is that what you are suggesting?

MR KASULE SEBUNYA: As part of the reports required, if we mentioned in clause 74 that all this data is property of Government, then clause 75 will be specifying the documents we require. I think that is what hon. Nasasira was saying; that, What have we passed previously that talks about the ownership of information or data? 

So, if the House can think of a clause or a line to make this information the property of Government, then in clause 75, we shall just outline the kind of data we require; either records, plans, maps, licences; even in bad times, when they have terminated the licences; and even in good times, this information is property of Government.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us bring it up when we are reviewing clause 74, which we have stood over. I put the question that clause 75 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 75, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 76

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute Clause 76 with the following: 

“(1) The minister may, in accordance with the Access to Information Act, 2005, make available to the public —

(a) Details of all agreements, licenses and any amendments to the licenses or agreements whether or not terminated or valid;

 (b) Details of exemptions from, or variations or suspensions of, the conditions of a licenCe;

 (d) All assignments and other approved arrangements in respect of a licence.

(2) The information referred to in sub-section (1) shall be available to any person upon payment of the prescribed fee.”

The justification:  To be consistent with what was passed in the Upstream Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 76 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 76, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 77

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 77; “Confidentiality of data”. Substitute for clause 77 the following:

“(1) Subject to the Access to Information Act, 2005, all data submitted to the minister by a licensee shall be kept confidential and shall not be reproduced or disclosed to third parties by any party under this Act except –

    (a) In the case of disclosure by the licensee, with the prior written consent of the minister; or

    (b) In the case of disclosure by the Authority prior to the expiration of the licence, with the prior written consent of the licensee.

(2) 	Consent under sub-section (1) (a) or (b) shall not be unreasonably withheld or delayed.

(3) 	The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not prevent disclosure –

    (a) By the minister upon 15 days’ prior written notice to the licensee identifying the parties to which disclosure will be made – 

    (i) to an agency of the Government;
    (ii) to a financial institution or person acting as a consultant or professional advisor to the Authority;
    (iii) arbitrators and experts appointed under this Act or under an agreement made under this Act;
    (iv) for statistical purposes; or

 (b) 	By the licensee or one or more of the subsidiaries of the licensees to -
    (i) a licensee affiliated company, its home government or any department or, agency as required by any law;

    (ii)  a recognised stock exchange on which shares of the licensee or its affiliated companies are traded;

    (iii)  financial institutions, professional advisors, arbitrators and experts appointed under this Act;

    (iv)  bonafide prospective assignees of a participating interest; or 

    (v)  a corporation with which the licensee is conducting bonafide negotiations directed towards a merger or consolidation.

    (4) All data disclosed to third parties shall be disclosed on terms, which to the extent possible ensure that they are treated as confidential by the recipient for so long as the data remains subject to the confidentiality undertakings.”

The justification: To be consistent with what was passed in the Upstream Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 77 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 77, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 78

MR WERIKHE: Clause 78, Madam Chairperson, prohibition against disclosure of information. (Hon. Alaso rose_)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let him move first and then I will come to you.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I am seeking your guidance. Now that you have begun roll calling, it is difficult to escape. And now that I am feeling a little tired, I wanted to propose that you adjourn. Otherwise, I really fear to escape now because you will roll call. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Alaso, let us handle just a few more clauses. 

Honourable members, clause 78.

Clause 78

MR KAFABUSA: Substitute for clause 78 the following:

“(1)Information furnished or information in a report submitted under this Act by a licensee shall not be disclosed to any person who is not a minister or an officer in the Public Service except with the consent of the licensee. 

(2) Nothing in sub-section one operates to prevent the disclosure of information when the disclosure is made – 

    a) after the licence concerned has ceased to have effect;

    b) for and in connection with the implementation of this Act;

    c) for the purpose of or in connection with any legal proceedings; 

    d) to any consultants employed to advise the government on matters relating to midstream operations; 

    e) for or in connection with the preparation by or on behalf of the government of statistics in relation to midstream operations;

    f) to a financial institution for or in connection with a financial arrangements or advice in relation to midstream operations;

    g) for or in connection with the determination of any liability of the licensee to make any payments to the government or;

    h) for or in connection with any matter or for any purpose prescribed in a petroleum agreement.

(3) 	A person shall not, while in the Public Service or service of the Authority in the petroleum industry or when he or she ceases to be a public servant or a member of the board of the Authority, disclose any information which he or she may have obtained in the course of his or her employment for a period of 10 years. 

(4) 	Any person who contravenes sub-sections (1) or (3) commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding 500 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both.

(5)	In proceedings on a prosecution for an offence under this section, it shall be a sufficient defence if the person charged proves that the information disclosed and to which the prosecution relates was without that disclosure generally known to the public.”

The justification: To be consistent with what was passed in the Upstream Bill. I beg to move.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Chairperson, this clause is inconsistent with Article 41 of the Constitution and I wish to propose that it is deleted. 
The justification: This provision is inconsistent with Article 41 of the Constitution and also the Access to Information Act. 

The exceptions to access to information, are already spelt out both in the Constitution and in the Access to Information Act, and any blanket exception including a requirement for consent of a licensee may be abused. There is no way we can have this and after we join the extracting industries and transparency organisations, it will also require us to be 100 percent compliant and open. So, why are we putting this provision which is abusing our own Article 41 of the Constitution?

MR KAKOOZA: We have already passed the other Upstream Bill and I remember we debated it thoroughly well. There was an argument from hon. Katuntu on the Floor and it was even passed. I do not know; if we reject it, won’t we contradict ourselves and won’t we be inconsistent with the one that we passed? Maybe the Attorney-General can explain.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I want to disagree with the chairman of the committee and support hon. Wafula Oguttu that actually, this very clause be deleted because we are talking about over 34 million Ugandans who serve in different portfolios and capacities and, therefore, who may also have the need to access this critical information, and the people listed here are only three. 

I feel, it could be possibly left to the discretion of  the court to judge who should actually access the information and who should not, but to tell us here that the licensee should also be contacted in order to authorise who should access which information, I do not think it would be proper for us to legislate on this. 

So, Madam Chairperson –(Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking clarification from hon. Onzo –(Interruption)  

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I think we have spent more than one and half years here and we have the directory and access to our records and to information. Is it in order for a Member who has taken more than one and half years here to mispronounce my name?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think the honourable member was speaking the name in her language. (Laughter)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I seek clarification from the Member holding the Floor. It is unfortunate that we come from very distant locations so it is not very easy for me to pronounce your name, but I am sorry. 

The same Article 41(2) that you are referring to states that, “Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of information referred to in clause (1) of this Article, and the procedure for obtaining access to that information.” Does that qualify for deletion or it qualifies for us to maintain? Thank you. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I think, honestly, I beg my colleague to read the entire section because it is not actually a mere part of that, that defines what text; but for purposes of clarification and particularly in view of this Bill that we are handling, when you read clause 1 it states, “Subject to sub-section (2), information furnished or information in a report submitted under this Act by a licensee shall not be disclosed to any person who is not a minister or an officer in the public service except with consent of the licensee.” By the way, not even the President is mentioned here, for your own information, because I would even be more comfortable to have consent of the fountain of honour of this country instead of the licensee. But to have a licensee to be allowed to access information or not, is criminal in itself, but I think we are not even negotiating on this because –(Interruption)

MS KWAGALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am seeking a procedural ruling on this issue. Is it really fair for honourable members who gave us a reference in Article 41 to make us fail to observe the article, which they quoted and were using to enable them delete? I am seeking for a procedural matter because they used the same article to back the deletion. We are using the same article to analyse clearly so that we understand and appreciate whether or not we should retain the clause. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think we are misconstruing the import of this provision, because, if you read the marginal note, it states, “Prohibition against disclosure of information” and the targeted people of this clause are public servants. And it is common knowledge that all public servants take an oath of secrecy; it is aimed at protecting information that comes in the public servants’ knowledge during the course of their employment. And that is the import of this provision. Moreover, this is exactly what was passed in the Upstream Bill. (Interruption)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The Article states, “Every citizen has a right to access information in the possession of the state or any other organ or agency of the state, except where the release of the information is likely to prejudice the security or sovereignty of the state or interfere with the rights to the privacy of any other person.” 

Now, the Attorney-General is telling us that the information in the hands of the state agents like civil servants cannot be disclosed to citizen Wafula Oguttu who has sought that information from them; that is the law you are making. Therefore, the civil servant is going to use that law to deny me that information.  

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Wafula Oguttu should read Article 41 fully because he is restricting his mind to Article 41(1) because in (2) it states, “Parliament shall make laws prescribing the classes of information referred to in clause (1) of this Article and the procedure for obtaining access to that information.” The procedure is critical; this is what we are saying in this provision that in order to obtain this information from a public servant, follow A, B, C, D. And that is not in contravention of the Constitution. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is this what you passed in the Upstream Bill? [HONOURABLE MEMBERS: “Yes.”] So, it is already – 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: No, Madam Chairperson. We are using the word “prohibition”. I am not a lawyer but I know what TEH WORD“prohibit” means. So, you are prohibiting information; you are even allowing a licensee - an investor - to have a right of information and yet when a citizen wants it, you say he cannot access it. We cannot allow investors to hoard and manipulate information which would be useful to our country.

MR BYABAGAMBI: This is the way I understand this issue: When I have got my employees; I pay them salary and by virtue of me employing them, they access my company’s information. Now, here, the law says, “Do not go on the streets of Kampala and start giving information about my company to anybody you meet.” But if you want that information, you follow the procedures as they are in the Information Act. I think that is very clear.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think this type of provision is already in operation in regard to our IGG’s declaration; you cannot just go and access; you have to apply and go through a process.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, I remember very well why we passed this clause; we debated it during the Upstream Bill. The reason was that we are going to deal with business; these companies are competitive and they want to know the information. I can give an example; in the Financial Statute of 2003, Bank of Uganda – if it has audited one bank, cannot share the secrets and information about another bank. Even for me, if I have an account with a certain bank, it does not have the authority to reveal the details of my account without my permission.

When you are dealing with business, you must put into consideration exceptions of how you deal with businesses without selling information that can hinder the operations of the business. We have already passed clause 77 of the Confidentiality of Data. What does it mean? It deals with oil companies. Actually, hon. Wafula has said it that if oil – by the way, it can be a security threat. If you reveal information to a company or to a government, which is hostile to another, that information can be dealt with and the government can be in trouble. (Interjections) You can easily share this information with a hostile country and they know that as a civil servant, you have left here. And that is why it is being stated that if you are working for Government, you have known all the data; why do you sell information without following proper procedure? You might want money, but why sell the country? That is why this clause is prohibitive and in business it must be dealt with. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 78 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 78, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 79

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Clause 79 - “Obstruction of employee authority.” Amend clause 79 as follows: 

    a) Substitute for the headnote the following: “Obstruction of authorised officer”. 

	The justification: To widen the scope of the provision. The term “authorised officer” is defined.

b) 	In paragraph (a) delete the words “employee of the authority or/and”.c)In paragraph (b) delete the words “employee of the authority or”. 

	The justification: To widen the scope of the provision to include persons acting under authority of the minister and to use a term “authorised officer”, which is defined.

d)	Substitute for the words “one hundred” the words “ten thousand”.

	The justification: To provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 79 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 79, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 80

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 80 - “Powers of inspectors.” 
a) Insert the following new sub-clause immediately before sub-clause (1) and re-number accordingly. 
“(1) The Authority may, by notice in the Gazette, designate inspectors for purposes of this Act.” 

The justification: To provide for designation of inspectors.

    b) In the current sub-clause (1), substitute the words “petroleum activity” with the words “midstream operations”. 

	The justification: To separate midstream operations from the petroleum activities under the Upstream Bill.

    c) Substitute for sub clause (5)(d) the following, “Inspect any areas subject to a licence facility and used for midstream operations.” 

The justification: For clarity. I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 80(1) is permissive in that it authorises the inspector, at any reasonable time, to enter any area, place or premises where he believes is used for purposes and in connection with the midstream operations. But in two, this section shall not be taken to authorise entry into premises or part of any premises that are being used as private dwelling.

Madam Chairperson, many operations are shifted from the official premises into bungalows where they transact business. Now, if you allow this under (1) and in (2) you say, the owner of the premises shall first give consent, you will be undoing what you stated in (1). It is very well known that contrabands and smuggled items on many occasions are not kept in the official premises, but someone hires a bungalow and uses it as a conduit. 

So, I would propose that once the inspectors have reasonable information, they should have access to all premises. Once I am a manager and I am involved in this - Recently, Members may not know that when some Members of Parliament were being sought, even the ceilings of our homes were searched to find these horrible MPs.

For that matter, I do not want us to give powers to the inspectors and then provide escape routes where illegal activities can be conducted and you say, for you to access my private premise, you seek my consent.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssekikubo, if I do not give consent you come with a warrant. It is here.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, in most cases, by the time inspectors come, they have information and just in time. Should you go to look for a warrant, you will find what you wanted to inspect or get it already tampered with and taken away.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, I think if you take a closer look at sub-clause (2), the section is talking about entry into any premises or part of any premises that is being used as a private dwelling. Should the owner not permit entry to this dwelling, under the Authority of a warrant issued in accordance with the law, he or she will actually, allow anyone entry.

So, why should we now again say, any private dwelling should be accessed without permission? I think that is not proper.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 80 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 80, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 81

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Clause 81; Obstruction of inspector. 

    a) Substitute for the words “shall be guilty of” the word “commits”. 

The justification: to conform to the principles of the presumption of innocence as provided for in the Constitution.

    (b) Substitute for the words “one hundred” the words “ten thousand”. 

The justification: To provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 81 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 81, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 82

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, in clause 82, substitute for the word “one” the word “five”. 

The justification: To provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 82 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 82, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 83 agreed to.

Clause 84

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 84 - “Orders forfeiture.” 
    a) Substitute for sub-clause 1(b) the following :
 “(b) An order - 
(i) 	for the forfeiture of petroleum commodities or products converted, transmitted or stored in the course of the commission of the offence; 

(ii) 	for the payment by that person to the government of an amount equal to the proceeds received from midstream operations carried out. 

The justification: Clause 84 applies to forfeiture in case of offences in the midstream petroleum value chain. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 84 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 84, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 85

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Clause 85 - “Contravention of decisions and orders issued under this Act.” 
a)	Substitute for the words “five hundred” in paragraph (a) the words “ten thousand”. 

b)	Substitute for the word “five” in paragraph (b) the words “one hundred”. 

The justification:  To provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 85 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 85, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 86

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, a) in Clause 86 sub clause (1)-

i) 	Substitute for the word “provision” the word “construction”;
 
ii) 	Delete the word “petroleum” appearing before the words “facility”;
 
iii) 	Substitute for the words “a petroleum activity” the words “of a midstream operation”. 

The justification: To apply the appropriate word “construction”.

    b) In sub-clause (5), substitute for the word “thirty” the word “ninety”. 

The justification: Thirty days may not be sufficient for the minister to investigate and conclude a complaint. I beg to move.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, I have a problem with the proposal of the chairperson to substitute “provision” with “construction”. Actually, I am not even comfortable with “provision” neither am I comfortable with “construction”. I want to have a complaint with the entire operation. 
So, the initial clause reads, “A person may submit a written or oral complaint to the Authority in respect of the provision or operation of a petroleum facility or undertaking a petroleum activity”. I thought that “construction” would be limiting, I do not know; maybe, I am tired, sleepyand hungry.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, I was looking at the right of complaint where under clause 86 a person may submit a written or oral complaint to the Authority in respect of the provision or operation in the midstream. The Authority shall take appropriate action within a period not exceeding 40 days. The problem here is that there could be a whistleblower or any good citizen. Because we are now in the midstream and the facility could be, say, bypassing a metre in which process the country is losing. One could be using another way to bite us - the measurements, the checks - and they can get away with it. If you allow the entire 40 days, it will give room for this very criminal act, which has been used before. 

Members, remember the problem with Sudan. There was the problem of bypassing and using different metres to gauge the oil that was being exported for purposes of making a difference between the Northern and Southern Sudan sharing of oil. So, for us to permit the 40 days under these circumstances is too much and a lot of damage would have been incurred. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But not exceeding 40 days. It can be a week or two weeks; not more than 40 days.

MR BYABAGAMBI: Hon. Ssekikubo has just completed his degree in law and I am getting a problem with the way he is interpreting “within”. “Within” can be even a minute thereafter or a second thereafter. Within 40 days, that is the maximum. They are giving you all the time that even if you see it now momentarily you can report and action be taken.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The command is saying, do not exceed 40 days. 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Chairperson, it is only that my colleague was a bit over-anxious. I may have my failures, but to doubt my credentials really, I could also challenge your training in Russia as an Engineer though I may not reach those -(Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, I was proposing “within a fortnight” or within “two weeks”. I wanted us to reduce it to within two weeks, that is, a fortnight, but not to leave it within 40 days. I would propose that this being very sensitive and any slumber can lead to a colossal amount of loss, let us tie it to within two weeks - if the information can be verified within two weeks. I propose that we put it within two weeks.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Ssekikubo, you are assuming that the complaints are the same, very brief and clear. Really, you are tying the hands of the Authority.

Honourable members, I put the question that clause 86 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 86, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 87

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute for clause 87 the following:

    (1) A licensee shall negotiate in good faith to reach an amicable settlement of a dispute concerning a contractual matter that arises with respect to:
 
(a) facility tariffs;
(b) margins set by traders; 
(c) freight rates for transmission of petroleum commodities or products; and 
(d) any matter designated by the Authority.

    (2) Where the dispute cannot be amicably settled through negotiation the aggrieved party may submit the dispute to the Authority.

The justification: To provide for mandatory resolution of disputes through negotiations first, with an option to refer the dispute to the Authority should negotiations fail to resolve it. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 87 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 87, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 88

MR WERIKHE: Clause 88 - “Maintenance of property: 
a)in sub-clause (1)(c) substitutes for the word “activities” the word “operations”. 

The justification: The term “operation” falls under midstream while “activities” are covered under the upstream.

    (c) In sub-clause (2) substitute for the word “one” the word “ten”. 

The justification: To provide for a more deterrent penalty. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 88 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 88, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 89

MR KAFABUSA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 89 - “Agreements between affiliated companies.” In sub-clause (1), substitute for the word “activities” the words “midstream operations”. 

The justification: The term “operation” falls under midstream while activities are covered under upstream.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 89 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 89, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 90

MR KAFABUSA: Clause 90 - “Security for fulfilment of obligations.” Delete clause 90. 

The justification: This is covered under clause 10(6) on page 19 of the Bill. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 90 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 90, deleted.

Clause 91

MR WERIKHE: Substitute for the words “petroleum activities” the words “midstream operations”. 

The justification: To delineate the midstream operations from upstream petroleum activities. 

I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 91 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 91, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, a) In sub-clause (1), substitute for the words “petroleum activities or the petroleum processed, transported or stored or to the value of the petroleum” with the words “midstream operations.”

b) 	In sub-clause (1)(b), substitute for the words “petroleum activities or to the value of the petroleum” with the words “midstream operations.”

    c) In sub-clause (1)(c) substitute for the words “those activities or the petroleum processed, transported, or stored or to the value of the petroleum” with the words “midstream operations.” 

The justification: To simplify the provisions. The term “midstream operations” is defined in the Bill and it covers all these.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 93 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 93, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 94

MR WERIKHE: Clause 94 - “Powers of the Authority and authorising officers.” a) In sub-clause (1)(a) substitute for the words “petroleum activity” the words “midstream operations”. 

The justification:  To delineate the midstream segment from the upstream.

(b) Substitute for sub-clause (1)(b)(i) the following: 

“i) The suspension of midstream operations and the withdrawal of all persons from any facility that is being used in connection with any midstream operations; or” 

The justification:  To replace the word “cessation” with the word “suspension” to clearly indicate that the stop order for the operation in question does not have to be permanent.

    d) In sub-clause (3)-

                        (i) substitute for the words “building, structure or place, or a person in charge of any vehicle, vessel, aircraft, machinery or equipment” with the word “facility.” 
                        (ii) Insert the words “or machinery, equipment or chemical referred to in sub-section (2)” immediately before the word “shall” in line 4.
                        (iii) Delete the words “facilities and” before the word “assistance”. 

The justification: For simplicity and clarity. 

I beg to move.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Under clause 94(1)(a); “For the purposes of this Act, the Authority or an authorised office may at all reasonable times -

    a) “With respect to the health and safety of persons employed by a licensee” I would propose that we broaden that because now it is looking only at persons employed by the licensee, to add, “...in respect to the safety of the community at large in or in connection with any petroleum activity...” so that your safety concerns do not necessarily end with only the people that you employ.

You should broaden it to the general community – “...in connection to any petroleum activity, issue directions and impose restrictions on the licensee or any person so employed by instrument in writing.”

The justification is to take care not only of the people in your employment, but even for the wider community in the course of your activities.

MR KAFABUSA: Madam Chairperson, that is covered elsewhere under safety zones. So, this is specifically for people who are actually employed by the licensee within the facility. The wider community is covered under the safety zones.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 94 as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 95, agreed to.

Clause 96

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, underclause 96, substitute for the word “Government” the word “Republic of Uganda” appearing in line one. 

The justification: Indemnity should be made to the Republic of Uganda.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, I would be more comfortable with what is there right now because I do not see any error in maintaining the Republic of Uganda there.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 96, amended agreed to.
Clause 97

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, under clause 97 - a) In sub-clause (1) insert the words “transmission” immediately before the word “pipeline” in line one, and delete the word “petroleum operations or activities under the”. 

b) In sub-clause (2) insert the words “mainstream operations of the existing” immediately before the word “licensee.” 

The justification: Clause 97 applies to mainstream operations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 97, as amended agreed to.

Clause 98

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, regulations; amend clause 98(2) as follows:

    a) In paragraph b), insert the words “commodities to a facility” at the end of the paragraph. 

    b)  In paragraph d) substitute for the word “activities” the words “mainstream operations”.

    c) In paragraph e) delete the words “and the carrying out of environmental impact assessment for that purpose”, and insert a new paragraph as follows: “the taking out of appropriate insurance protection in regard to mainstream as well as health and safety of employees.” 

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, I think I am not following the chairman. When he read sub-clause (c), in the Bill I have sub-clause (c) is stating confidentiality, but he is proposing to delete something to do with carrying out environmental impact assessment. I do not know whether my numbering is wrong in the Bill I have or -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Chairperson, I think the Member is saying that your 2(c) is in variance with your proposal. It is about confidentiality in the original Bill.

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson (c) here is referring to sub-clause (e); it is not (c) as it is in the Bill; (c) is for the purpose of helping us follow the flow of the amendments.

The justification: A requirement for an environmental impact assessment must be set in relation to a specific operation such as construction or decommissioning of a facility and to enhance the requirement for insurance. 

e) 	In paragraph (g) substitute for the words “installation or equipment” for the word “facilities”. 

The justification:  To use the appropriate term “facility” as used and defined in the Bill.

(f) 	In paragraph 8 delete the word “petroleum.” 

    g) In paragraph (i) insert the words the words “commodities and products” at the end of the paragraph. 

    h) Substitute for paragraph (j) the following, “(j) Transmission of petroleum commodities and products.”

    i) Insert the following new paragraph immediately after paragraph j, “(k) Pricing the petroleum commodities and products at the refinery gate.” 

j) 	In paragraph (k) insert the words, “Commodities and products” after the word “petroleum” and substitute for the word “utilities” the word “substances”.
k) 	In paragraph (l) substitute for the word “transportation” the word “transmission.”

l) 	In paragraph (m) substitute for the words “pipeline and storage” the words “midstream operations”

m) 	In paragraph (o) delete the word “petroleum” appearing before the word “facilities.”
 
n) 	In paragraph (p), substitute for the words “production to authority of” the words “obligation to submit” and insert the word “to the authority” at the end of the paragraph.

o) 	In paragraph (r) substitute for the word “petroleum information” the word “midstream register.” 

p) 	In paragraph (y) substitute for the words “the sharing of third party access to”
 
q) 	Insert the following paragraphs immediately after paragraph (z):

	“(aa) the surveying of midstream pipeline routes.” 

r) 	In paragraph (aa) insert the word “midstream” before the word “pipeline.”

s) 	In paragraph (ab) delete the word “charges and”. 
t) 	In paragraph (ag) delete words “and the prescription of anything required or authorised to be prescribed under this act.”

This is to have all these apply to the midstream segment of the petroleum value chain.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I propose the question that clause 98 is amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 98, as amended agreed to.

Clause 99

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, clause 99 - “Code of practice.” Delete the word “petroleum” appearing before the word “facilities” and substitute for the words “processing, transportation, storage and refining” with the words “performance of midstream operations.”

The justification: To delineate the midstream operations from petroleum activities.

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 99 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 99, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 100, agreed to.

Clause 101

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we propose to delete clause 101. 
The justification: The provision is redundant and was also deleted in the Upstream Bill. 

I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 101 be deleted. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 101 deleted.

Clause 102

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, substitute for the words, “petroleum refining, gas processing and conversion, transportation and storage of petroleum,” the word “midstream operations.” I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 102 be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 102, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 103, agreed to.

Clause 104, agreed to.

Clause 105 

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, we wish to propose an amendment of deleting Clause 105. There are no midstream licences which have been granted in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 105 be deleted. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Clause 105 deleted.

Clause 106

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, Clause 106 is also proposed for deletion. 

The justification: The officers under the midstream were saved under the Upstream Bill. So, there is no need for clause 106.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 106 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 106, deleted.

Schedule 1, agreed to.

The Title

MR WERIKHE: Madam Chairperson, short title. Substitute for the short title the following: “The Petroleum refining, conversion, transmission and midstream storage Bill.”

The long title - substitute for the long title, the following, “An Act to give effect to Article 244 of the Constitution to regulate, manage, coordinate and monitor petroleum activity to enable construction, placement and ownership of facility; to provide for third party access to facilities; to regulate tariffs for facilities; to provide for an open, transparent and competitive process for licensing by the minister; to provide for additional and particular health, safety and environmental regulations not sufficiently regulated in other laws; to provide for cessation of petroleum activities under this Act and decommissioning of facilities; and to regulate any other matters related to mid-stream operations.”

The justification: To adequately address the modifications made to the Bill. 

I beg to move.
  
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the short title be amended as proposed.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Short title, as amended, agreed to.

Long title 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the long title be amended as proposed. 

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Long title, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.30
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.31
THE MINISTER OF ENERGY AND MINERALS (Mrs Irene Muloni): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Petroleum Refining, Gas Processing and Conversion, Transportation and Storage Bill, 2012 and passed with amendments clauses 21, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 53, 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 61, 62, 64, 65, 66, 67, 69, 70, 72, 73, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87, 88, 89, 91, 93, 94, 96, 97,98, 99, 102.

The following clauses were passed without amendments: Clauses 22, 23, 26, 34, 41, 46, 51, 52, 58, 63, 68, 71, 83, 92, 95, 100, 103, 104 and Schedule 1. 

The following clauses were stood over: Clauses 54 and 74. 

Clauses 90, 101, 105, 106 were deleted. 

The short title and long title were passed with amendments.

I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put, and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much for the cooperation today and the stamina. Thank you so much for the work done. (Applause) I wish you could do this more regularly. I think work would move very fast. So, I adjourn the House to tomorrow. Maybe the minister will take some of us for something up there. (Laughter) I do not know. House adjourned to 2 O’clock tomorrow. 

(The House rose at 7.34 p.m. and was adjourned until Thursday, 21 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
