

Wednesday, 12 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to inform you that hon. Gerald Karuhanga’s mother will be buried tomorrow in Itojo, Ntungamo District. There will be transport from Parliament at 6.00 a.m. in the morning.

I would also like to inform you that hon. Margaret Aleper lost her father and they are also in the process of organising funerals. I ask that we stand up in honour of these deceased people.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: I had forgotten that we had lost another senior Ugandan, Gen. Biraaro, who was a presidential candidate. Let us also stand in his honour. Thank you.

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

THE SPEAKER: The second matter concerns a complaint I received from the Ssaza Chief of Bugerere; he is called Mugerere in Kayunga District. He had come to complain about the destruction of Gangama Forest. He said that it was being destroyed to be replaced by an industrial park. 

He said that it was not a local government forest but a property of the people of Uganda. He came with a taxpayer who contributed money in 1934.

I am going to pass on the complaint to the Minister for Environment so that she can follow it up and see how we can assuage the fears of the citizens about that issue.

2.49
MS IDAH NANTABA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kayunga): Madam Speaker, we also have Wamale Forest that has been grabbed and there is a sugarcane plantation now. The other forest is called Kiwula we are in court battling but the graders were already putting it down completely. I just wanted to bring this to your attention.

THE SPEAKER: Sometime back, we had asked the Minister for Environment why they do not take action and they said that the districts have their forests and they have theirs.

However, from what this old man was telling me they were planted by the colonial government and they are a property of the Government so they do not belong to the districts. You need to follow it up and see what we can salvage but I will pass on to you the issues of Gangama Forest.

2.50
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When Mugerere was coming to see you he passed through Mukono and notified me on Monday. We also had the same issue and Sekiboobo is also coming. Mugerere is representing Bugerere but Sekiboobo is representing Kyaggwe and they were supposed to come together.

Even as we speak now, in Mukono Ntenjeru area - I came here and asked the Prime Minister why we do not have the forest boundaries reopened so that we know where the forests begin and where they stop.

As we speak now in the areas of Buganda, where they planted the forests, they are now giving them away. It is timely for the honourable minister concerned in that docket to come out clearly and make a follow-up of the opening of the boundaries so that when these people are giving out forests they have a limit. Thank you.

2.52
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thought it was Parliament that gazetted these forests and if there was any give away it should have been authorised by the same Parliament. 

However, as we talk now in Kei Central Forest there are already demarcations and they are saying that they are supposed to be given out to investors who are supposed to plant trees but those were natural trees.

Not all trees are friendly to the environment particularly in terms of contribution towards rain. Some of them drain a lot of water so I do not know who permitted to plant them. I will ask that the honourable minister interests herself in this because it is already being gazetted. The forest itself is less than a kilometre to my own home. That is what I have seen on the ground.

2.53
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, I sit on the Committee of Environment and Natural Resources. The forest cover in this country is under immense threat. It is even worse with forests that are located within urban places like towns. We have forests but you cannot see any single sign of a forest in town. There are cities which have forests that were reserved as green areas but they are no more. 

I think this august House will require at an opportune moment a comprehensive report from the ministry about all forests in this country. As I speak, there are people with land titles in forests which were given by the same Government and yet they are forest reserves.

Madam Speaker, we need a very serious analysis of the forests covers in this country and like my colleague said, we need to support National Forestry Authority to identify, demarcate or open boundaries of the national forests that we have in this country. So that they are clearly visible to the extent that we try to discourage these people who want to grab forest land. Thank you.

2.55
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Kapelebyong): Madam Speaker, if I listened very carefully, an issue was raised which was supported by hon. Nantaba of encroaching on the forests. While I appreciate what other members have raised on this area, in my constituency I have Alungamosmos Forest Reserve, where we witnessed military officers coming with kayoola trucks at that time and cutting all the pine trees to zero. As much as we, the locals, wanted to stop them, these were armed people. Everything was cut, timber was harvested and loaded in the trucks and they vanished with it.

While we were still waiting to get a proper report from Government on what the intention was, the forestry body, National Forest Authority (NFA) came with the police and the army and started planting mark stones, engulfing the land of 5,000 residents in my constituency into the forest. 

They shot people; I have a basin of magandas which they shot at the people. We went to court and the matter is there. I think when we are investigating this forest matter that has been reported, we need to find out both. There are also people who are losing their land because we hear that some people have vested interest in the land around the forests and the forests. 

We need to know these people because they are using the cover of the forests to annex the land of the ordinary people and displace them. How can you displace 5,000 people from Kapelebyong, who are simply trying to return to their homes? Where will they go and how can they survive?

Madam Speaker, this is very crucial. I think the honourable minister needs to service this Parliament with all the central Government forests all over the country, including those other ones so that we know what the position of Government is in protecting the forests and also protecting the citizens who live around the forests and who have been with that vegetation for long because they derive their livelihood from the forests. That is what I would like to add. Thank you.

2.58
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kitagwenda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In my constituency, we have a forest reserve called Kakasi. The ministry had an arrangement called joint management of the forest between the ministry and local people.

An organisation of the local people applied to manage that forest reserve and unfortunately, it was not granted the permission or a certificate. A new group with people who were foreign to the area was brought in. What we have learnt is that they are cutting down the trees themselves. There are mining activities taking place in the Kakasi Forest Reserve. The same mining activities are polluting the already polluted River Buhindagyi that flows from Buhweju that borders between our constituency and Queen Elizabeth National Park.

We need an explanation from the ministry. The people may not have been able to successfully get through to be able to manage the forest reserve, in conjunction with the ministry. However, bringing foreigners to the area has made it worse because they are depleting the same forests. Even for the few who were doing agriculture within – because there are people who have been in that area or a long time. 

The arrangement was that the ministry would give them trees and they plant them as they grow their crops. As the trees grow and they take over, then they can get out. The people have been chased out of the forest reserve. We think this land is part of our heritage because we have been living there. Bringing foreigners to chase people out of the forest reserve is in itself causing a lot of havoc in the constituency. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Keefa, finally, and then maybe the minister, if she has something to say.

3.00
DR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are two issues. I think the first issue is the dispute on boundaries. The NFA has been looking for money – not much money – just around Shs 10 billion to do the demarcations. This has been going on for the last three years but they have not been given that money to do the demarcation, so the boundaries remain disputed in some areas.

However, there is also a much bigger issue and I am glad the Minister of State for Environment is here. They recently came to the committee with about 20 land titles issued on the central forest reserves and actually, they were seeking for our help. How can we help in this matter?

Somebody somewhere has issued land titles on central forest reserves and they are having them. I think there is a much bigger issue which goes beyond the Ministry of Water and Environment, something to do with the land commission or Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development generally, which needs to be investigated. I think it is something also to do with the land grabbing which is being widely talked about in this country.



3.01
MS LILLY ADONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Nwoya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice by saying that much as we are talking about forests, it is not only the forests. When you see the people who are really destroying the forests, they are not the local people. There is a move I think by some people covering up and bringing in - that is why they do not want the local people to be there. They are either bringing in refugees or people unknown to the place to put them in the national forest land and also the wetlands.

I do not know whether our laws restrict citizens only and not foreigners. When you see these wetlands, they are all being occupied by Chinese and Banyarwanda; I can maybe say that. They are grazing there. The 100 metres protection zone is being respected by citizens but non-citizens are enjoying more power above our laws.

Therefore, we would like to know why all this, so that we also tell our citizens to begin occupying because if they are all taking, we should also take our share. What is going on?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, I know there are many issues raised but perhaps, you could make a comment.

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, honourable members, for raising pertinent issues concerning the forests.

Two weeks ago, when I was here, issues were also generated around the environment and I had asked the House that I compile a comprehensive report, come to the Floor here and we can exhaustively discuss it. I hope that opportunity will come and we discuss it in detail.

However, I thank the colleagues who have raised the issues today. What I can respond to the few of them is that for example on the issue of people living around the forests, yes, we have the communities around our forest reserves.

This morning, I launched the collaborative forest management report at Hotel Africa and it detailed all these gaps that we, as a ministry, need to fill in. It is also true that some of those communities do not actually have an agreement signed. Others have their agreements to operate and collaborate with us to work in the forests renewed. Others actually do not have it at all. That is why - as some colleagues were already raising - others were given the go ahead while the locals were not given. We have already launched that today and we are going to encourage the communities around our reserves, including the wetlands and those forest reserves, to collaborate with us and see how sustainably they can work and conserve the environment.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank the chairperson of the committee. The biggest challenge we have, and probably we shall come to the House over this, is that funds for demarcating our forest boundaries are urgent but we do not have all the money. Colleagues, you will bear with us when we come to this House to ask for those funds. Let it be given so that we demarcate all our forests once and for all and jealously guard them. 

Secondly, I also plead with the honourable colleagues – yes, we have a lot of political pressures. Like some colleagues have mentioned, in towns, you find that there are some forest reserves but when you go there, you do not see any tree. There is pressure to de-gazette forest reserves.

Colleagues have come to this House and asked for that and yet as a ministry, we have procedures. The honourable colleague said it is Parliament, which gazettes these national forest reserves. There are procedures we have laid out as Parliament that have to be followed in order to de-gazette the said properties –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable minister, you rightly put it that there are some forest reserves that need to be de-gazetted in some areas. I would like to confirm that such forest reserves exist. There has been pressure from Gulu Municipality, which is now a city, that there is need –(Interjections)– Yes, it is Gulu city.

Now that we have Gulu city, I would like to get clarification from you as to when you are going to bring the proposal to de-gazette the forest reserve there.

MS ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I have not said that we need to de-gazette those forest reserves. I am saying there is pressure; people are demanding for them to be de-gazetted. 

Madam Speaker, I have clearly said that there are procedures for de-gazetting any forest and it must be through this House. However, I must add, for purposes of clarification to my sister, that a city is very beautiful when it is green. We cannot afford to have a city, which has no trees. We have travelled all over the world and we have seen how other people jealously guard their green cover. Therefore, Gulu city would be more beautiful when we have that forest reserve well protected. 

I would like to request that I be given time to come and present a comprehensive report to this House so that we can debate it. Otherwise, thank you very much for your concern to conserve our environment.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. There were a few matters of national concern. 

3.09
MR JOHN BOSCO SEGUYA (NRM, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you know, I come from a constituency that is on the trans-African highway and we have experienced so many fires and deaths. However, we do not have a fire engine on that road. Buwama Police Station is one of the oldest police stations on that road and we do not have a fire engine there. 

Yesterday, we lost a bus from our friendly country, Rwanda. It was burnt to ashes on the Fika Salama roadblock. 

Therefore, I call upon the Ministry of Internal Affairs to provide a fire engine to Buwama Police Station so that we fight fires on that road. 

In the same way, I am aware that the Government of Uganda has a disaster management policy but we do not have a disaster management Act. I think we need this law to govern all the disasters happening in this country.

I have a feeling that I should put my Government to notice that if they do not produce this Bill in three months’ time, I intend to move a private member’s Bill to have a disaster management Act in place. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Lubyayi. On the last point, I think you do not need to wait. In the Eighth Parliament, the Government came with a wish list and among them was that Bill and it has never come. So, please move.

3.11
MS FAITH ALUPO (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning Foot and Mouth Disease in Pallisa District that has risen since last year. I would like to bring to your attention that as we speak, cattle in Pallisa are dying because of Foot and Mouth Disease. The cattle market is closed and movement of animals is restricted from one sub-county to another.

I would also like to bring to your attention that even if cows are being restricted from movement and slaughter, the people of Pallisa are still consuming meat. As such, as their leader, I am worried that very soon the people of Pallisa may catch diseases.

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that the Government, in a preventive way, should at least vaccinate all animals in Pallisa District. Also, Government should try to see that they help us in the treatment of these animals such that we do not lose our livelihood. 

I would also like to bring to your attention, Madam Speaker, that cattle is the only livelihood the people of Pallisa have because they can no longer cultivate in the swamps. Also, fishing is no more. I need Government’s attention. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I do not see the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here but – Yes, Minister of State for Land, Housing and Urban Development.
	
3.12
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the member for raising the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease, which is a disease that affects livestock, particularly cattle.

This matter was discussed in Cabinet a few days ago where the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries requested for resources, which we approved and arrangements are underway to bring in enough vaccines to vaccinate cattle in the various parts of the country.

The responsible ministers are in Karamoja and Teso regions fighting locusts but I have this authoritative information. 

We also resolved that we should establish a factory in Uganda that manufactures vaccines, especially vaccines for Foot and Mouth Disease so that we can eradicate this disease once and for all, like it has been done in other countries like Botswana where they manufacture these vaccines.

Therefore, arrangements are underway. However, when the minister comes, he could give a comprehensive response. I just wanted to comfort our sister that arrangements are underway to bring in vaccines to address Foot and Mouth Disease in the cattle corridor communities. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I do not see the Minister of Internal Affairs on the issue of the fire brigade. 

MAJ (RTD) GUMA: First of all, the minister, Dr Chris Baryomunsi, is a Mukiga; he comes from Kanungu. He always talks with a lot of confidence and assertion. The timidity he has displayed today, maybe it is because he is talking about a portfolio that is not under his ambit. 

How can he say that arrangements are underway to bring vaccines? This country has always had cattle. How can arrangements be underway? Are there no vaccines in the stores of the veterinary services in this country to address an emergency? 

I do not know. I do not want to grill Dr Baryomunsi. Lt Col Rwamirama is absent but really, Dr Baryomunsi did not look confident when he was demonstrating his “underway” ideology. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think what hon. Guma is asking is, are there no vaccines in this country? Are we just arranging to bring vaccines?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very confident hon. Guma - the vaccines are there but you see when you have an epidemic, you will need more vaccines. Actually from a public health point of view, you need to vaccinate 80 per cent of the herd in order for you to gain what we call herd immunity.

Therefore, the vaccines have been there but because of the epidemic, we need more vaccines so that you are able to reach put many more cows in order to bring down this epidemic.  Therefore, what was discussed in Cabinet - the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries brought a request and we agreed that more money must be released to bring in more dozes of the vaccine. That is the point I was emphasising.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if we have some vaccines in the country, we would start by addressing the issue in Pallisa as we wait for the bigger supply. They have no other livelihood.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This country has been here for some time and the cows have been here; the ministry has also been here too. Surely, we have talked about these vaccinations but we do not see any breakthrough. I at one time proposed here that to control Foot and Mouth disease, there should be regular vaccination of cows in all the sub counties that border with these countries where the Foot and Mouth Disease comes from.

Therefore, why has it been impossible to vaccinate regularly until the calamity emerged that you are now thinking of procuring vaccines? You know of course the procurement cycle of this country takes such a long time. So, I am not convinced that the minister is telling us the truth. Thank you.

MR LOKWANG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the first day, when we sat here in this Parliament, I raised the issue concerning quarantine. You directed that the minister was to come the following week on Thursday and respond to those issues. However, up to today, the minister has never come to respond.

Now, when it is issues for locusts, because they know that there is money for locusts, they just rush for locusts abandoning issues to do with the cows. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR BAFAKI: Madam Speaker, I have been on this Floor of Parliament, several times, talking about issues regarding cows. Isingiro was quarantined for 15 years. As I speak, the districts of Sembabule, Kazo and Kiruhura are also under quarantine.

Now, we are talking about cow diseases in Pallisa yet when you reflect back about 20 years ago, you realise that the Government has not taken a step to procure the vaccine for the Foot and Mouth disease. 

As if that is not enough, cows have died because of tick and bone related diseases. The population of animals now in the cattle corridor has reduced by three quarters.

Therefore, when the minister begins telling us that the plans are underway to get the vaccines, I, on behalf of the people of Kazo and the entire country, feel cheated. This is a serious concern. 

Madam Speaker, this is very serious matter because I remember one day when we debated the issue of soldiers being on Lake Kyoga, in your wise ruling, you said: “We are not going to sit until there is a commitment by Government that these soldiers should leave the lake.” And we - but when we come to talk about the livelihood of people who sustain the country on their animals, everybody keeps a deaf ear.

These people are suffering and others are in jail. Because, you can imagine milk now is at Shs 200. Children have not gone back to school. What do you want us to do? 

Madam Speaker, I beg that Government takes serious steps on this issue. It should take it up; if it means suspending House to have a conclusive report tabled here by the Prime Minister - I have asked him several questions. If I have spoken in Parliament four times, those four times have been about cows and the livelihood of the people.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course the locusts are important but it is a recent issue. We have talked about the issue of the quarantine and the lack of livelihood for those communities for a long time. 

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has more than one minister. Therefore, we want the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - him or one of them - to come and report on the quarantine issue because that is an outstanding question. The minister should also report on what they are going to do on the Foot and Mouth Disease. We cannot go on like this. I don’t think it is fair to the citizens.

3.22
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Indeed it is a very serious issue and I will communicate so that –(Interjections)– I would like to request members not to think that they are chasing after locusts because there is money. Locusts are an emergency. I thank you but I am going to inform the minister.

3.23
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We all know that the 16th February of every year was gazetted for the St Janani Luwum commemoration in Mucwini, Kitgum District. This day is only three days to go and this is a national function but we have never heard from the Government how the preparations are going.

Normally, what happens is that when there is a national day, the ministry that is involved or responsible for national functions comes before this Parliament to update the members on the level of preparation. 

However, while we are left with only two to three days, we have not heard anything from the side of Government on how the preparations are moving. This is worrying and is alarming the people on the ground whether the Government is fully behind this function that is going to take place on the 16th.

Secondly, some of the missionaries and pilgrims reached the shrines yesterday. Unfortunately there have been no preparations to facilitate them logistically. They are there - I think they are starving because there is no food or anything.

This morning when they called me, I promised that I would raise it up and see what steps can be taken by the Government to support the overall function. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I would like to know from the Government whether they are aware that we have a celebration for St Janani Luwum Day and whether any preparations are going on to support the citizens in that part of the country.

MS KARORO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed Government is very much aware and preparations have been going on. I am going to inform Fr Lokodo, the responsible minister to come and give information to this august House. I am not sure about the feeding. We have been following up this issue but usually Government gives money for that very day because the church handles all these other issues.

Like I have said, I will inform Fr Lokodo to come and give us substantive information statement tomorrow. Thank you.

3.25
Mr lawrence mangusho (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I would like to raise concerns the threat of the desert locusts.

The country is in confusion as to whether we are already under attack or we are fighting the locusts. If so, how effective is it? What steps has Government taken to ensure that it is effective and with what methods? For example, if they are spraying, are we sure that the chemicals that are being used do not have any health hazards to the human beings?

We know that the locusts are said to have entered through Karamoja and the neighbourhood is under threat. Government should give us the position on the current status. Thank you. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, we have been hearing that the locusts have invaded the place but we have not been told officially how to handle it. 

3.27
Mr benard atiku (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The locust invasion of our country is a very serious issue. It is envisaged to have attacked areas, which are hunger-stricken. When you also look at the poverty statistics, these are regions, which are wallowing in poverty. 

To my dismay, this morning when I was reading the Daily Monitor newspaper – of course, we are aware Government acted swiftly and has allocated about Shs 22 billion.  The money is meant to help the relevant ministries to address this invasion by the locusts.

When I read the Daily Monitor, there was an officer of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries who said that they have procured insecticides that are not effective on locusts - (Interjections) - It is there for those who have read the Daily Monitor. It is not my statement.

It is now clear that people have rushed into this thing to procure chemicals that are ineffective to appear to be addressing the problem when the motive is different –

The Speaker: Then they can also procure more. 

Mr atiku: We need to be very careful as we address ourselves to this issue to ensure that whatever little money that has been allocated is effectively used –(Interruption)
 
Mr Agaba: Thank you, hon. Atiku, for giving way. We agree that locusts are an emergency but why the public is awash with the thought that it is becoming money-making centre, there are three questions:

First, the Government kept away from subscription to the regional Desert Locust Organisation for all this time. Now that we are having a problem, we woke up to pay subscription in order to be assisted to fight the calamity that is befalling us. What has been the problem ignoring totally to pay subscription to this organisation?

Secondly, where these locusts have been in Kenya and other countries, there are two methods that have been used to control them; using the pesticides that can kill them but the other is biological control because the locusts are edible. Government has assisted those communities that can harvest and consume them. That is factual.

There is also where they have used larva that feed on the eggs of the locusts. These two approaches are not part of Government’s approach to control locusts. I do not know why. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, you remember that two years ago from this very chair, I reminded Government about their need to subscribe. We shall need services and we shall not be assisted. 

3.31
Mr Ibrahim ssemujju (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister briefs Parliament, we had been told that we were preparing for the locusts that were in Kenya. We were then told they had entered and are in Karamoja. The Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) choppers went to Karamoja.

This morning we read that the locusts have spread to Acholi. In fact, they have left those who went to fight them in Karamoja –(Laughter)– they are just running after them. 

Those are the reports in the newspapers this morning. They are not in the districts where they were seen first but the officers who went are still offloading chemicals in the districts where they have left.

If we knew that the locusts are in Kenya and on their way entering Uganda, it would be a shame for Government to tell Parliament that, “We are unable to stop them in the areas where they were first sighted and we are now running after them in Lango, Acholi and Arua,” - (Interruption) – I will take the information.

Ms anyakun: Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleague, for giving me room for information. Right now, they have sent the choppers and over 2,000 Local Defence Unit (LDUs) and the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). 

From 17th December, Members of Parliament from Karamoja came with a complaint on issues of deployment of UPDF to Karamoja because of the issue of insecurity. However, the moment the locusts came –(Laughter)– just because there were funds of Shs 15 billion, deployment was put in place and they are busy handling the sprayers. 

Couldn’t the Government motivate the locals in Karamoja by training them on how to spray the insects? Must they take people from this end to go and just carry a sprayer? We need accountability for that Shs 15 billion.

I asked this nation to pray for us and the locusts are leaving Karamoja in the name of the Lord.

Ms nauwat: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is like all Ugandans are aware that Amudat District was the entry point of the locusts. That Sunday at around 3.00 o’clock, I was called and informed about the locusts, much as they just had a brief stopover there –(Laughter)

That evening we were informed that - the Prime Minister was meeting some members of Cabinet – on Monday, they would go and spray the locusts. I have been monitoring and there was no spraying on that Monday. Yesterday Tuesday, I kept monitoring up to 6.00 o’clock. They told me that what they are seeing are technical people from the agriculture ministry and other departments. They were there driving from Moroto to Amudat - I see that is how this money is being used -(Interjection)- just give me some time members. They drive to Amudat stay there then drive back.

Madam Speaker, I think Government should be sincere to Ugandans. To say they are spraying and yet no spraying has taken place - much as these insects did not stay for long, there is fear that they could have laid eggs there.

I think Government should have gone on to spray the route through which these insects passed and Ugandans should be given accurate information. Why does Government hide its head in the sand? It should give accurate information that now we are not able to spray because of these technicalities, and you inform us, but do not say that they are going to spray yet no spraying has been done. Thank you.

3.36
MR CHRISTOPHER KIPTERIT (Independent, Upe County, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The way my colleague said, they first stopped in Amudat. Madam Speaker, they say prevention is better than cure. The Government knew that there was high chance that locusts would invade Amudat, because we border Turkana and Kenya where the West Pokot in Kenya experienced a lot of locusts. 

However, the Government waited until the locusts invaded Amudat. But by the grace of God, we prayed and God heard our prayers- and you know those locusts have bad manners, they multiply so fast; when they reached Amudat, they left in one day.
 
I am urging the Government that if they give you information, it is imperative that you act on that information because if you wait too long, you act when the problem has already happened and that would be very costly. Thank you. Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, we are now talking to ourselves, but I think the Government must come and speak to us formally about what is happening and how we are going to manage because honourable members are speculating.

3.38
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker, the whole situation is understandable. As we started this year, the world has been hit. First, we have the Coronavirus (COVID19) and then the locusts. Madam Speaker, you had already ruled, the Prime Minister is supposed to give a statement on the Coronavirus (COVID19) and our students who are stuck there and our citizens.

I am requesting and proposing that in the same breath, after he has presented about what we are doing about our citizens in China, afterwards he presents a statement about the locusts’ invasion and what Government has done so far so that people can have proper information.

Madam Speaker, the issue of locusts - I remember studying about locusts though in an elementary fashion. When a locust eats something green, in that very instant, it passes it out; then it eats a little bit more so everything comes out within that very moment. That shows you what risk we stand if we do not take a decisive step. 

I know that Government is doing so, but I am going to inform the Prime Minister, you know, they had gone in for the swearing in of the Deputy Attorney-General; he is going to come so that he gives a comprehensive statement. Thank you.

3.39
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am happy to hear that the minister is saying that when it eats the grass, it immediately passes it out. Now, we have known about the locusts and we have heard about them over a period of time. They said, they were going to get chemicals to spray them. We have not seen any spraying taking place.

Yesterday in Katakwi, they took the LDUs to go and start spraying. The people who were taken to do the spraying do not even know how to operate the drones.

They were actually just watching the drones and locusts taking off. They were enjoying the drones moving around but there was no spraying taking place.

Madam Speaker, you find that what is being done on the ground is not rescuing the people there, but just making accountability of the money that has been disbursed –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we had stray animals from the game park - hyenas, they devoured animals in Kasilo. When I raised the matter here, a team of Uganda Wildlife Authority went over there. For three weeks, they could not get the hyenas, but they were just driving around.

What I did, Madam Speaker, was to tell the hunters in Kasilo that whoever catches a hyena, will get one million. Within one day, all the hyenas had been rounded up. Yet we had Uganda Wildlife Authority teams driving around and getting allowances. (Laughter)

Therefore, with this issue of the locusts, Madam Speaker, we may even spend less than Shs 5 billion if we told the people that a kilo of locust is 3,000. 

You will see how people will go and collect them. And if you raise it to 5,000 per kilo, we would not need the LDUs. The local people there will go - even the people from Kampala will run to collect locusts for money. This is a very simple thing, which can be sorted out and we get rid of them. I thought I would give simple information to the Prime Minister.

3.43
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): The issue of locusts is very serious. Some of us who have read the Bible know what locusts mean. When you see them coming, it is not a joking subject.

The Government is not taking it very seriously, even when we knew they were coming. The people in Karamoja are saying they are not seeing people spraying and I think people should take it seriously.

The minister representing the Prime Minister needs to tell the Prime Minister that people are doing business out of this. People are just making money while others are suffering and we cannot allow this to continue as a serious country. Please tell the Prime Minister to go and investigate the money that we have spent in the guise of fighting locusts.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the debate will continue after the Prime Minister has brought a statement because now we are just talking among ourselves. Therefore, when he comes tomorrow, we shall do the needful. Item no.3.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON GOVERNMENT PLANS TO EVACUATE UGANDAN CITIZENS STRANDED IN THE PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF CHINA ON ACCOUNT OF ON-GOING CORANAVIRUS (COVID19) SCOURGE

3.44
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Mary Karooro Okurut): Madam Speaker, that is the statement he is supposed to present tomorrow. I know he is on his way, but he may not be here on time, so I think we stand it over.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I hope that it really takes place. Today, I received a number of parents; they have formed a WhatsApp group with their children there in China. They are monitoring what we are doing and they are really anxious. I hope the Prime Minister comes with a solution.
 
MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020”

3.45
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

This is a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2020.” It is moved under Articles 94(4), 259 and 262 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda; 

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognises the rights of members of Parliament to move a Private Member’s Bill; 

AWARE that Article 86(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda vests the High Court with the original jurisdiction to determine any question relating to the validity of the election of a member of Parliament and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and the declaration of vacant seats; 

FURTHER AWARE that Article 86(2) of the Constitution grants a right of appeal to a person aggrieved by the termination of High Court to the Court of Appeal;

NOTING that the current legal framework for handling election petitions is not only time consuming with no clear timelines but also costly and therefore, calls for the establishment of ad hoc election petition tribunals to ensure efficiency in delivery of justice;

FURTHER NOTING that vesting the determination of election petitions of members of Parliament in election tribunals and abolishing the appeal process for such election petitions would not only ensure expeditious disposal of electoral complaints but would also reduce the cost of election litigation incurred by Government and individual parties;

ALSO CONCERNED that the perpetuation of regional, gender and other disparities in the allocation of employment and other opportunities need to be addressed as it threatens national unity and cohesion;

RECALLING that there have been several calls by Parliament to have the Uganda Public Service reflect national character in recruitment and appointments in order to achieve equitable distribution of employment opportunities;

NOW THEREFORE, be it resolved that this House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2020”, a draft of which is hereto attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for the first reading.” 

I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by some Members. Please, justify.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to state that leave had been granted in this matter but in a consolidated manner in that when I moved the first motion, hon. Niwagaba’s Bill moved together with this one. The presiding officer then consolidated the two Bills but at the stage of printing, my part was omitted. I was advised by the presiding officer and the Legal Counsel of Parliament that to avoid technicalities, I should move this Bill again for purposes of formality. 

For purposes of a synopsis of what transpired the other time, when it comes to election petitions, we have issues where there have been a lot of uncertainties when it comes to election petitions. Very many participants have fallen victim to delayed justice, yet, justice delayed is justice denied. 

I will give an example of myself. I have been a victim twice. In 2011, I won an election but – (Interruption)

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Listening to our colleague, hon. Mwiru, he has just confirmed that this motion has been presented before the House before during the time when hon. Niwagaba equally presented the same motion seeking leave of the House to bring a Constitution (Amendment) Bill. 

The Constitution (Amendment) Bill moved by hon. Niwagaba is currently before the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, where I sit. 

The procedural matter I am raising is, if it is true, like the mover has confirmed, that this motion was brought at that time by hon. Niwagaba but during the printing, an error occurred and the one of hon. Niwagaba was printed and his was left out, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we do not belabour the details of this motion but the committee directs that it be consolidated with the one of hon. Niwagaba, now that it is already under the committee dealing with it? Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Notwithstanding that, I think he has to justify why he moved it in the first place. He had a reason for moving it. Let him complete justification and then, we can take a decision. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The object of this Bill is to provide for expeditious disposal of election petitions. As a result of expeditious disposal and even providing election tribunals, it will reduce the cost of litigation. 

I know many colleagues out there who are in court and because the process was very lengthy, it involved starting from the High Court to the Court of Appeal. They cannot meet the cost of litigation yet, these are public matters. 

By the time you go for an election, as participants, you have an interest. The state has an interest and the public have an interest too. These are public matters but we have seen costs failing an individual because of the lengthy process. 

It has also been frustrating because, for example, in the previous election where I won and they declared someone who did not win, he stayed in this House for two years yet, he was not supposed to stay because the question for determination was, who won? Out of technicality, if that matter had been determined by High Court, it would have taken three weeks but it took two years to determine the issue of who won. As a result, the court even shied away from determining who won and said we should go and have another election. 

At the end of the day, there was uncertainty as to who was the Member of Jinja Municipality East Constituency as the person who had been in this Parliament illegally would not come to Parliament because he was not sure of whether he would continue being a Member of Parliament. The voters were also not represented. That uncertainty also denied the people of Jinja Municipality East Constituency effective representation. 

The other leg of the motion is about even distribution of jobs in this country. When you move through most Government offices and departments, there has been unfair allocation of jobs. These days, they have introduced aptitude tests and it may look like there is only one group of people who are passing these aptitude tests. At the end of the day, people with the same qualifications are eliminated at the level of aptitude tests and yet, some are even more qualified than those who pass the aptitude tests. 

I thought that this motion is timely so that when there is public employment or promotion, we take into account regional balance. We need to look at this as a country so that we address other imbalances, which have been caused by the people who are holding these offices so that we are looked at as one country. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as indicated, the matter had been brought before but in the printing of the other Bill, these were left out. I do not know whether we have authority to send this directly to the committee without printing the Bill. I think we cannot.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, after that occurred, I wrote and the presiding officer then guided that we should move a motion and print a new Bill so that we are not trapped by technicalities. It is on that premise that I have moved this motion again. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: That is why I am saying there is no other way of sending it to the committee than in the form of a Bill. Honourable members, I put the question that a question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that hon. Mwiru be given authority to print a Bill for first reading.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DESIGNATION OF A MEMBER TO A STANDING COMMITTEE IN ACCORDANCE WITH RULE 157(2) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, thank you for the opportunity to raise a procedural issue. The 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda is either old or not updated. Any good law should be both rigid and flexible – it should be easy to amend and also hard to amend.

The Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs that I am privileged to chair – which privilege I do not take lightly –(Laughter)– yes, it is an honour because not everyone can chair this committee - is getting overwhelmed with several amendments. We are also human beings and members of Parliament.

It would have been proper for all of who have - the other day, I seconded a constitutional amendment to amend a schedule just to include some people who have been living in Kiryandongo for a long time. Probably, other Members here could also be having several other amendments. 

The attrition rate of the Members who sit on the committee that I preside over is the reason I get up to speak on their behalf. Whereas Members on other committees will be conversing for votes to come back to this Parliament, our committee will be doing a technical job that we cannot take home. We cannot take home courts, Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions or anything.

Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on the period for submission of the proposed amendments. In view of the closure of our term, could the submission of the proposed amendments be fast-tracked so that after a certain period, we do not again get into the constitutional amendments? It is a lot of work and this is a concern. Next week, we shall be going out of this Parliament to do consultation on hon. Niwagaba’s proposed amendment and we thank Parliament for facilitating us to do that. We shall go to about all the sub-regions and sample out opinions. When we come back, there will be another amendment by hon. Mwiru that will also need us to go out.

If it would please you, Madam Speaker, you could make a pronouncement that those who want to make those amendments in piece meal, as it is being done, should do it within some timeframe so that we conclude them.

Madam Speaker, I seek for your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable committee chairperson. Indeed, on behalf of the House, I thank your committee. I think you have had the biggest number of Bills. You have handled about 15 Bills in one Session and that is quite a lot. That is sometimes the point the press do not understand – that the committee has been very busy. 

I think you are right. There should be a cut-off date so that we know when to stop constitutional amendments. Let me look at it and give my ruling on the timelines tomorrow. Otherwise, we need to have a cut-off date for new proposals so that the committee can concentrate on the work available in good time and also have enough time to go and talk to the real people down there for obvious reasons. Thank you.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO THE MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Again I do not see our team.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, if I recall very well, that report was presented to this House and debated. However, the Government failed, I think they did not want to be embarrassed by the minority report carrying the day because there were very critical issues. That matter was referred to the Attorney-General. When hon. Rukutana, the then Deputy Attorney-General came, the House was not convinced and he asked to be allowed to go back.

Since that time, we have been waiting to hear from the Attorney-General. The SGS Company is there. The Government said they would go through negotiations and we have been waiting for the Attorney-General and Ministry of Works and Transport to tell us what has transpired.

It is now the Attorney-General and Ministry of Works and Transport to come and report on what they have come up with such that we either take a decision based on the minority report, which was very popular or we hear whether they have re-negotiated the contract.


MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, I am the one who brought the petition over that matter. However, recently, I was surprised to hear that they are busy coming up with a new agreement despite the decision that was taken on the Floor of Parliament, whereupon we all agreed that the minority report was the best and had the support of all the members of the House, including support of the committee members. Therefore, this is like smuggling back something in the interest of making many Ugandans to suffer.

When you look at the recommendations and what we noted when I was testifying before the committee – as proposed, we will wait to hear from the Attorney-General. Otherwise, we are also ready to come up with additional information over the same. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us refresh ourselves on where we stopped and then, we can hear from the Attorney-General maybe next week. Let us give ourselves time to study where we stopped. Thank you.

Now, I have seen that the “minister in charge of locusts” has come. (Laughter) I do not know at what stage we should give him a slot. Minister, are you ready? We have been waiting anxiously to hear about what is happening.

4.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we heard about the locust invasion, the Government moved very quickly and took a strategy to fight them. We are in arrears of the Desert Locusts Control Organisation but we paid $3 million to strengthen the capacity of the organisation in fighting the locusts before they could cross into Uganda. This somehow paid off. 

However, they crossed into Uganda and, fortunately, the ones that crossed into Uganda are the mature ones. So, they are not as destructive as the young ones. We had to divide ourselves into groups. The first group went on the ground while hon. Ecweru and I went to Nairobi to negotiate for an aircraft to come and spray those swarms. I have secured one aircraft, which will be in Moroto tomorrow. We are also in the process of procuring another one, hopefully today, so that we deal with the locusts.

The yellow locusts that have crossed into Ugandan are laying eggs possibly for the third time. We, therefore, need to map out areas, where they have landed so that in the morning, before they fly, they are sprayed and killed.

We have also put in place a training camp in Moroto. We have got some experts from Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) and Desert Locusts Control Organisation They are training our extension workers, the Entomologist in the districts on how to deal with them so that in 14 days, we expect where they have laid eggs to have hoppers. We shall be spraying these hoppers so that we control them effectively.

We have sighted nine areas, where we have had locust landing. We are going to deal with them effectively. My senior colleague, hon. Ssempijja and Bagiire are on ground –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Please, let him finish.

MR RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the locusts are very destructive. Each locust eats the amount of kilograms equivalent to its own weight. When they congregate, they fly. In fact, the young ones are the most destructive.

We have also agreed with the organisations that the invasions, which we are mainly expecting from neighbouring Kenya, be dealt with on ground. 

The challenge, which remains unsolved is that they first landed in Somalia. Due to the war situation in Somalia, no one is in control and even the organisation is not in control. We are planning to call a regional meeting over the same so that we deal with this situation in Somalia. Otherwise, I would say that the situation is under control.

We are procuring enough chemical, which is very effective to make sure that in 10 days, we are on ground to spray the hoppers that come. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have clarifications from hon. Lokwang.

MR LOKWANG: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This House should be aware that last year, I raised an issue concerning locusts. The ministry went there to bring the samples and they were even aware that the locusts were going to come. I even showed them the pictures of locust in Ik County and now, they have come.

There is uncoordinated movement of people who are now in charge of locusts. Madam Speaker, locusts are in Kapedo, Kaabong but they are not aware. They are in Orom and other places. I think you do not communicate with the local leaders on the ground. Otherwise, they could have told you where the locusts have landed.

Madam Speaker, I have not even seen the media showing the ministry spraying the locusts. I have never seen this there. Thank you very much.

MS ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also thank the minister for this brief. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious issue. You have given a brief statement but you have not told us the impact of using these chemicals on humans.

From WhatsApp, we are seeing some restaurants already serving locusts yet, we are spraying them. There is even an advert on the WhatsApp of locust as a delicacy. (Laughter)

Before the minister came, hon. Okupa was advising Government to buy these at Shs 5,000. I would say that Government should buy them at Shs 10,000 so that people can catch them. If it is something that can be eaten, please brief us on what it means when one eats these locusts.

As we wait for the side effects of the sprayed locusts, I would like to know whether the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has already sensitised the local people on whether these locusts are edible or not.

Finally, for us in Lango, we are also very much threatened. Some people are telling us that in two days, locusts will be in Lango. Honourable minister, could you, please, tell us the areas, which will soon be affected and what should we do, as leaders, who come from the neighbouring areas?

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister whether he is aware that the locusts have reached Agago. We sighted them yesterday in Lapyem Parish. They are yellow. We are worried that the yellowness might end up producing more.

On a serious note, the level of the destruction is high. They eat cassava and sorghum leaves. We are worried about the food security of our people especially in Lapyem Parish that was invaded yesterday.

This morning, the locusts headed towards Lira, Kato sub-county, which is in the neighbourhood. They are actually heading northwards.

Yesterday, a team of ministers including hon. Peter Ogwang, hon. Ssempijja and others came to Agago District Headquarters and flew in the helicopters. I think they were trying to do assessment of the actual situation. We expect them to come with a formal report to the House so that we are aware about the gravity of the problem. Otherwise, people are now scared not only of the invasion of the locusts but they are also worried of the safety of our people as they spray the locusts. We are not sure about the safety of the chemicals that are being used. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.13
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA	(FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very painful and shameful to our country. These locusts were predicted to come to Uganda two years ago, which I think the ministry concerned was very much aware of. However, they waited to the extent of starting to tell Ugandans that they are 50 kilometres away, four kilometres away to enter the country.

Cabinet approved Shs 15 billion. In two years, they were not aware but they had arrears of the body that controls the locusts. They waited to pay when the locusts were already in Uganda. That was not enough. We have a saying that says that, “Prevention is better than Cure”. That was also not enough.

Madam Speaker, they went and procured one aircraft. The minister is now here telling us that they are procuring another aircraft, yet the locusts have left people in Amudat, Moroto and they are running after them. This shows the highest level of unpreparedness. I would like the minister -(Interruption)

MR ACIDRI: Thank you, honourable colleague. The information I would like to give you is that the Uganda People’s Defence Force (UPDF) was deployed in Somalia to fight terrorists and the locusts have come from Somalia. Now the UPDF has been deployed in Karamoja to fight locusts instead of deploying them in Somalia where we would have better fought them without them causing problems on the ground.

It defeats the purpose as to why the same Government that deployed UPDF in Somalia failed to deploy them to fight locusts there and waited for them to first arrive in Uganda. Thank you.

MS BAMUKWATSA: Thank you, for the information. I was in Mombasa a week ago for the Coffee 54th Conference. They told us that the impact of locusts, whenever they land somewhere and lay eggs, the eggs might be long lasting and the minister has confirmed that the yellow ones, which came were already laying eggs.

Removing those eggs from the soil will create a long lasting impact. Remember there is climate change but we are adding more chemicals, which are not relevant to the soil. 

I would like to call upon the Government to always prepare whenever we hear something that is coming to our beautiful country, which we are proud of. Always prepare in time; fight it before it reaches here. Thank you, very much.

MS LUCY AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the verbal statement. The information about the locusts reached us sometime back when they were still in Kenya.

The clarification I seek from the minister is that if we, indeed, have started spraying, which areas are we talking about? I saw some pictures circulating - the UPDF, LDUs who have been sent there are redundant and yet, the containers were behind them.

Secondly, I want to ask all of us who are here and all of us who are in charge, when the locusts came to Egypt, it was because the king had refused to listen to the voice of God and it was some sort of punishment. So, it is also time for us to reflect; it is food for thought. Thank you, very much.

MS NAUWAT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his brief. The minister gave us some of the strategies that they have put in place to combat these locusts. 

Whereas you were saying that you want to look at those areas where the locusts have settled before you can spray, what happens in Amudat District where these locusts settled temporarily and left? We were told that those insects lay very many eggs.

They are telling us that that was just an advance team and that more locusts were coming and this morning, I received information that some few locusts were cited in Alakas in Amudat sub-county.

Honourable minister, the two choppers that you are talking about, I propose that one of them be stationed there as we wait for that other swarm, which they say is about to come so that it is easy to combat them before they spread to the rest of the country. Thank you.

4.20
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a piece of advice to the minister. May be, they should think about applying the local mechanism of catching these locusts.

If we employ people who normally catch grasshoppers to come with their drums like in Masaka. (i) We are giving them jobs and their process can be more cost-effective because it is a fact that locusts are a delicacy rich in proteins.

Let us not assume that Ugandans are not going to eat these locusts, much as we may sensitise them. (Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for yielding the Floor. This is not the first time for Uganda to be invaded by locusts. In the 1940s, we had them and that is how we ended up naming some of our children Kizige, Obonyo and some of the people who fought them are still around. They can give us tips on how they fought. Amongst the Luo, if you were born during the locusts’ invasion, you are called Obonyo, in Busoga you are called Kizige. We can get tips from those people who were around when we first suffered in 1914 and 1943-45; so, it is not new and there is a formula.

Finally, is it not something on which we can try the weapon we have in abundance namely; tear gas? If you sprayed these locusts with teargas, would they survive? That was the information.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much for the information. Madam Speaker, my colleague has brought a very pregnant point by enriching me with the names. In Ankole we have people named Rwitanzigye, meaning that they were very good at killing these insect. We have a whole lake called Mutanzige named after these locusts. 

Let us employ our local people and they also try to trap them because they are rich in proteins. We and our animals can feed on them. Thank you very much.

4.24
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I learnt from history, locusts came to Uganda about 70 years ago. For us in our local language, we call them Bonyo. At that time, they ended around Lake Albert. In our local language, we call Lake Albert Onek Bonyo, which means the lake that has killed the locusts; so, we have that history.

These locusts that have come are quite unique because we call them desert locusts. I do not think they have the same colour like the locusts that came in those days. (Interjections) – Yes, the red ones in those days. This time, it is the yellow ones. (Laughter) Not NRM but they are quite scary.

Madam Speaker, the speed at which these locusts move, I understand they can move between 100 and 150 kilometres per day. These locusts came to Uganda about four days ago through the side of Amudat. Just yesterday, some locusts were already sighted in Otuke in Lango sub-region.

I agree that these locusts are very fast but we are not fast enough to plan interventions. Therefore, I am asking the honourable minister to –(Member timed out.)

4.26
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Locusts are very destructive and that is why this organisation called Desert Locusts Control Organisation was set up by the United Nations and they have been doing their work very well. That is why we have not been seeing locusts around.

I would like to find out from the minister what went wrong. Does it mean the organisation has not been working? Uganda was also supposed to contribute towards that organisation but they waited until the locusts came. I would like to know when they are completing payment of the remaining money. I understand Shs 10 billion has been given and we are left with around Shs 7 billion. When are you paying so that we get free aeroplanes to spray these locusts?

Secondly, not all of us are biology teachers. I would like to know the life span of locusts because I do not understand the logic of saying, we let them spray around our crops and allow them to lay eggs first before they are sprayed. This means that as soon as they lay their eggs, they will move ahead. In fact, if they had sprayed all of them in Kenya, we would not have some in Uganda. 

Why don’t you spray those old ones and then wait for the young ones rather than waiting to spray the young ones and leave the old ones to go ahead to produce more eggs? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I hope you can take an interest in Lake Albert because my other relatives call that lake “Mwiitanzige”. There must be something.

MR JOSEPH KASOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify to me and the House the effectiveness of spraying. As a country, we are injecting over Shs 15 billion in spraying. The Kenyans carried out aerial spraying and other forms of spraying. How effective was it? At the end of the day, what they sprayed is in Uganda.

Two, health wise, how does this spray affect human beings and the other species and organisms? That is what I would like the minister to clarify.

4.29
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga County East, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to commend Government for the initiative. However, one thing, which is puzzling me is that there is a lot of focus on fighting locusts, which is a good thing and is commendable. However, there is not much that is being put in a way of preparing the public for the eventual disaster.

What we are hearing from you is that the situation is under control. Are you sure you have now contained them where they are and they will not spread any further? 

According to FAO, they have the capability of reproducing 500 times and I get worried that probably, it is these older ones, the yellow ones, which can reproduce. In this case then, the problem is greater than what you are talking about.

What is your view? How should the public prepare? What can they do? In other countries, we have seen people banging pans and tins and trying to do everything possible. What is your message for us in Uganda –(Interruption)

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: I am giving information to hon. Kiwanuka –(Interjection)– Please, honourable minister, this information is very useful to hon. Kiwanuka. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, hon. Kiwanuka has allowed me to give him information.

I would be very surprised if Government had a very robust response on handling these desert locusts because Government has had a very lukewarm response to any form of invasion we have had in this country. 

Hon. Kiwanuka, I would like to give you an example of the invasion of Lake Kyoga by a strange waterweed in 2013. It has taken seven years and we have not seen any response, to the extent that at one time, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries had wanted to give us wheelbarrows and spades, as if Lake Kyoga is a pond.  

Therefore, there is a very lukewarm response from Government on anything to do with invasions.

MR KIWANUKA: My final issue is that we are again missing the point of the causes of this locust invasion. I think one of the causes, which is well known, is the changes in weather patterns and climate change generally. I am not hearing any voice on this.

Honourable minister, we are missing the point of climate change in this, which is one of the causes of these swarms. I think this is an opportunity for the leadership of the country to help in mobilising the people so that they are more responsive to issues of climate change. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me start by commenting on the issue of climate change and attempt to explain why there are locusts today. There are three types of locusts: the African migratory locusts, which have their breeding sites in South Africa. We have the red locusts, whose breeding sites are in West Africa and then the desert locusts, which have invaded us, which breed in the Horn of Africa and part of the Arab world.

Last year, there were effects of climate change and the people who monitor global climate trends saw heavy winds in the Pacific Ocean, which crossed into the Indian Ocean. This caused water to be drifted from the eastern part of the Indian Ocean towards the West, giving rise to the increase in the sea surface temperatures of the Indian Ocean. It is actually recorded that the temperature on the western part of the Indian Ocean, which is our side, rose by two degrees Celsius whereas the eastern part reduced by two degrees Celsius.

The effect of this is that the low water level rises in the eastern part resulting into low temperatures. That is why you see drought and bush fire in Australia while there was heavy evaporation resulting into heavy rains in the western part of the ocean, which we saw towards the end of last year. 

Also, there were over eight cyclones. This kind of situation favours the breeding of locusts. That is why the current wave of locusts is reported to have come from Yemen and Arab areas and they crossed the Red Sea into the Horn of Africa. This explains the invasion of locusts in this part of Africa. 

This has been monitored by global experts including Government. So, it is not true that Government has just been asleep. We have been monitoring trends on the emergence of the locusts and also, the invasion of our country. 

That is the first point to enforce the issue the honourable member had raised on climate change and why the locusts’ invasion.

Secondly, there have been questions of yellow locusts. I would like to take the opportunity to explain scientifically why the yellow locusts –(Interjections)– I have the opportunity to speak – 

THE SPEAKER: Let us understand this thing. Tell us.

DR BARYOMUNSI: The desert locusts are naturally solitary. They live usually solitary as much as they can. When there is change in climate, as it happened, and the breeding is favoured, then they start living in swarms. They turn from solitary to gregarious; that is, they live together. 

When they do that, they squeeze each other. You know they have strong legs. When the strong legs hit another locust, there is a chemical, which is produced in the body and then the colour of the body changes from brown to yellow. When they mature, they become yellow.

So, the yellowness that you see shows maturity. (Laughter) That is why the feeding behaviour – that is why the swarms that came to Karamoja are not feeding ravenously as they were doing while they were still pink in colour. It is just because when they are pink, they are hoppers. They are young and they feed much more –(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, on a serious note, I rise on a point of order. The locusts that I saw yesterday in Adilang sub-county, whether young or old, small or big, were all yellow. It did not indicate the difference between the young and the old. There was no difference in colour.

So, is it in order for the minister to come before the House to tell us a lie that the yellowness of the locusts is a sign of maturity when all the locusts are actually yellow in colour?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister was explaining the life cycle of the locusts. He is in order.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. May be, to assure the Member, I am a scientist by training. You may not agree but that is the truth. I was giving scientific information about the locusts –(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was reluctant to interrupt my good friend, the hon. Dr Baryomunsi but you may recall that just a while ago, he told this House that the responsible minister, Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama, was in Karamoja. And that is how Dr Baryomunsi stood in to answer questions meant for the minister. However, in a matter of seconds, Lt Col Rwamirama is here with us. 

Can we trust the words of the hon. Dr Baryomunsi who chooses to romanticise with the locusts? He is now dillydallying and telling us the various colours – can we trust a person who has just misled the House to believe that Lt Col Rwamirama is in Karamoja only for him to turn up in the House? Can we trust him to take the Floor and guide this House at this point in time?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think you should agree to benefit from knowledge from different Members. We are here from different professions. Let us benefit from one another. 

Concerning the order, he said the responsible ministers. He did not name any minister. Please, complete your submission, honourable minister. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You should not fear knowledge. Anyhow, lastly, what we have read about Mwitanzigye, like you asked the minister to clarify, is that Lake Albert, found in Western Uganda, is referred to as Mwitanzigye in the local language, which means something that kills locusts. There are stories that long ago, before colonialism, locusts drowned in that lake when they tried to cross. Locusts can cross distances, which are bigger than that because there are reports that those locusts have crossed from Africa to the Caribbean.

It appears the reflection in the lake misled the locusts to think that it was grass and they tried to follow onto the water body, only to drown. That is why they named it Lake Mwitanzigye, a lake which kills locusts. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I invite the minister, Lt Col Rwamirama? 

4.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (ANIMAL INDUSTRY) (Lt Col (Rtd) Bright Rwamirama): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, generally when we have a disaster, it is better to put our minds together and address the situation as it comes. 

It is not true that there is un-coordinated movement of those people who are on the ground. We are very co-ordinated and we are using the LC structures. This morning, we alerted the affected districts to use all the LCs on site and we are using our extension workers on ground. We are also training and generating capacity for our local people to deal with the locusts at different stages. 

Two, the impact of using chemicals on wetlands - when we spray using aircrafts, we spray in areas that are not highly populated. In areas that are highly populated, we use motorised and hand pumps. 

The chemical is biodegradable and it does not kill bees for instance. We are using chemicals, which are not harmful to human beings though they are not good for human consumption. So, it is not wise to eat the dead sprayed locusts because –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable minister. I seek two clarifications from you. One, you have talked about using the LCs. Earlier on, I shared some information with you out there. Wouldn’t it be better if you also used that approach where the people help you to stop the locusts using the LC system of money and asking people to collect them? You then give them what it would take for them to do it; for example, a kilogramme of locusts could be for Shs 5000. In that way, honourable minister, the economy of the people would be improved and it would even be cheaper compared to us hiring the helicopters that you are talking about. 

The other issue is the side effects of the pesticide you are using. I do not know whether it is a non-selective or selective pesticide. I actually do not think that this pesticide can only kill the grasshoppers; it may also be killing other insects and living organisms. Therefore, in that way, we would be able to avoid the side effects that would be caused to either human beings or to other living organisms and interference with the ecosystem of the area.

I wish you could also specify categorically the name of the chemical you are using for spraying, so that we can know its chemical composition. Some of the businessmen may decide to use it. Even with those international organisations - you saw the issue of Monsanto. They will say that there are no side effects - FAO can tell you - yet definitely there will be some side effects. I do not think that that chemical is made specifically to kill only the locusts and not any other insect.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you so much, honourable minister, for giving way. Since UPDF is involved in this activity, can you tell this Parliament so far how many locusts have been killed, captured and probably the ones that have even escaped, because this is the work of UPDF? Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please conclude.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, first of all, the strategy of getting grasshoppers and locusts are different. We are dealing with different types of insects. Grasshoppers are attracted to light. So, the strategy hon. Mbwatekamwa is recommending is not applicable.

Secondly, hon. Okupa, that would be ideal if we are dealing with a small number of insects. However, we are dealing with a mass and we want to protect them from breeding and kill them before they fly. We cannot risk the consequences of aggravating the matter. We shall use scientifically recommended methods of dealing with locusts.

Hon. Franca Akello asked whether I was aware that they have reached Agago. Yes, we are very aware and Agago is one of those areas that have been mapped.

Hon. Bamukwatsa says that Government has been careless, that we received a warning and did not do anything. I would like this country to know that this is not only a Ugandan issue but it is a regional and international issue. The first warning came from FAO and we have different breeding centres. The breeding centres in Eretria, Sudan and Ethiopia have been under control. 

This invasion came from a country which is experiencing war and we could not control the invasion. Yemen has been having war. However, we predicted that they would come and we prepared in the region on how to deal with them. You should also know that Uganda is a Member of the Desert Locust Control Organisation. That is why we rushed very quickly to pay our arrears so that they can be –(Interjection)- Yes. Why don’t you let me finish? Madam Speaker, let me clarify these issues which have been brought forward. I can respond to other questions if time allows.

Hon. Bamukwatsa, as I told you, we are using chemicals that have been used elsewhere in this region and have been recommended by the World Health Organisation. We cannot risk using chemicals that are not biodegradable and that are dangerous to human beings.

Hon. Lucy Akello said UPDF and the LDUs are redundant. Yes, at the moment they are redundant maybe because you are not seeing them spraying. However, we are training them in 14 days in these areas which have been mapped. That is where these people on ground are going to spray those hoppers that will be hatched.

You have been told that this is an advance team. That is why we are taking precaution to have one aircraft from the Desert Locust Control Organisation because we are members and we get services from them. However, we have taken more precautions so that in case we get an invasion from the hatched eggs in Somalia and eastern Kenya, we should have capacity to deal with the new invasion after 14 days.

Hon. Mbwatekamwa, applying a new strategy is disastrous. I can see that you are not taking this matter seriously by saying that they use Masaka style of getting hoppers and hitting them. This is a serious matter because hoppers are not as destructive as the locusts.

About the colours; they are actually pink but when they grow old, they become yellow. At that stage when they are yellow, they are less destructive. However, we suspect, from the information we have from the scientists, that the ones which landed in Uganda are laying their last eggs. Locusts lay eggs thrice and we think that these yellow ones are not destructive because after laying eggs, they die, even if you do not kill them. We are killing them because we suspect that maybe they have not laid eggs. So, killing them with their eggs is another way of reducing the risk.

Somebody said that Government has been lukewarm in dealing with invasions. Well, the example given is not true also. The issue is that when we are dealing with an invasion that is trans-boundary, an enemy who does not know the boundaries, it is wise to deal with it in a coordinated manner with our neighbours. Therefore, whatever you call lukewarm is what we call an effective way of dealing with them.

Public awareness is a very big point. Our colleagues who are not here, - hon. Ssempijja and hon. Bagiire - one of the things they are doing is going to the affected communities to make the public aware of how to deal with the locusts and how to inform the people who are on ground, so that we can take effective control.

A Member talked about the effects of climate change. Yes, I would like to inform this House that because of climate change, we have had some of these disasters coming, including the locusts. We need to be aware and to know the science; for instance, those which landed in Tanzania flew over the ocean and they were being taken by winds. Now that in April the wind is blowing towards the north, we believe that if the trend continues like that, then they will not be blown to Uganda but to the north. However, whichever way, as a region we are prepared to deal with locusts working together.

Finally, I request Members to inform their constituents. People are asking every leader about what is happening with the locusts. I would like to say that the situation is under control. We are working with Desert Locust Control Organisation. Also, Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO) has come in and some other multinational agencies want to come in and assist because the locusts are threatening food security in the world.

We pledge that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will continuously come here to update Parliament on how far we have gone and the general situation regarding the desert locusts that have invaded the country. Thank you 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

4.55
The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am pleased to report that today in State House, the Deputy Attorney-General, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi, was sworn in. Therefore, the political leadership of the ministry is fully constituted. We promise to serve this House with dedication and diligence, to ensure that the Bills before the House are expeditiously passed.

To start with, under rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda, I beg to move that the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 now be read the Second Time. 

The Speaker: Is the motion seconded? 

(Motion seconded.)

The Speaker: It is seconded from both sides of the House.

PROF. kamuntu:  The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 has several objectives:

    1. To operationalise Chapter Eight of the Constitution relating to the Judiciary; 
    2. To facilitate the improvement of the efficiency and effectiveness of the courts of judicature; 
    3. To establish the Judiciary Advisory Committee to advise the Chief Justice in the administration of the Judiciary and justice; 
    4. To strengthen the independence of the courts in accordance with the Constitution;
    5. To streamline the administration of the courts; 
    6. To facilitate a judicial process that is committed to the expeditious determination of disputes; 
    7. To establish the Judicial Training Institute; and 
    8. To provide for the retirement benefits of judicial officers.

These are broad objectives this Bill seeks to address. 

There are also policy principles behind the Bill. The policy behind the Bill is to operationalise the constitutional provisions relating to the Judiciary by providing for the further application and enforcement of Chapter Eight of the Constitution. Chapter Eight buttresses the institutional, operational and administrative independence of the Judiciary. 

Whereas there is guidance on the functioning and administration of the Judiciary in the Constitution, there is no law that operationalizes Chapter Eight of the Constitution. This has resulted in a lack of clarity, ineffectiveness and wasteful duplication of the judicial structures at the expense of the administration of justice.

The provisions of Chapter Eight have not been operationalised through an Act of Parliament as provided for by Article 150 of the Constitution. The provision of the Constitution enjoins Parliament to make laws providing for the structures, procedures and functioning of the Judiciary.

There are currently some provisions related to the Judiciary in the Judicature Act, Cap. 13. However, these provisions are not comprehensive and do not exhaustively elaborate or translate the principles set out under Chapter Eight of the Constitution. 

There is also no law that comprehensively provides for the retirement benefits of judicial officers as is the case for the other two arms of Government - the Executive and the Legislature.  

The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018, therefore seeks to translate and amplify the principles set out in Chapter Eight of the Constitution through legislative provisions to deepen further the independence of the Judiciary and make the Judiciary more effective and accountable to the people.

There are salient provisions of the Bill we would like to point out at this stage. The Bill makes the following provisions:

1. 	The administration of the Judiciary by the Chief Justice who may, in consultation with the Judicial Service Commission, create, classify, change and abolish offices within the judicial service for the efficient functioning of the Judiciary.

2. 	The establishment of the Judiciary Advisory Committee to advise the Chief Justice on the functions and administration of the Judiciary. The committee shall be composed of at least 14 persons from all levels of the Judiciary, representatives of the Solicitor General, the Secretary to the Treasury, the Judicial Service Commission, the Uganda Law Society and at least two members of the public.

3. 	The establishment and appointment of the Inspectorate of the Judiciary to receive and process internal and external complaints against any staff of the Judiciary.

4. 	The Judiciary Service, which shall consist of judicial officers and other staff, who in the discharge of the functions of the Judiciary Service shall be guided by the Constitution to promote honesty, integrity and transparency in the Judiciary. 

5. 	The formal appointment of the Chief Registrar and Registrars under Article 145(2) of the Constitution.

6. 	The formal recognition of the Secretary to the Judiciary and confers functions to the Secretary to Judiciary similar to those of permanent secretaries under Article 174 of the Constitution and section 10 of the Public Service Act, 2008.

7. 	The establishment of a Performance Management System and the establishment of the Judicial Training Institute.

8. 	The retirement benefits of judicial officers. 

9. 	The funds of the Judiciary will include, among other sources, money appropriated by Parliament as well as grants and donations. The moneys approved by Parliament to defray expenses incurred in the discharge of the Judiciary shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.

10. 	The Judiciary Fund where all the funds of the Judiciary shall be paid. It also provides for the bank accounts, financial year and books of accounts of the Judiciary.  

11. 	The power of the Chief Justice to make regulations to put into effect the provisions of the Act. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to commend members of the sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, under the competent chairmanship of hon. Oboth, for scrutinising and producing their report on the Bill. They have done exhaustive work on this job. We have interacted with them during the process, shared with them our comments and comments from stakeholders and interested parties and they have been taken into account. The committee also made comments on the Bill and these have enriched the Bill.

Throughout the exercise, we have attempted to harmonise the position of different parties, harmonise our own views and international best practice in the administration of the Judiciary. We have, as a result of this exercise, proposed some amendments to the Bill in a harmonised manner.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this Bill entitled, “The Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Can I now invite the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to give us their position.

5.05
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As the minister has stated, I would like to say a few things about this Bill. It is as needed as Parliament at one time needed the Administration of Parliament Act and it was passed by this Parliament.

The Judiciary forms part of the three arms of Government and they find themselves without a law governing them. When we sat as a committee, we looked at the Bill and we were a bit critical of a few clauses as we tried to point out a few things that we felt were not right. However, generally, the committee supported the Bill and we made a few comments, which generated debate in Parliament and outside Parliament. As a result, there has been harmonisation of views.

Madam Speaker, we are ready for the second reading. In addition to what the minister stated, this Bill was needed the other day. What I have here is a brief statement, which I have summarised further in those few words.

THE SPEAKER: Is that your report? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the report was laid on the Table. We were ready for this -

THE SPEAKER: But it was laid on the Table in January 2018.

MR OBOTH: Yes, and these Members have been reading this Bill and the report continuously and nobody is complaining.

THE SPEAKER: Could you just give the highlights? It was more than a year ago.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, as I stated, on 29 May 2018, Government introduced the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 in Parliament. The Bill was referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, pursuant to rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

This Bill intended to operationalise the constitutional provisions relating to the Judiciary by providing for further application and enforcement of Chapter Eight of the Constitution.

As you may be aware, the Judiciary is one of the three arms of Government in Uganda and it is the only self-accounting arm of Government in Uganda, as prescribed in Article 128 (5) of the Constitution. The Constitution bestows onto the Judiciary the duty to exercise judicial power, being the power to dispense justice among persons and between persons and the state under the laws of the land.

This Bill is therefore meant to:

    1. Provide for the efficient and effective administration of the Judiciary;
    2. Establish the Judiciary Advisory Committee to advise the Chief Justice on the administration of justice and the courts; 
    3. Establish a Judiciary Service within the Judiciary; 
    4. Strengthen the independence of the Judiciary by streamlining the provision and management of funds for the Judiciary and establishing structures therein; 
    5. Improve the performance of the Judiciary and to provide for retirement benefits of Judicial Officers.

Madam Speaker, the committee has scrutinised the Bill by consulting widely and has made recommendations in detail, which are in the main report, which was uploaded. However, the committee had a few concerns that we highlighted.

Whereas Parliament was directed by Article 150 to enact legislation to provide the structures, procedures and functions of the Judiciary as well as regulating and facilitating the discharge by the President and the Judicial Service Commission of their functions, it is not true that such legislation is not in existence. During our processing of this Bill, we disagreed with that assertion. It is not true that such legislation is not in existence as alleged in the memorandum of the Bill. Therefore, we got a problem with it being quoted as the basis for enacting this legislation.

Indeed, Parliament enacted the Judicial Service Act, Cap. 14. The Bill therefore is not novel as far as the subject matter it relates to is concerned, since Parliament has already enacted legislation as commanded by Article 150 of the Constitution.

Furthermore, the Bill does not introduce anything new warranting the enacting of legislation. Apart from clauses 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 31 and 35, there is nothing new that warrants the enactment of the legislation separate from the Judicial Service Act. In any case, the Bill and the Judicial Service Act both relate to the same subject matter and should have ordinarily been merged through an amendment to the Judicial Service Act.

We also observed that the Bill proposes to bestow on the Chief Justice powers that almost seek to elevate the Judiciary and make it independent of the Judicial Service Commission in clauses 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 15, 17, 19 and 20. These clauses grant powers to the Chief Justice that would ordinarily be exercised by the Judicial Service Commission; for instance, the power to create, classify, change and abolish offices in the Judiciary. 

On the creation of a Judicial Service within the Judiciary and the creation of a Judiciary Fund, we recommend that this intention be clearly spelt out in the Bill so that there is harmonisation of the functions of the Judicial Service Commission and the powers proposed to be bestowed on the Chief Justice. This will ensure that the provisions of the Constitution, especially on the functioning of the Judicial Service Commission, are respected and adhered to. 

That said, for harmony, the committee has proposed amendments that it believes can help us reach a common ground. These and other in-depth analyses and our recommendations are detailed in the report that has been circulated to Members. I pray that this Bill is passed subject to those proposed amendments. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chair.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I am very happy the Member who is presenting the report is a very senior Member and knows very well that we need to read this in detail and that we needed the details of the report that he is talking about. Since he already said that he last presented these details in January, how I wish that those details are availed to us afresh. 

Therefore, is it procedurally right for us to continue just like this without those details being served to us? The report has been shallow. He has talked about details, which I have not personally seen. Maybe he could give some clarity.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I did not understand when the Member said, “to proceed just like this”. I wonder whether the invasion of locusts has taken the report from the iPads –(Laughter)– but this report is available. Unless the Member is requesting, without stating clearly, that they need time to refresh their minds and prepare for debate; I believe so but on our side, Government has been consulting on this Bill and this House needed to process this Bill long time ago.

Now that Government is ready and is here, it should not be any of us to say we are not ready. Anyhow, I think the Member is saying that it has been a long time and memories have lapsed, and more so that we have been focusing on the colours of the locusts -(Laughter) – and this could have disturbed Members. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it my understanding that Members may want to refresh their memories on the report? 

MR ABDU KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the chairperson and the minister noted, this Bill has taken a long time. It was first read in 2018. I seek your indulgence, Madam Speaker, that yes, colleagues need time to refresh their minds, but may it please you to give us a short time such that we get this Bill out of our committee. 

It looks like it is us delaying this law yet we do not want it to appear like it is the committee delaying this particular law. There is a lot of anxiety, especially in the Judiciary. They think that House is doing this deliberately. I would request that we have just a short time; one or two days would be enough for us to refresh our minds and have this business out of the way. 

THE SPEAKER: Members of the committee, is it true that you are going to be conducting public hearings out of Kampala next week? Does that also endanger my other work which the minister will be presenting on the other five Bills?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, formally, a letter should be in your office about our request. I believe your office is already informed. We are to go out from 17th to do consultations. 

Hon. Sseggona, who could have whispered that, is really in the know. This Parliament has adopted a procedure that we reach out and consult. Consultation has enhanced our report writing. We do not ignore what people tell us. 

Now, the subsequent electoral reform Bills – the five of them - are quite small, but if they were to come next week – In the earlier permission that you granted us to do this exercise, this would have to wait for us to conclude that consultation because we have already informed the stakeholders in the different districts, for example in Kyegegwa and Namutumba. They are probably having the legal committee of Parliament for the first time to go and interact with them. We have already informed these people and we are ready. I would like to state, on record, that Parliament has facilitated this committee; we do not want to consume the money we are going to pay to the hotels. 

However, Madam Speaker, you can advise on this matter. If you say we shorten our consultation, we shall comply. We have those electoral reform Bills, and for the record of this Parliament, this Administration of the Judiciary Bill and all the electoral reforms Bills do not have a minority report because there was consensus in most of these, unless it will be the Government side to pull the rope. So, we will process them very fast. Otherwise, we are available tomorrow and we could finish this Bill on Friday and finish the other five as well. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. It is true that we were ready in 2018 and it was the Government that was not ready. The people who were saying we should hold on because they were consulting were hon. Rukutana and Maj. Gen. Otafiire. 

I think they want independence but the independence we are looking at is very tricky. At least I have gone to court –(Interjection)- in whatever case. I look at this law as an opportunity for Parliament. I can give an example; you drive from here to Mbale to go to court and on arrival, you will be told that the Judge is not available. They are semi-gods. So, we should use this law to tighten this thing. 

Independence does not mean you dodge court. It does not mean that we pay you and you do not become accountable. Even if you wanted us to sit today and deal with this issue, I would be very ready. However, because of our colleagues who want some more time and since the committee is also going out, maybe we could allow that. 

Madam Speaker, there are some clauses that the committee has left out. The Judiciary wants to be allowed to have their own bank accounts, yet the money they get should go to the Consolidated Fund. If you allow them to have money – You recently saw how they were misappropriating the money through Stanbic Bank. We need to tighten. Give them the money they want but also put in place the laws to make sure that they perform.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I think it is important to provide for them a retirement plan. At least, I have been around here for some time and I know that we had to make our own retirement benefit plan by bringing in a pension scheme. I think it is also an opportunity for them. If we can put for them their own pension scheme so that when they leave, we do not see a former Chief Justice or Justice of the High Court also coming to court to represent Mawanda from India. (Laughter) We want them to get a pension so that when they go home, they relax, unless we call on them to come and help Government.

Madam Speaker, it is urgent but we also do not need to hurry and miss something which is vital. If the committee is going away, we can start tomorrow and we continue when they come back.  I think it is important that we set the process going. We can start tomorrow, debate it a bit and continue when the committee comes back –(Interjection)- The reason why hon. Mawanda is saying “no” is because he has problems with courts. (Laughter) 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to continue referring to me as a person who has problems with courts? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can you substantiate whether he has a problem, hon. Nandala?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have been waiting for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mawanda is even involved in international courts. You recall that he was in the Indian courts. (Laughter) This man knows courts very well -(Interruption)

MR MAWANDA: Madam Speaker, you will excuse us; we are not trying to take Parliament’s time. However, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is aware that I was disturbed when I was in India. (Laughter) I was at the Supreme Court of India and I won a case there. I was awarded damages of $300,000. Is hon. Nandala-Mafabi in order to continue saying that I do not just have problems in Ugandan courts but I also have problems in India? 

I thought it is my right to defend myself, which I have done successfully in several cases. I had an election petition and I won the case and that is why I am an Independent MP. I went to India and won a case in the Supreme Court of India. Is he in order to continue referring to me as if I always go to courts in a bad way?

THE SPEAKER: He is out of order. Honourable members, I hope the Government can now see what failure to adhere to our parliamentary programme means. We had planned what we were going to do every week. We may have to consider some marathon sessions. We may have to get one or two days and sit both morning and afternoon. Will Members be in a position to start this tomorrow?

MR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, one of the reasons why we would be pushing for Members to read this report overnight is that whenever we move closer to election time, Members will be saying that they are busy with their party primaries. It happened in the Ninth Parliament. There were days when we could not sit because Members were busy in their party primaries. 

The suggestion to read this report overnight – I am sure we do not have a Member who does not have the ability to read and understand this report of just 34 pages. One, the consultation we are moving out for is on a constitutional amendment. It is very important to this country and there is precedent in this House. Secondly, the roadmap for almost all political parties is out. I can give you assurance that by April, you will not see most of the Members, especially those who come from upcountry. 

It is, therefore, important that we conclude especially these election related business as well as this one, which is very core to the existence of the state. I would implore Members to do some marathon reading also. The extension you are granting is actually a privilege to a Member that has been with this report for a year and has not read it. I implore everyone to go through this report. For once, do some overnight reading and we conclude this thing tomorrow. It is not controversial.

MS REHEMA WATONGOLA: Madam Speaker, I would like to agree with colleagues who are saying we should quickly discuss the report. However, some of us who are not members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs need more time. One night is not enough for us. Although the report is already with us, it was not on the Order Paper. Therefore, we request that you give us at least two or three days and we come back next week on Tuesday when most of the Members will have gone through this report.

MR DAVID ABALA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The report is just 34 pages. Even though you have any serious assignment at home from 7.00 p.m., you can begin to read from 7.00 a.m. up to 8.00 a.m. –(Interjection)- I am submitting. That is why I am saying this law is very critical. We have been accused from all corners, especially by those involved in the courts. They say we are self-centred and that we are only bothered about ourselves. 

I am also aware of what my colleague, hon. Sseggona, was talking about. Very soon, this House is going to be in trouble because Members will be looking for votes here and there. That is why I would agree with the issue of adjusting the sitting time and starting at 10 o’clock at least twice a week so that we are able to dispose of most of these reports and address many issues in this House.

Madam Speaker, I support that tomorrow at 10 O’clock, we come back and discuss this law. Thank you very much.

THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This law is very important. We need to move together with the third arm of the state. I do not think anyone is objecting to us sitting and doing an expeditious job. However, if I can understand, from my own point of view, it is coming to 6.00 p.m. and we have other duties apart from this. Members are saying give us some little time to internalise and recapitulate the work we are going to do. When we have done this, then you can take us through the marathon session. I would even hesitate to say tomorrow, we come back to this. We really need to internalise this and do it very well. 

Also, understanding that the committee will be going out, whatever time you give us whenever it suits our programme as Parliament, call us and we do an expeditious job. For now, Madam Speaker, allow us time to go and internalise the law. Thank you.

MR MOSES KAHIMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Bill is very important. For some of us who have been to court, we want to have enough time to internalise this report and find out whether there are some gaps that we need to fill.

Like our colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, has said, when you go to court, you will establish that it is becoming a habit for judicial officers to work on Tuesday up to Wednesday. You might find that such gaps are in this Bill, which we need to fill. Therefore, I would like to submit that you allow us time to internalise this report since this has been the work of the committee. We need to understand it so that when it comes to the Floor of Parliament, we are able to contribute to the Bill. So, I beg that this Bill be pushed to next week on Tuesday, such that we get enough time to contribute to it. I beg to submit.

THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My experience in this Parliament - and I am sorry I will say this – is that first, there is no guarantee that the set of Members who are here will be available the next time this matter is called for consideration; I am speaking from an experience. Secondly, many similar proposals have been made before on matters that are before Parliament – “give us time to read” – but by the time they are called again, they say “we have not read”. 

I remember when I was chairing the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), we presented a report here. Colleagues said it was a very important report, so they needed to read through it. The Speaker granted them three days to go and read. When the report came back, many did not even remember that it had been brought.

Also, from experience, one time we had a Bill here and when the chair called for debate, I remember I was the only one who stood. By the time I finished speaking, almost everyone wanted to speak. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to persuade my colleagues that we need to consider these matters as they come up. Otherwise, they are going to pile up. Even when we say we want to go and read, I would like to repeat myself that I am not sure whether we shall be here or would have read; from experience, that has happened. I would like to persuade colleagues to process these matters that are before us when we still have time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not checked with all the parties but I think the primaries are two or three months away and we are still here on duty.

Honourable members, this law is important. Each time I am invited at the Judiciary, I am worried that they are going to ask me about it because each time they see me they want to know why this is not done. It is important that we handle it and get it out of the way. The political reforms are equally urgent. 

Honourable chair, I think I may have to interfere with your programmes and defer your departure to Kyegegwa so that we use Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and if possible Friday to deal with this law and the others. We will apologise to the citizens and explain to them that we really had to reluctantly postpone our interaction with them. (Applause)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, you have spoken. Most obliged.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you must really go and read. On Tuesday, no excuse and no delay, we shall just go straight to work. 

MR ABALA: I would like to inquire about the time; Is it 10 o’clock or 2 o’clock?

THE SPEAKER: I think let us do it at 2 o’clock. If it becomes necessary, we can move to the morning sessions. We shall advise on Tuesday. The debate on this matter is deferred. I invite Members and Government to get ready for debate starting Tuesday, next week, at 2.00 p.m. 

Let us go to the other items on the agenda. I do not see the Prime Minister. Go to Item no.8 (a) on the boundaries - Minister for Local Government.
 
RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT TO AN ISSUE RAISED ON THE INADEQUATE CONSULTATION ON THE PROPOSED ALTERATION OF BOUNDARIES OF KABALE MUNICIPALITY TO CREATE KABALE CITY UNDER ARTICLE 179 (1) (A) OF THE CONSTITUTION AND DECLARATION OF CITIES UNDER SECTION 7 (2A) OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACT, CAP. 243.

4.40
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am responding to item no.8 (a)(ii) on the inadequate consultation on the proposed alteration of boundaries of Kabale Municipality.

Madam Speaker, it is true, we have received several petitions and complaints from some people about the proposed boundaries of Kabale City. I have set up a team to go to Kabale next week, to do detailed consultations. It is true but we are handling this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So, will you be able to update us after your team has returned?

MR MAGYEZI: Yes, Madam Speaker; we shall update you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much.  

RESPONSE TO ISSUES RAISED ON THE DELAYED RESPONSE OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER AND ENVIRONMENT TO AN URGENT QUESTION ON THE STALLED CONSTRUCTION WORKS AT THE KAHENGYE GRAVITY WATER SCHEME.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Muzanira Betty Bamukwatsa brought a matter of national importance on the delayed completion of Kahengye Water Supply and Sanitation System in Rukungiri District. I wish to clarify and respond as such:

1. 	The Ministry of Water and Environment contracted M/s Technofab Engineering Ltd for construction of the water supply and sanitation system valued at Shs 44 billion, with the commencement date of 14 July 2016.

2. 	The contractor completed 95 per cent of the works but failed to clear and deliver five containers of critical fittings from Mombasa due to financial and managerial challenges within that company. They were charged delay damages of 10 per cent of the contract price, in line with particular conditions of the contract.

3. 	The Ministry of Water and Environment has outsourced the remaining work to another company, M/s Vambeco Enterprises Limited. By 10 February 2020, the ministry had received a waiver of 50 per cent on the storage charge and final bill from Kenya Ports Authority. Vambeco is, therefore, going to immediately pay this final bill and deliver the container to Rukungiri. 

4. 	We expect the fittings in the country within two weeks from 10 February. Installation and commissioning of the system will take us a maximum of three months from the date of receipt of the fittings. 

The new contractor has already reported to Rukungiri and therefore, I would like to assure my sister, hon. Muzanira, and the Rukungiri community, that the water supply system will be up and running by end of May 2020. I beg to submit.

5.44
MS BETTY BAMUKWATSA (FDC, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for her statement. However, it would have been much better and convincing if she had laid on the Table a copy of the contract by the new contractor going to work on that project. This would give assurance to Ugandans and the people of Rukungiri that the project will be completed within the three months. I would like to ask the minister to lay a copy of that contract on the Table. Thank you.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, we interacted with the honourable member and I told her that the contractor was already at the site. Please, call the constituency and confirm this as I engage my engineers at the ministry. 

I assure her and the people of Rukungiri that the contractors are on the ground. If you would like to look at the copy, we can deliver it to you to confirm and comfort our people. It is true that the contractor is already there. 

Madam Speaker, if you could allow me time, I have responses for the other questions. Thank you.

5.46
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Minister of Water and Environment who is now hands on. I congratulate you. 

These gravity schemes we are talking about are new. There are those that were built and you just see something but without water. We have gravity flow systems but for a majority of them in Namisindwa, Sironko and Manafwa, you will see a huge thing but the equipment that has been installed is not helping in the production of water.

Madam Minister, is there a lifespan for these gravity schemes? Are they built to last one week? What is their lifespan, so that we can tell our people?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, tell her the particular one so that she can follow it up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have mentioned the one in Namisindwa and she knows it. In Manafwa and Buwalasi, the pipes have never come. There is one in Bumasifa and there is one they built in - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: I can give further information on this. It is not only gravity flow schemes. Under water for production, two years ago, they came to Kasilo County. The production well, which they identified, is in my village, just next to the health centre IV. They dug and fitted the lower pipes but it has now been two years - It was supposed to be solar pumped – and nothing has been connected apart from that borehole. The other one is in Amuria and it is also wanting. 

When we keep inquiring, they say there is no money. We passed money for these projects. How did you allow the contractor to come and drill this borehole with no solar connection and piping? I need you to pick interest in that, and this is specifically under your office in Mbale.

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Madam Speaker, we benefitted from urban water supply in Amolatar Town Council. Unfortunately, the areas that were intended to be served by this water supply did not all benefit. My home is in one such area that is getting very limited water supply, and homes beyond mine do not get a drop of water. This has lasted for over three years.

At one point, I made proposal to the ministry to install a booster tank so that these other areas would be served but to date, there is no response. We are also faced with similar challenges like those communities benefitting from gravity flow schemes. How I wish the Minister of Water and Environment could follow up on such water supplies that are constructed in urban centres to ensure that water services are available in urban settlements. We would be very happy. Thank you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, the gravity schemes are known and the small towns, which you are talking about, are also known. Therefore, the minister should come next week with a comprehensive report saying that this was put there at such and such a cost and it is running.

I can tell the outcry that will arise in this House. People see these schemes but they are not functioning.

Madam minister, that English you are putting here would be good for convincing Rukungiri maybe, but for us who have been there, you need to come with concrete evidence that gravity schemes, which are in place and are operating.

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Members, for the concerns you have raised. When these systems are put in place, they need to be maintained. When you raise concerns, it is feedback to us leaders.

A few of you gave me details and I have taken note of them. If you can give me more details - A colleague requested that you need a report to that effect. I call upon Members with similar issues to send them to the ministry so that we can incorporate them in a report, which we should present to Parliament for discussion and way forward. Thank you.

RESPONSE BY THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL ON THE CONTINUOUS ENFORCEMENT OF THE LAW ON IDLE AND DISORDERLY DESPITE THE PRESIDENTIAL DIRECTIVE TO THE POLICE AND KAMPALA CAPITAL CITY AUTHORITY FOR ITS SUSPENSION

5.52
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Madam Speaker, this is a statement in response to what I was requested to present on the continuous enforcement of the law on idle and disorderly by the Uganda Police Force and Kampala Capital City Authority despite a presidential directive for its suspension.

The honourable member of Parliament, hon. Jackson Kafuuzi Karugaba, MP Kyaka County, whose circumstances have since changed –(Laughter)- had raised an issue on the continuous enforcement of the law on idle and disorderly by the Uganda Police Force and Kampala Capital City Authority despite a presidential directive for its suspension. 

Madam Speaker, the President issued a directive regarding the enforcement of Section 167 of the Penal Code, Cap. 120, that deals with this offence of idle and disorderly. The President was in particular displeased with the harsh and ruthless mode of arrest of hawkers, vendors, petty traders and also the mishandling of their merchandise. 

The law applicable is the Police Act, Cap. 31, which is an Act to provide for the structure, organisation and functions of the Police Force. Key among their functions is to enforce the laws of Uganda and protect the life, property and other rights of individuals as well as to ensure public safety and order.

Madam Speaker, the next law applicable is the Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2010, Act No.1 of 2011, which is an Act to provide for the administration of Kampala by the central Government. Key among its functions are-

    1. To monitor the general administration and provision of services in the divisions;
    2. To assist in the maintenance of law and order and security; and 
    3. To prohibit, restrict, regulate or license the sale or hawking of wares or the erection of stalls on any street, or the use of any part of the street or public place for the purpose of carrying on trade, business or profession.

The third applicable law is the Penal Code, Cap. 120. This comprises all or at least a significant amount of Uganda’s criminal law. It contains offences as well as their penalties and also correctional measures to deal with the criminal conduct by individuals and the public for which state protection is appropriate.

Section 167 of the Penal Code Act, Cap 120 provides for the offence of idle and disorderly. The penalty for a person found liable, upon conviction, is imprisonment for three months or a fine not exceeding Shs 3000 or both such fine and imprisonment. That section lists the circumstances where one may actually even be liable to imprisonment for seven years. These include being a prostitute, or without lawful excuse publicly doing an indecent act, or if in any public place one solicits or loiters for immoral purposes.

Kampala Capital City Authority, under its mandate to assist to keep law and order as well as to license the sale or hawking of wares, enforces the Trade Licensing Act, in particular Section 19. This is where a person is required to produce their licence for inspection upon demand by an administrative officer, or a police officer or any authorised person in writing by the licensing officer. Section 8 prohibits a person from trading without a licence. Additionally, Section 16 of Cap 10 requires that a person shall not act as a hawker unless they possess a hawker’s licence. Kampala Capital City Authority does not, of course, enforce the Penal Code. It is the Uganda Police Force responsible. 

The President derives executive authority from Article 99 of the Constitution. This recognises his authority, which is vested in him and it should be exercised either directly by him or through officers subordinate to him; in this case, we can say the Uganda Police Force and/or Kampala Capital City Authority. His Excellency the President, cognisant of the harsh and ruthless manner of carrying out the arrest of petty street traders, vendors and hawkers, issued a directive that was aimed at protecting the rights and human and economic rights of these petty street traders, vendors and hawkers, especially during the arrest as well as the handling of their wares after the arrest. 

The Uganda Police Force, in trying to keep with the presidential directive and under its own mandate to keep law and order, wrote to the Executive Director of KCCA on 19 September, for purposes of implementing the directive, where both the Uganda Police Force and KCCA would ensure that hawkers and street vendors are treated humanely, without violating their human and economic rights. The Uganda Police Force issued a circular on 1 September 2019 on the implementation of that directive to the Deputy Inspector General of Police and all its directors and regional and district police commanders. That was basically to ensure that the hawkers were not mistreated.

The honourable members should note that the provisions of the Penal Code, nonetheless, are still on the statute book and are enforceable. However, the manner in which the petty traders and hawkers are treated should not violate their human and economic rights. The Uganda Police Force issued implementation modalities for the presidential directive to the Executive Director of Kampala Capital City Authority in that letter of 19 September 2019.

Therefore, Kampala Capital City Authority should, in accordance with Section 7(1) of Act No. 1 of 2011, ensure that they mobilise residents of Kampala, in particular hawkers and street vendors, in order for them to undertake income generating activities and self-help projects, in compliance with the law.

Madam Speaker, that is our submission, which is basically that the presidential directive was to cater for the humane treatment of these people. However, the provisions of the Penal Code are still in the statute book up until they are either repealed or amended. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, my understanding would be that the directive of the President was an instruction to you people to bring an amendment here to delete that clause from the Penal Code. That would be my understanding.

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, that may be the case. However, what we were responding to was the immediate response to the presidential directive, which was that with immediate effect, these people should not be inhumanely treated. However, on what you have just said, Madam Speaker, we are going to proceed to bring legislation to change the law.

5.59
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, this is not the first time this matter is coming up. In fact, I was waiting, as I attentively listened to the Attorney-General give preambles and correspondences of an administrative officer. The correspondences and the information he has given are purely administrative, - nothing related to his office - apart from quoting those sections, which also an administrator would do.

Like you have said, the Member who raised that matter was a member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and he is now the Deputy Attorney-General. I wanted him to be the one in the House and he would have actually said they are going to take it up and bring an amendment of just one section. 

This committee undertook, and before the court decision, which threatened his tenure, hon. Basalirwa was somewhere. As the chairperson and the committee, we agreed and delegated two Members - hon. Basalirwa and hon. Jovah Kamateeka. Wait for our amendment and support it because you people still need to do feasibility studies and consultancy. We have all those consultants here.

May I get to be briefed by hon. Basalirwa. Now forget about the Attorney-General; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is handling. (Laughter)

6.02
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the chairman has rightly observed, when this matter came on the Floor, the committee took it up and at the level of the committee, we were given that assignment, hon. Kamateeka and I.

Madam Speaker, we are in the final stages in coming up with the proposed amendment. Once the committee considers it, the matter will come on the Floor. So, we have moved ahead of the Attorney-General. However, one aspect I wanted to –(Interruption)

MR BYARUHANGA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Basalirwa in order to say he is moving ahead of the Attorney-General for an amendment that the Attorney-General’s Chambers is considering right now? (Laughter) The Attorney-General’s Chambers is busy pursuing an appeal that is going to help the same hon. Basalirwa. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is difficult for the Speaker to know whether the Attorney-General’s Chambers is really moving on this issue. So, I cannot rule on that point of order.

MR OKUPA: Can I seek a clarification from the Attorney-General as to whether this is not blackmailing the honourable member. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Attorney-General, notwithstanding the events in which you are engaged in on our behalf, I think the honourable member still has a right, as a Member of Parliament, to continue doing his work. 

MR BYARUHANGA: Yes. Madam Speaker, I need to remind him that that notwithstanding, he knows we are going out of our way to keep him in Parliament. That too takes time. That is just a point of information for him. He knows what we are doing. So, I do not think he is in order but I stand guided. (Laughter)

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, the matter touching people being arrested and charged with being idle and disorderly continues not only in the city of Kampala but in the entire country. 

The Attorney-General’s directive and communication in the interim should be – because you are the chief advisor of all those that take administrative decisions on behalf of Government. In my opinion, the advice should come from you and the office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP), not only to those that are in charge of prosecution but also to those that are in charge of all administrative enforcement, to desist, in the meantime, from apprehending people on the basis of being idle and disorderly. 

The communication should be, in my opinion, that in the meantime as we come up expeditiously with an amendment to the Penal Code Act, our directive, in line with the directive of the Commander-in-Chief – in any case, the police should not do anything outside the command of the Commander-in-Chief – is that you desist from conducting arrest and prosecution on the basis of being idle and disorderly until we send a directive to the contrary. Since you will have spoken that in Parliament, even the people will be empowered on the ground not to accept if someone apprehends them. 

The issue was that they were being apprehended and their national identity cards were destroyed. Some are beaten and others are detained. The reason is that many people have used this as a tool of extortion. You are picked up because probably you have parked along the road or you are walking and then people say you are idle and disorderly. They take you to the police station and try to extort money from you to give you a police bond. This has been the issue. That is why it is so serious in January when people are taking children back to school –(Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is nothing to debate. There is a law we want removed and we have talked to the Attorney-General. Let him remove the law. If he is not moving, hon. Basalirwa should move and bring the notice quickly. Thank you.

Honourable members, let us go to question 8(l) on the Order Paper. Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, there is a question there for you to answer. 

RESPONSE TO AN URGENT QUESTION RAISED BY HON. WILLIAM NZOGHU ON THE DISENFRANCHISEMENT OF YOUTHS IN KASESE DISTRICT DURING THE ONGOING UPDATE OF THE NATIONAL VOTERS REGISTER ON ACCOUNT OF BEING UNDERAGE YET THEY WOULD BE ELIGIBLE TO VOTE AT THE TIME OF VOTING IN 2021

6.08
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, this matter was raised yesterday and you directed that we make a statement tomorrow. The statement is being prepared.  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Prof. Kamuntu, who is our new Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, should be fair to us. This question even appeared on the Order Paper yesterday. Now, you are coming to say that yesterday, the Speaker said you come on Thursday. Are you setting your own questions for Thursday or what? (Laughter) 

Is it procedurally right for the new Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to come and set his question for Thursday?  

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a copy of the statement?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, the statement is actually ready. It is only that my understanding yesterday was that you ruled that I should make a statement on this on Thursday. That was what I directed my staff to do because they were checking with the army and State House. The statement will be ready tomorrow. 

THE SPEAKER: The question is about eligibility and registration of voters.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, now that you have required it, this is the statement. 

The statement is made in respect of two related matters raised by hon. William Nzoghu, who is not in the House, Member of Parliament for Busongora County North, and hon. Betty Bamukwatsa, Woman Member of Parliament for Rukungiri. 

The questions raised were on the disenfranchisement of youth in Kasese District during the ongoing update of the national voters register on account of being underage yet they would be eligible to vote at the time of voting in 2021. 

The second question was about the legality of setting deadlines to voters’ registration by the Electoral Commission Act, Cap. 140, which mandates the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain and update the national voters register on a continuing basis. This question was raised by hon. Betty Bamukwatsa.

I can answer these questions jointly as follows:

Article 61(1)(e) of the Constitution enjoins the Electoral Commission to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register. The Electoral Commission provides deadlines for voters register updates in accordance with Section 19(7) of the Electoral Commission Act, which provides, “When updating the voters register, the commission shall update it to a date appointed by statutory instrument in accordance with subsection (8) as the date on which the updating shall end”.

The Electoral Commission has since appointed the date for end of updating the voters register and has since extended the deadline on two occasions. The last extension ended on 23 December 2019. The Electoral Commission is conducting the update of the electoral process in accordance with the road map for the 2021 general elections.

Madam Speaker, it is also important to note that the Electoral Commission does so in accordance with Article 59 of the Constitution which provides thus: 

“(1) Every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age or above has a right to vote.

(2) 	It is the duty of every citizen of Uganda of eighteen years of age and above to register as a voter for public elections and referenda.”

Accordingly, Madam Speaker, only persons who have attained the age of 18 years are eligible for registration. 

I draw the attention of this House to the fact that in accordance with the road map of the general elections of 2021, the Electoral Commission is due to start displaying the voters register for 21 days from 19 February to 10 March 2020. I have been with the Electoral Commission this morning and this is exactly what they are working on.

Madam Speaker, providing the deadline of updating of the voters register is accordingly in line with the law as provided for above. I would have come with Statutory Instrument operationalising the work of this Electoral Commission. It has been done in accordance with the law, however. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister states quite rightly that the Constitution provides that every citizen of Uganda of 18 years and above has a right to vote. The right to vote for any Ugandan who is 18 years and above is constitutional. It is not a favour or at the discretion of the Electoral Commission.

What the honourable colleague was asking is that the Electoral Commission gave a deadline of 23 December 2019 and the general elections are in January 2021, meaning that everybody who will be turning 18 from the 24 December 2019 throughout 2020 to January 2021 will not be on the register and therefore will not vote. That is the effect of that deadline. It means that the Electoral Commission has taken away a constitutional right of everybody of 18 years, and that the youngest who will vote will be of 19 years old because it is going to be a whole year of people turning to 18 years.

I would like the honourable minister, therefore, to clarify - I think he could be assisted by the Attorney-General - whether the Electoral Commission through the Statutory Instruments has a right to take away, to amend and deny people who have turned 18 their constitutional right to vote. That is the essence of the question and that is what we expect the honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and or the learned Attorney-General to answer.

I can also say that when you look at the statistics, people who are turning 18 years for the whole year come close to 1.8 million. This means we are denying 1.8 million Ugandans a right to vote. I seek clarification from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek clarification. The Constitution, under Article 61(1)(e), says that the Electoral Commission shall compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register. The clarification I would like to seek from the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General is: Where does it say compiling and updating the register must stop on a specific day, because their job is to compile, maintain, revise and update the register regularly? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification specifically from the learned Attorney-General on how he plans to defend cases of disenfranchisement from the 1.8 million young people who will be turning 18 by the time the election happens. How do we plan to handle that because it is one aspect we are not going to run away from, especially as we approach the 2021 election?

Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and also the Attorney-General, the practice with the Electoral Commission, at least previously, has always been to create an office at the Electoral Commission - at least at the level of the Electoral Commission. So, whoever wants to register at any time does register and whoever wants to change is free to change. That has been the practice. Therefore, the idea of creating deadlines that have the effect of denying people the right to vote, with due respect, is unfair and is likely to cause more legal problems in future.

6.19
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the minister has pointed out, this morning he was with the Electoral Commission together with their legal department. 

I agree with hon. Basalirwa and hon. Katuntu that there should be absolutely no intention at all, neither does the Constitution command so, for any citizen of Uganda to be denied his or her right to register as a voter.

The most important thing here is to, of course, designate an administrative switchover period as close as possible to the anniversary of a new election -(Interjection)- Yes, of course; meaning that if the next election is January 2021, an administrative period, even for technical and administrative reasons, should be as close as possible to that day - perhaps 60 days. A period of one year would be unreasonably long and would definitely disenfranchise a big number of voters.

I did not attend the meeting of this morning and I was just telling the minister, and you must all know that he has just become the minister in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. However, that is a matter that I intend us to take up with the Electoral Commission.

This is across party lines. It has got nothing to do with inclination. It is just not to disenfranchise a voter of Uganda -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from you Attorney-General. During the last election, the Electoral Commission extracted the register from the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA). That is the register they used. Today, there are people who are registering with NIRA, which continuously registers people. 

We were made to either change or make a law to allow the Electoral Commission to use the data captured by NIRA. I seek to know whether that has now been abandoned so that NIRA can register people who are going to turn 18 years old in January or February and the Electoral Commission can use the information. They do not even have to go back to the field and register because someone else is doing registration, and this is the information they used for the last election. Has this been abandoned, even after them coming to Parliament to plead that the law should be changed to allow them to use the information?

THE SPEAKER: I do not think this is a supplementary question. It should be raised separately. I do not know whether anybody is ready to look for that Hansard.

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General because he has spoken like one. I know that NIRA has the list of all Ugandans who are turning 18 years this year. It is not rocket science; it would be easy for the Electoral Commission to extract this.

Now that the Attorney-General has conceded to this, I think there is a problem with the Electoral Commission roadmap. Many issues have been raised and that was one of them. The other is the issue of the whole country going for campaigns for eight months. You need to look at that.

THE SPEAKER: The other matter I wanted to engage with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is whether the Electoral Commission intends that nominations for parliamentary candidates take place in August and they start campaigning for elections due to take place in February. How can that be? You engage them for eight months; it means that in September we have to close Parliament. It is a very serious issue, honourable minister. You cannot send out people to struggle for eight months. It is not right.

Mr abala: Madam Speaker, having listened carefully and internalised all that has been said here, these matters are very critical. When I look at someone campaigning for eight months and the denial of 1.8 million Ugandans to vote, these are pertinent matters. Since this matter affects the entire country, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to open the debate to discuss this and resolve on the way forward so that we are able to understand the dynamics involved and why Government is operating the way they are?

THE SPEAKER: You may need to bring a separate motion so that it is formalised. Allow the minister to speak.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Ephraim Kamuntu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Your concerns are shared because today I had a meeting with the Electoral Commission. More than anybody else, I really appreciate the opportunity cost that this country will suffer by having primary elections for parties in May, nominations in August and elections in February. In other countries like Britain - this is an experience - they declared elections in November and held them in December; just one month and it was finished. 

Purely from an economic point of view, we have to re-examine this. This is the discussion I had with the Electoral Commission. Everybody sees it. The economic impact of having primaries in May, nominations in August and elections in February is paralysis, including of work in this House. We discussed this matter and we are continuing to discuss. Similarly, people are becoming 18 years of age, even on the eve of elections –(Interruption)

Mr oboth: Thank you, Prof. Kamuntu, the new Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Madam Speaker, as you may recall, in our 2017 constitutional amendment, we brought forward elections by at least a month. Some of the five electoral reform Bills that are before us are pre-occupied with the matter of the timeframe. In addition, the four months for campaigns was a matter that was litigated. Some presidential candidates complained that they did not have enough time. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, protect me from those that have never been presidential candidates. 

When the roadmap came up, probably our committee should have interfaced. Most Members are complaining about the anxiety that will be present while at the same time, there will be presidential and parliamentary nominations as well as the business of this House. 

If it would please you, Madam Speaker, you could probably guide or direct us to meet with the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Electoral Committee as a committee, report back and then we can debate from that point. I know the minister means well; he met them today. However, we had to do some mathematics with hon. Katuntu. Hon. Ssemujju is agreeing with me; he has never been a presidential candidate –

THE SPEAKER: For the first time. (Laughter)

mr oboth: Yes, for the first time ever since he was born he is agreeing with me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I know this is not your docket but you might also want to engage the political parties. Primaries in May and then in August – Really! 

Ms ayaka: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to give information in relation to the issue of the cut-off period for registration. The Electoral Commission sometimes has challenges, which are legal in nature. 

Elections are a cycle in itself. We have an update activity, which has to be wound up. Secondly, there is a display of the national voters register where you have to remove people from the register. It is an open activity where all citizens have to view the voters register that has been compiled. You might have to do inclusions or deletions of particulars from the register for various reasons. According to the law, it is for 21 days.

We need to factor in all these things so that the data from the display exercise can be compiled and then you order for ballot papers and so on. There has to be a cut-off date. We cannot just leave it open because there is the next activity, which is display. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think you are now speaking to the possibility of our committee meeting with the minister and the Electoral Commission to harmonise all these timelines.

Mr ssemujju: Madam Speaker, following the information supplied by the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, I would like to say that the Electoral Commission has issued a revised roadmap, which was given to political parties. 

You will take note that nominations for local governments are in July and their elections are going to come after presidential and parliamentary elections. That means they will have more than half a year of campaigns. The parliamentary nominations, according to the revised roadmap, will take place between August 12th and 13th. That means at parliamentary level, you have nearly four or more than four months.

In the past, honourable minister, a presidential candidate would need the four months. I have participated in moving with candidates; every day a presidential candidate can cover only one district yet the districts are many. 

Therefore, as you continue sitting with the Electoral Commission, they will certainly have to shift nominations for local government and parliamentary elections. There is no way you are going to send away people who are serving local governments and want to be leaders again. From July this year, there would be no work in the district because everybody is campaigning. The same is true for Members of Parliament. So, while the time for presidential nominations is understandable, for the rest of the elections, you cannot have nominations six months before.

THE SPEAKER: The locusts might make a stopover if we go on like this.

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, already the Electoral Commission has stated that it wants to start conducting the nominations for people within the bracket of special interest groups. One of those groups is the youth - hope you understand. The biggest number of persons likely to be disenfranchised is the youth. Therefore, you may take it upon yourself to further advise them that it would be important to conduct mainly the elections of the youth at such a time after they have attained the age of 18 rather than before. If parties present their flagbearers now, that would mean there are very many people who would have attained the youthful age by 2020 when the actual election should have been conducted but cannot be part of that electoral college.

For the youth, you build electoral colleges from the village level. Now, if those persons who would be attaining the age of 18 by 2020 January are not part of the electoral college, they are automatically disenfranchised.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, just as I mentioned to this august House, this very morning I had a meeting with the Electoral Commission. All matters that are being raised here are the same matters we discussed in that meeting. 

I would want Members to appreciate that if there is anybody who is aware of the opportunity cost for us going with the roadmap - what it costs to be there, what we would have been doing here and we would not be doing it because we are engaged in elections – It affects all the sectors of the economy. If you are to take a political party, it has to look for flag bearers, and that is electioneering; they have to go for nominations for general elections and that is electioneering; then you have to go for general elections. You are almost at six months. The economy will suffer heavily.  So, we have to weigh and balance.

Therefore, we appreciate the macroeconomic impact of having this roadmap and I agree with the information provided by the Chairman of Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I would agree to be in a meeting with that sectoral committee and the Electoral Commission to find an economically efficient method of conducting elections in this country.

I am also fully aware that the Constitution is very clear that every citizen of Uganda who is 18 years of age or above has a right to vote, and the age 18 has no schedule. Some people will be 18 on the day of elections and by law, they are entitled to vote. We must find a solution to that kind of thing.

We must be aware that logistically, the Electoral Commission has to have something it can operate on as a deadline. Otherwise, you cannot be updating up to the eve of elections; it cannot work. So, administrative arrangements also have to be agreed upon. I agree with proposal, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, let us also not forget the people whom we engage in listening to us for all those months; they also do not work. They are invited by the chairman, Members and then they wait for the President. It is also unfair to the population - six months of listening! 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for the work done. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00p.m.

(The House rose at 6.38 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 13 February 2020 at 2.00p.m.) 

