

Wednesday, 20 February 2019

Parliament met at 1.59 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I would like to congratulate you for what we were able to do yesterday; we handled two Bills. If one Bill didn’t have a small difficulty, we would have done three Bills. I am advised that its incorporation is almost being finalised and by next week, we will have it coming back to us. So, thank you very much. 

Let us go straight to business. There are some members who wanted to raise urgent matters; we will start with the Member for Kumi District. 

2.01
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Kumi District is heavily populated. As a result, many of our families migrate to neighbouring districts to earn a living. Moses Apasa aged 38 years and Emmanuel Ilukor aged 25 years together with 18 others had gone to a neighbouring district at the border with Bulambuli and Nakapiripirit districts to look for what we know as mud fish, which is usually got from swampy areas.

This swampy area at the border of the two districts happens to be the same area where the Pokot and Karimojong graze their animals. I am reliably informed that it is along Gigiri River, which borders Bukedea District to the west, Nakapiripirit to the north-east as well as Bulambuli District to the east, particularly around Bunamputye Sub County. 

However, on Friday 15 February 2019, Moses Apasa and Emmanuel Ilukor were shot dead because of a disagreement on water sources. The armed Pokot, who have migrated from Kenya, developed a misunderstanding with them around that area over water. They were accused of making the water dirty upon which they were watering their cows. 

That loss of lives was not necessary. We buried these young men on Sunday 17 February, 2019 at their village at Omatakirya Village, Nyero Sub County in Kumi District. 

Mr Speaker, the reason I raise this matter is because it is not an isolated incident around that area. A month ago, a Mugisu man had gone fishing at the same place but was allegedly killed by the same Pokot armed persons. After two weeks, they returned to the same village and stole 22 cows from the Bulambuli side. 

We are aware that the army is properly deployed around that area but nothing has been done to this end to pursue those criminal elements.

Mr Speaker, this unnecessary loss of life is a responsibility of Government. My prayers therefore, before the minister are that: 

    1. They need to explain to the people living around that area whether they are secured from such incidents happening again in the near future. 
    2. We would also like the Government to explain what it is doing to secure those communities around that border area from the aggressive neighbours, who are crossing over from Kenya.
    3. Particularly as a Member of Parliament from Kumi District, where Government fails in its duty to protect life and property, I think it should be put to task to compensate such lives of innocent civilians and their property, which continues to be lost in such incidents. 

I beg to move, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, where there are acts of criminality and lives have been lost, it is a crime under our laws. The standard procedure would be to report these cases to the police and have the suspects apprehended and prosecuted for whatever act they have done; that should be done. However, that does not deal with the general situation that you have narrated. I would like the minister to deal with that - let him deal with the rest of the issues. 

2.06
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, we condemn those acts of criminality and regret them. I have not got a briefing on the particular incident about the people who were killed and how far the police have gone with investigations. However, now that it has been brought to my attention, I will definitely get a briefing. 

As you have correctly said, Mr Speaker, these are criminal matters and the law will take its course to make sure the culprits are brought to book. 

It is not true that Government has failed on its duty in that area to protect the people. Government has taken every effort to secure the people. It has deployed both the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) at the border and the police, especially the one that has to keep law and order in that area. 

I will need to get the details regarding how this incident exactly occurred and about deployment in that area. Thereafter, we shall also inform Parliament about the developments. Thank you.

2.08
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I wish to rise on a matter of national importance regarding the deplorable state of the magistrate courts in Ssembabule District. I have also visited some magistrate courts in the hard-to-reach areas and found that their state is not worth for the honourable magistrates and staff working there. 

The issue at hand is the poor working environment at Ssembabule Magistrate Courts. On Monday, I had the opportunity of visiting one of the Grade II Magistrate Courts in Ssembabule. Unfortunately, it had rained and the situation in the chambers was deplorable. The wind blew away all the chairs and the windows with the debris were flying all over. The complainants together with all the people that had come to be attended to had to take cover. 

Mr Speaker, it rained so much and the sanitation is so poor that the water was entering the offices. We had to pull up our dresses a bit and you know the elderly people who come, those who had shoes, had to remove them. His worship also had to take cover with the rest of us.

The deplorable state of these offices, are worth to be condemned. The health and safety of the judicial officials – Mr Speaker, I have the pictures that were taken on that day. After raising these issues, I request, through you, Mr Speaker, that I lay them on the Table.

If the ICT staff were around, as it has been requested through you, I would like these pictures on the state of those offices to be shown to the honourable members. 

Poor sanitation, time came when the elderly were looking for places of convenience after the rains and there were no such places around there. The state of the court and the dignity of its officials – I saw the magistrate mixed with me, the representatives and the convicts; we were all under a situation that nobody could work.

Mr Speaker, my prayer is that Ssembabule Magistrate Court should be condemned. The magistrate court’s deplorable status called for having land, which land was procured two years back and it is only remaining to construct new offices. When I looked at the face of the magistrate - he was looking at me and I looked at him then I think he said now, “How do I raise an issue against this one.” I said: “Here I am Your Worship.”

The second prayer is, a new building should be constructed in Ssembabule District with immediate effect. They bought the land and secured a land title and the funds were raised. The whole building where they are working now should be condemned.

Finally, Mr Speaker, I call upon you that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs interests itself in the court premises in Ssembabule District and all over the country, especially the hard-to-reach areas. 

I would like you, Mr Speaker, to allow me to lay the pictures of the situation of the magistrate’s court in Ssembabule District. I wish to lay these pictures at the Table. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Honourable member, we are handling the budget right now and these are the matters that can be factored into the budgetary process and dealt with accordingly, because what that requires is just money and then it will be handled. 

As you have said, since the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs is also looking at these things and trying to assess what areas require priority funding, the chairperson of the committee should set up a team to go and look at this facility and feed it into the budgetary discussion that we will have in the course of these few months; they should go and see what is going on there. 

MS KAWOOYA: Much obliged, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay the pictures for their easy reference. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: They might have to go and take their own pictures since they are going there.

MS KAWOOYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Though they will go to take the pictures, I would like to lay these ones as their guiding reference. I thank you.

2.14
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. The issue concerns the well-being and freedom of a Member of this House, hon. Allan Ssewanyana Member of Parliament, Makindye Division West.

This financial year Shs 3.5 billion was released for the construction of a lagoon at Kiruddu Hospital. This was done after reports in that area showed that the sewerage system had broken down affecting the residents in the nearby area and the patients at the facility. 

Hon. Allan Ssewanyana who represents that area followed up this matter with the ministry and after discussions, they assured him that work would commence in January after negotiations with Kampala Capital City Authority over land where the lagoon was to be constructed.

Mr Speaker, January ended with no work being done. It was around the same period that the people in this area who are about 4,000 families petitioned their Member of Parliament seeking that he addresses them on the matter. On Monday, hon. Allan Ssewanyana organised to meet his people in a peaceful demonstration, showing their anger and discomfort over the situation they are living in.

It was here that hon. Allan Ssewanyana was arrested and instead of being deposited at Katwe Police Station that covers that area, he was driven up to Naggalama Police Station. He has been under detention ever since. This morning, we went to see him with the Leader of the Opposition. At the police station, nobody can tell you with certainty what they intend to do with hon. Allan Ssewanyana. 

Mr Speaker, the situation at Naggalama Police Station is also worse. The toilet system at that police station has also broken down; the place is stinking. We have also received information that police is arranging to transfer hon. Allan Ssewanyana from Naggalama to Lwengo District. I stand here as a victim of such arrests and torture. Police arrests your Members of Parliament, takes and detains them in other districts and they start driving them around recklessly. It was during one of such rides that I got an accident that broke my leg.

Mr Speaker, I am here to make these prayers:
1) 	That if at all hon. Allan Ssewanyana committed an offence - we are not above the law - he should be taken to court immediately or released today. 
2) 	The Minister of Internal Affairs should interest himself in the condition at Naggalama Police Station because the suspects there and police officers working there have no toilets at the moment; the system broke down several days ago.
3) 	Kiruddu Hospital is the only facility we have that treats people with kidney problems. That is where we have the Government dialysis machine. The dialysis machine generates a lot of waste with diverse consequences if that waste gets to reach the people. We, therefore, painfully want to request that Government closes this facility for now and reopens it after the construction of the lagoon is done, after all, we already released Shs 3.5 billion for that work. 

We are talking about lives of Ugandans at Kiruddu, both the sick and the residents in this area. We feel that our colleague, hon. Ssewanyana was pressed hard. It was because of the pain of his people that he went out to demonstrate their dissatisfaction, which is what Members of Parliament are supposed to do. 

Mr Speaker, you are our custodian. You are the one responsible for our security. I request that your office re-asserts its powers that Members of Parliament do not get arrested without informing your office.

2.20
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Mr Speaker, I thank you.  This is what is happening in Jinja right now. The Democratic Party is a legally registered political party in Uganda. It is a party that even the Parliament of Uganda allocates money to through the Political Party Fund. 

The Democratic Party embarked on a nationwide campaign to rejuvenate its structure and reconnect to the publics. It has had successful conventions and they are indoor. They are not rallies. People are seated in tents in a closed environment. It had successful events in Makerere. It went to Gulu. It has gone to Masaka, and today, it was supposed to be held in Jinja. 

To our dismay, while the Democratic Party abided by every letter of the law - it acquired permission from the venue owner as the law stipulates, it paid, and it notified police in time accordingly. However, in the morning, there was heavy deployment of military and police officers at the venue where the function was supposed to be held. 

The information I have is that the top leadership of the party, including the party president, hon. Norbert Mao have been arrested. 

This does not only stop with the Democratic Party. The Forum for Democratic Change organised similar activities across the country but they were all stopped using the same excuses. One of the incidents was so painful; the police went in the morning, closed the gate and put a padlock and that was the end of the story. 

I had an opportunity, with the permission of the Leader of Opposition in Parliament, to seek a meeting with the Minister of Internal Affairs. I led a delegation of shadow cabinet ministers and we had a meeting with the minister over this matter. 

We agreed that the law as it stands does not stop Members of Parliament or individuals from organising events as long as they abide by the law. They even requested me to go the extra mile of giving him the list of activities that opposition organisations intend to do.

I wrote to the minister, detailing all activities Members of Parliament and political organisations intend to do. I copied in the Inspector General of Police and other people following that meeting, which was attended by hon. Lutamagguzi and hon. Mugume from Rukungiri.

We have tried everything humanly possible to fit within the limited constitutional space that is provided and operate in accordance with the law, even when we have petitioned those laws in the constitutional court. If us who believe in constitutionalism are not given way, those who do not believe in what we are doing will take charge; we will be left with no options. Yes, you can defeat them but there will be a huge damage to this country. 

Mr Speaker, as we speak the NRM is organising. They are in retreats, endorsing sole candidate. They are doing everything to prepare for the next election and the roadmap is out. We are in a political contest to wrestle power from them in accordance with the law. 

As they are organising and as the President embarks on numerous tours across the country and campaigning, so must his competitors. We are only asking for fair play and for the police force to abide by the letter of the law, even when we do not agree with the law. 

Therefore, our prayer is: let us get the position of Government formally. If they have now reached a conclusion that political activities will not be permitted in this country, let them be honest as Iddi Amin did. (Applause) Amin was a more honest leader. If they want to follow the same footsteps, it will not be new to this country.

As I wind up, my singular prayer to Government is that let them be honest to people. If they want to stop the pretence of democracy, let it be. Otherwise, let us know, when the Public Order Management Act applies? Thank you.

2.26
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on the situation of freedom of association in this country. Uganda, amongst other states of the world signed the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is part of our Bill of Rights in our Constitution as imported. 

The practice however, is beginning to show us that we are veering off course to begin to practice what is not accepted. I am happy that the Minister of Internal Affairs is here; he is among those who are responsible for ensuring that our laws and rights are fully protected. 

The Inter-Political Parties Dialogue was created in this country to create – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I need you to deal with the urgent matter.

MR KOMAKECH: Let me go straight to the point. Now that the police have done what they have done in Jinja – it was very unlawful that they arrested the leader of the Democratic Party. I am the deputy whip of this party in this House. I, therefore, demand that the Minister of Internal Affairs, with immediate effect, releases the President of the Democratic Party. He had only gone to preside over a reunion of members of the party. This should be done with immediate effect, Mr Speaker.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

On the issue of the well-being and freedom of hon. Allan Ssewanyana, Member of Parliament Makindye East, I would like to state it clearly that as Government and as the Ministry of Internal Affairs, we do recognise and believe in the right of the honourable Member of Parliament to address his people on the issues, which affect them. There is no question about that. We stand to guarantee that freedom, not only for him but for all of us and all Ugandans. 

The circumstances that led to the arrest of hon. Ssewanyana are generally correct, as stated by hon. Nambooze. However, what she did not state is the fact that in the process of organising the demonstration, he did not inform the police and other authorities about the desire to do so.

Secondly, in the process of going to address that unfortunate situation at Kiruddu Hospital – and as a Government we do not accept that, that sanitation situation should continue to deteriorate. I think last week the Minister of Health was on the Floor here stating what Government was doing to address that situation as soon as possible.

However, hon. Allan Ssewanyana went – in his view it could have been right – with padlocks to lock the hospital. However, he has no right to lock the Government facility –(Interjection)- he does not have that right, honourable members. Let us accept it. He has other ways of expressing his frustrations. Therefore, the people who are in charge of law and order had a right to stop him from doing so.

Secondly, where one should be detained is not the choice of the person who is being taken but the choice of the arresting authority to make sure that he is safely deposited where his own safety is guaranteed. The arresting officers, in their wisdom, which you may query, felt that he would be safe at Naggalama Police Station. 

The conditions at Naggalama Police Station, and many of our police stations, are not the best, not only for the inmates but also for the police personnel working there. We have been taking interest in them together with you to make sure that we provide as much resources to improve these conditions. However, we shall continue to take more interest in that situation – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, I was reluctant to raise a point of order because I thought the minister would actually be answering the issue raised. However, I lost patience when he started accusing this Parliament of not giving police adequate resources.

Mr Speaker, the abuse of resources – and the minister is aware –is the reason we do not have enough resources to deal with the welfare of police. The last time I was arrested by police from Kireka, I was escorted with about 12 vehicles, as if they were taking Kony yet all these vehicles consume fuel. The last time they locked me inside my house, they brought about eight police trucks. 

Therefore, is the minister in order to accuse Parliament – which has increased the budget of police from Shs 100 billion, about seven years ago, to now about Shs 530 billion – of not providing police with minimum resources to deal with issue of sanitation when he is aware and he is a Member of this Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think you acted in time to stop him from saying that. He simply said we are in this together to raise the funds. I think he was about to say what you put him on order on but now he will not say it. (Laughter)

MR OBIGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Of course, I would not say this Parliament is about to deny us resources. As police, we have been extremely grateful to this Parliament. All that I was saying was that we have been together in this. We have always brought our problems but as a country all these problems have not be resolved.

Having said that, let me come to the last point on the detention of hon. Ssewanyana up to now. I will check on it and see why –(Interjection)– absolutely  not only colleague but a citizen. The principle is that whether small or big, there is absolutely no reason for one to be held beyond the mandatory time, except if the reason is legitimate. I commit that I will find that reason. As soon as we have gone out of here, I will find out that reason and put it to Parliament. It is not an acceptable position; we will give it to you.

On the arrest of the leader of the Democratic Party in Jinja, I have just got it here – (Interjection)– definitely, I have been in other meetings, so, I hadn’t get it. I will definitely check it again and make sure we do the needful to ensure that if there is nothing to hold our colleague beyond the mandated time, he is released. There is absolutely no reason he should be kept there beyond the mandated time.

However, honourable members, let me say this. As the Speaker said sometime back, it is also important that for some of these things you get in touch with us so that some action is taken before the matter is raised as a matter of national importance on the Floor because it may take time and here what we are requiring is that action is taken immediately. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I stand on a point of procedure. This Parliament makes laws and is a custodian of laws. It is very clear in the Constitution of Uganda that one cannot be held beyond 48 hours without being taken to court.

Hon. Ssewanyana has been in detention for more than 48 hours. The Minister of State for Internal Affairs knows the law and the police know the law. Why are they still holding hon. Ssewanyana in the police cell? 

Mr Speaker, we had one of our colleagues in the Ninth Parliament, hon. Dede, who was held illegally in Jinja. The Speaker ordered that hon. Dede be released with immediate effect and he was released.

Is it not procedurally right, Mr Speaker, that – since Parliament makes laws and we are the custodians and we know that he is being held illegally – you direct that our colleague be released?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are procedures that are in the laws. If any of the laws have been violated, we know what to do but it cannot be a directive from me. We know what can be done. We have habeas corpus proceedings, which are in the law to make a person be produced immediately and if there are no reasons for further holding that person he is released. It cannot come as a directive from the Speaker because it could easily come out as interference in the working of other people.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, it is with great pain that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On what matter do you rise?

MS AOL: On hon. Allan Ssewanyana’s detention.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it a procedural matter or a clarification?

MS AOL: It is a procedural matter. It is with great pain that the honourable minister has not assured us. I was there and, Mr Speaker, we left all our things to run after our friends. Therefore, isn’t it procedurally correct for the honourable minister to assure us of either producing him in court today or releasing him? Otherwise, the minister has not assured us.

Mr Speaker, it causes us a lot of pain that the opposition   suffers in this country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to verify this matter and update us in the next one hour?

MR OBIGA: Of course, I cannot say no to a directive of the Speaker. If you give me that opportunity to verify – I do not know how long it will take but I would like to indulge the Speaker to leave the one hour open. Otherwise, I cannot be sure that within an hour, I will be able to fulfill it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What I said is step out and find out what it is and come back and brief us since you do not know what is happening. You only watched it on television. Kindly find out what it is and come to brief us. That is all. The other longer processes will come later but for now, come and update us about what is going on.

MR OBIGA: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have students of Makerere University. They are represented in Parliament by hon. Munyagwa Mubarak and hon. Nabilah Sempala. They are here to observe the proceedings. Please enjoin me in welcoming them. (Applause)

We also have in the public gallery this afternoon, students from Kampala International University, represented by hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Nabilah Sempala. Please join me in welcoming them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR KIVUMBI: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I carefully listened to the statement by the Minister of State for Internal Affairs – and I would like to say this before he walks out.

The procedural matter I am raising is that we sighted an infringement to the law established. If there is any institution in this country that is on oath to defend, uphold and protect observance of the laws of Uganda, it is the people’s representatives.

Mr Speaker, to continue with impunity and abuse the law established, by security agencies and the minister comes here to just gloss over the actual infringement on the law, is to breeding impunity.

The procedural matter that I am raising is: we have a law called the Public Order Management Act. What does that law entail? Can I, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, a Member of Parliament for Butambala County tell them that please these are dos and don’ts? 

Mr Speaker, the law even goes ahead to put responsibilities on the security agencies. Therefore, for the minister to simply walk away every day and even fail to answer those questions on the Floor of Parliament - I do not know whether we are proceeding well as an institution of Parliament not to hold the minister to account on the impious continued abuse of the law established by security agencies.

Mr Speaker, soon we are going into party primaries but they will abuse it with - Going forward, we need the minister to commit to observe the law as it is. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do we need to guide anyone to observe the law? Really! So, should I be telling you that please observe the law? Is that reasonable request to make? 

Honourable members, sometime back, I was forced to put the question that the body be buried. Please, some things should not be – honourable members, the law is put to be observed. If it is a violation by some people, then the recourse is also known. Isn’t it clear? If someone has been detained beyond the specified period, is Parliament the place to come? The persons who are qualified to interrogate the circumstances are the courts of law. Are we now the court of law?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue we are raising is that we belong to political parties and we always write to Uganda Police in accordance with Public Order Management Act but the police do not respond to our request; they just keep quiet.
	
Mr Speaker, under the law, we can only challenge their decision of not responding to our notification by conducting our activities - you just see police like what they did in Jinja. The Democratic Party wrote to them and we kept making contacts but they kept quiet. Until last night, when I talked to the Personal Assistant of Inspector General of police, Mr Fred Mulondo, who said “That was a no go zone area, you need to talk to the deputy” but they just kept quiet. In the morning, they deployed the army and the police.  

The reason we are seeking your indulgence, Mr Speaker, is that they did not take an action. We can only have a right to challenge their decision if it is communicated rather than keeping quiet and deploying the police.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have just asked the minister to come back in an hour to tell us what happened because he said he had only watched it on television. He is the person we are tasking to explain what happened. So, I have asked him to find out and explain to us. Is that a fair way to handle it rather than guessing what happened?

MR MWIRU: Most obliged.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let him come back and explains then we see how we can proceed with this matter. Thank you.
	
Honourable members, I will cause an alteration on the Order Paper to allow a motion by Member for Kassanda South to seek leave to present a Private Member’s Bill on the Land (Amendment) Bill at an appropriate time; the Clerk will be handling this later.

2.47
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker.  I rise on a matter of national importance.

Yesterday, Tuesday, 19 February 2019, the Minister of Local Government, hon. Tom Butime unconstitutionally transferred part of Napak land, which has been accepted -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has not even said what he intended to say.

MR TERRACE ACHIA: Hon. Tom Butime unconstitutionally transferred part of Napak land, which is recognised by the Constitution of Uganda 1962 and supported by 1964 Statutory Instrument of the National Game Reserve of Pian Upe and gave it to Katakwi, without being sensitive to the pains and sufferings of the people.

It is, therefore, my humble request to inform you, Mr Speaker, that when I wanted to bring my proposal, which should have harmonised the situation, the minister did not give me an opportunity to talk. I stood up two times but never was I given permission to talk; this is injustice.

My point of concern when I stood up was to inform the House that the surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development were the ones responsible for delaying the resolution of the Katakwi-Napak boundary. Why? It is because they were all the time showing the ministers who went on the ground a false border, which lies in Pian Upe Game Reserve. This is not constitutionally acceptable because the Uganda Wildlife Authority knows the boundaries; they know the relationship of Napak and Katakwi boundary with –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the urgent matter? 

MR TERENCE ACHIA: I humbly pray that the President halts that declaration and sends Uganda Wildlife Authority and lands surveyors to establish and harmonise the boundary therein and bring the matter to Parliament. This is very clear and  I pray that it is considered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Why don’t you make your prayers within Parliament? By praying to the President, we might have difficulty in getting feedback.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Thank you. I also pray that Parliament sends its committee together with the two teams from Uganda Wildlife Authority, and lands ministry so that a harmonised position is got and the matter is brought to Parliament of Uganda. Thank you.

2.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Mr Speaker, thank you for the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Terence Achia, for raising this issue. Yesterday, my ministry was in Katakwi with the surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and all the leaders. I would like to put it on record that, one, the issue of boundaries is a constitutional matter but also that it is done scientifically.

Hon. Terence Achia was one of the Members who participated in moving to the field to see where the pillars are. Napak District has been contesting, for example, about a market that Katakwi thought was theirs. Yesterday, we established it belongs to Napak. There is a trading centre towards Abim, which Katakwi thought it was theirs but yesterday we got to know it belongs to Napak District. There are two primary schools - Lalei and another one, which Napak thought were theirs yet they belong to Katakwi District. 

So, we had to declare this border as the ministry responsible for declaring borders based on a scientifically done survey. 

Therefore, for the honourable colleague to come here and reinvent the will by asking the President to come in when they have been involving him – he even one time gave them a plane to track the coordinates. Hon. Terence Achia was one of the members. They even involved the First Lady when she was the Minister for Karamoja. Changing goalposts every day is not fair. We have told them that as leaders, they need to be calm. This is not going to affect the settlement. A Karimojong found on the Teso side will remain there and an Itesot found on Karamoja side will remain there. The only thing we demand of them is to pay allegiance to that local government.

So, the issue of the boundary of Napak and Katakwi districts was resolved yesterday; it is final.

2.54
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There are always inter-districts disputes over boundaries. Some are at sub-county or parish levels. In the context of this matter, about eight years ago, a complaint came about the boundary between Katakwi and Napak districts. The Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development sent surveyors not to survey but to reopen boundaries.

The boundaries of Uganda are anchored in the Constitution. Upon declaration of Uganda as a republic, there was a map that was drawn in the colonial time from 1956 to 1958. In 1962, Uganda was declared a republic based on the mapping, which had been done in 1956 and 1958. The mapping was done for all the villages, parishes, sub-counties and inter-districts.

So, when there are disputes, we do not go to survey; we go to open boundaries based on the already surveyed portion. Therefore, we went and opened the boundary but they were not satisfied. We accepted that a private surveyor, agreed on by the people of Napak and Katakwi district, should be involved. They went and opened the boundaries with their private surveyors who confirmed the boundary opening done by the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. Again, they were not satisfied.

At that time, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs was the First Lady, hon. Janet Museveni. The minister put the leaders - Members of Parliament from Napak and Katakwi districts - in a chopper and moved around to point to them the boundary. They came back, sat and agreed that what they saw is the boundary. We adopted that report, went back and called a meeting at my ministry where the leaders from Karamoja and the Minister for Karamoja Affairs were present. We then agreed that they should go to the field and put what is in the boundary opening into a declaration. Once we open a boundary, the Ministry of Local Government is the one to go and make a declaration; that ministry went and made that declaration.

So, at the moment, even if they went to the President, he will still ask the technical staff from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to go and do the same thing we have already concluded. 

Therefore, what I request of the Members is that if they are dissatisfied, the only other thing they can do is to seek foreign intervention because the boundary that was opened by the technical people, which the President will rely on, will not change. If they are disputing the map, we will then seek for redress on the issue of the map. However, the boundary opening was concluded with the involvement of everybody. Thank you.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I said the surveyors from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development have been consistently misleading. My prayer that you have not responded to is that Uganda Wildlife Authority goes and shows the boundary.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think where the matter has reached, if that is the procedure that has been adopted and the conclusion was made yesterday, I do not see any other recourse because the processes have taken eight years as elaborated by the ministers and yesterday was just a formal declaration of the boundary where two markets were found to be in Napak and two primary schools were found to be in Katakwi. Otherwise, the boundary has been clearly stated.

Is there anything that this House can do about this? I am just asking? Is there any other issue that this House can address regarding this matter? I am just asking if there is anything more to be addressed by this House about the matter at hand.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Mr Speaker, I said that Uganda Wildlife Authority is responsible and that they should accept to go and show the boundary but that is not coming out from the minister. It is very important but they are silent about it -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable member. Uganda Wildlife Authority is not in charge of surveying - please honourable, whom would you like to give information?

MR SAMSON LOKERIS: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I participated when the First Lady was the Minister for Karamoja Affairs, as chairperson to go and get people of Katakwi and Napak to determine the border. When we went there, we sat in Olilim Primary School. I had both teams and we told the surveyors to determine the border between Napak and Katakwi from where we were. They were trying to push me to a certain particular point but I said no to them. 

However, the issue of this boundary has taken long. We have called the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and we have had a number of surveyors; some of the surveyors that have been hired, even if one entered in their offices, they will not see what I presume to be an office. It seems these people are just got from anywhere.

Our prayer now, as people of Karamoja, is that we want the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to avail the map from the UK, like they did for –(Interjection)– yes, because now there are maps and when you go to Entebbe, these points have been manipulated; everybody makes their own reference points. Even when they went there - like when you talk about the three boundaries - we have for Uganda Wildlife Authority and the one of 1958 to 1962, which is different.

Yesterday, I saw the pillar which was put, it was of yesterday - the surveyors were asked not to go and put pillars but to open and give a report about that. The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development has not given us the opportunity yet we would like to see the map used by the British to demarcate our boundaries. Otherwise, if we do not do that, conflicts will continue yet we need to save our people.

Our prayer, as Karamoja, is that the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development should get a team from Katakwi and Napak to go to London where we believe the archives are and bring the map. (Laughter) Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need this from the lands minister. You have reopened the boundaries but there are still contestations, what next is left?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, it depends on the nature of the contestation. As the Member is alluding to, they have now shifted to contesting the map. The map was displayed to them at the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the meeting was chaired by hon. Dr Chris Baryomunsi. They showed them the map and I told you that the map is based on the colonial map for 1956 to 1958.

Now, if they are not satisfied with the maps which are in our archives, the only way they can do is to go to London in the archives at their own cost or cost of Parliament because we have done the work. It was the same contestation for the Tororo issue. They went to London and found the same thing as the one we had given them.


Therefore, I will interest them if they want to go to London, let them pay for my staff and the matter can go - you don’t want to pay –(Interruption)

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Mr Speaker, hon. Betty Amongi is a Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development of this country. Is it in order for her to tell the Karimojong that they must go to London at their cost yet the other time they went with people of Tororo? Yes, they went with the people of Tororo to collect the maps from UK using Government money. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, did you finance the trip for the Tororo people?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, I did not finance as a minister. It was when the contestation went to the President; it was handled from that level. However, as a minister, when I conclude the work at the ministry level, I cannot foot the cost unless money comes from other sources and I am directed to do that.

Otherwise, as of now, if they would like me to answer their question, the only way that they can re-verify the map, which we used to open the boundaries is to go to London at the archives and the British library so they can compare.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we cannot resolve this matter now. We will stay it here for now and then we do consultations and see how to handle the issue better.

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. This matter was raised in this House about three weeks ago where the woman representative for Katakwi raised a concern that people from Napak District had violently invaded residents of Katakwi District and torched houses.

I did pledge to the House that we were going to convene a meeting to look into this issue. We had a meeting at the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development chaired by me, attended by the two ministers of Karamoja affairs, the Minister of State for Local Government and the Minister of State for Teso Affairs and the Members of Parliament from Napak and Katakwi districts; we spent many hours discussing this matter.

As my senior minister has already given information, it has been a long-standing matter. The ministry surveyors surveyed that place and produced a report, which was contested by Members of Parliament, particularly hon. Terence Achia from Napak. They then requested that the different surveyor comes on the ground. The Office of the Prime Minister (OPM) facilitated a surveyor to go and show the coordinates again. The report of the surveyor, supported by OPM and the one from the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, were the same.

The coordinates, which are used are the ones described in the 1962 Constitution, which show the boundaries for Karamoja and Teso districts then. 

The Assurance I would like to give my colleagues from Napak and Katakwi districts is that even when they go to London, they will find the same maps that we have in the department of surveys and mapping in the ministry of lands.

While in that meeting, our surveyors displayed the map for the area and showed us the boundaries. Hon. Terence Achia also had a map whose source was unknown. However, the difference was that his map was drawn on a very small scale and therefore, the surveyors advised him that there was no way he was going to compare the two maps when the scales were different.

We have highly specialised technical officers in the department of surveying and mapping. These are specialists who have been in the field for quite some time. I thought we had generated consensus in the meeting with the Members of Parliament from the two sides that the matter had fairly been understood. The Minister for Local Government pledged that he was going on the ground to do what they did yesterday –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, I would like to seek clarification from you on the issue concerning maps. I do not know which department is concerned with issuing out maps. Right now, where there are disputes, you find many different maps with different coordinates. They all claim that the maps are from the same ministry.

The second form of clarification I would like to seek from the minister is that in an area where people once lived in harmony many years ago, as a ministry, you are jumping in to cause more confusion - allowing tribal wars and people might kill each other. How do you feel? Is your major work to cause chaos and make sure people continue fighting over land?

DR BARYOMUNSI: I do not know whether the Speaker will add me time – (Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I need clarification because this issue of land conflicts in terms of boundaries did not start today between Katakwi and Karamoja. It is happening in so many places and you are aware of the many places that I will not mention here, for purposes of not making a mistake. 

Some people have been referred to London to look at the maps in London. We are talking about Uganda but we do not have our own maps. How is your ministry working closely with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning? Isn’t there a possibility of having the maps of Uganda in Uganda rather than referring people all the time to London to get them? I thought that we are independent and things should be handled here as a country. I need clarification.

MS OKORI-MOE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek clarification from the honourable minister. There has been a border conflict between Abim and Napak. The last time we met in Moroto, you assured the people of Abim that most of the land being contested is in Napak and part of it in Abim. What assurance can you give the people of Abim that tomorrow you will not curve Rogom Primary School under Napak? 

You have taken long on the issue of Aleklek. Some of us went to Kangole Girls Secondary School in Napak. We used to have a farm in Aleklek and we thought it was in Napak. How long ago were we in senior four? You can imagine how long it has taken you to resolve some of these conflicts. 

When people fight tomorrow, what are you going to do and when are you resolving the problem of Abim? Even Koblin Parish in Abim is said to be in Napak; so, which is which? Thank you.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: I need to give further information, honourable minister –

DR BARYOMUNSI: with the permission of the Speaker, you should be the last one.

MR REMIGIO ACHIA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have been a Member of Parliament and together with Dr Baryomunsi, we have been here since 2008. The ministry - together with hon. Betty Amongi - are presenting reports as if there were no mistakes made in the beginning. When this matter came out eight years ago, the first survey, which was done by the ministry, came out with the wrong map. We all agreed that it was a wrong report. I have a hard copy.

Secondly, in this Parliament there is a precedent. In 2001, the people of Katakwi in Teso said that they wanted all the land that was called Eastern Teso Game Reserve bordering Napak and Nakapiripirit District then to be de-gazetted. That report is in this House in the Library. It came with clear coordinates showing how that matter was resolved. All the land of Eastern and Northern Teso, which was a game reserve, was de-gazetted in 2002. The process started in 2001 and hon. Gen. Moses Ali was a Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities - and Joviah Akaki. The report is here.

What is funny about what was being done yesterday is that there are three maps now. There is the one which was rejected, the one in the second report and that, which was used to de-gazette Eastern Teso. 

The one being put today by the ministry is even entering Pian Upe Game Reserve. It is interesting because if the same ministry is using the 1956/1658 maps, what maps exactly have been used to issue different decisions in this Parliament?

Mr Speaker, there is more into this matter than we can see here. This Parliament has made decisions to de-gazette Eastern Teso using the 1958 maps. They used the same map - I do not know what kind of scale - to arrive at the wrong conclusion. We went back but we have arrived at a different conclusion.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, for the information. Let me wind up. First of all, as members of Parliament we should not attempt to turn ourselves into surveyors because our work as the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning is that when there is a dispute with respect to boundaries, we just dispatch our surveyors to determine where the boundaries are. We do not create new ones.

Like I said, our surveyors are guided by what is in the 1962 Constitution –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, hon. Chris Baryomunsi understands the mandate of this Parliament. When we lost a colleague, hon. Nebanda, we asked him and another colleague who are medical doctors to represent Parliament in the investigations to find out what had killed our colleague. 

Some authority outside Parliament told hon. Chris Baryomunsi the same words he is using against colleagues –(Interjections)– don’t you remember? (Laughter) He was told in no uncertain terms not to turn himself into a pathologist – and you remember that is how he got arrested. 

The reason there is a Government is to find solutions even to very complicated problems. The senior minister in the Ministry of Land, Housing and Urban Development has told members of Parliament and all the Karamajong that they can now fly to London. The second minister is saying, “Don’t turn yourselves into surveyors.”

A problem exists and you are in Government to find solutions. I expected people who are in Government to come here and help the Speaker by making an undertaking that yes; we were able to establish the boundaries where problems exist. We will call an inter-ministerial meeting and try to solve the problem. Now they are saying that you can fly to London; do not turn yourselves into surveyors. 

Mr Speaker, the people who are trying to provide answers are also not surveyors; the procedural issue is whether this Parliament needs to continue listening to a medical doctor and a social worker – and he has disqualified everybody else. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for this Parliament now to summon surveyors?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had already guided on this matter. Maybe I can repeat what I said. I said that it looks like we cannot resolve this matter here. We will pause it here, do other consultations and see how we can find a solution to this problem. That is what I said and I thought that was binding on all of us.

However, you can see that when you try to give more information, you are creating more problems for everybody else. Therefore, let us pause it here and we do other consultations. There will be an appropriate time when we come back to this House and let the House know how far these matters are going so that a solution can be found that can make the people live in harmony. 

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, Government committed itself to facilitate the local council administration with bicycles. Government facilitated some districts and some did not get - that is the old administration.

Mr Speaker, now that I see the Minister of State for Local Government, can she tell us – (Interjections) - they are now preparing to facilitate the new LC administration before they conclude with the old LC administration. These people are saying, “We cannot lose the election and also lose out on the bicycles, which Government promised to give us.”

The procedural point is, as Parliament and Government, are we proceeding right to facilitate the new LC administration before we finish with the commitment that the Government made?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are you facilitating the new ones?

3.33
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Waira Majegere for raising the matter. Mr Speaker, the bicycles were not to be given to individuals but to offices. Therefore, I do not know if it is logical for us to buy bicycles and look for former leaders to give them the bicycles.

Therefore, we are planning to provide bicycles to the new leaders. However, we have a challenge –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Point of Order.

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I can see the honourable minister is all smiles when she says that these bicycles were handed over to offices and office bearers. Can the honourable minister be courteous enough to this House to show samples of documents of handover of these bicycles as Government instruments-?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you rise on a point of order?

MR NSEREKO: I am going to ask the point of order, Mr Speaker. Can the honourable minister be courteous enough to this House to show us samples of documents of handover that will give comfort to the honourable member that has raised this question?

Mr Speaker, is she in order to allege that these bicycle were given by Government to these local council officials as instruments or a mode of transport to enable them perform their duties? In any case, can she show us those documents that in case they ceased to hold these offices, they would pass them on to the new administration? Is she in order to mislead this House?

We were here when her predecessor explained under what circumstances the bicycles where to be taken by the local councils.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in order for the honourable member to rise on procedure, order and then raise clarification? 

MR NSEREKO: That is your ruling, Mr Speaker. It is within your wisdom, Sir. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What you have asked is a clarification issue really and I would like the minister to clarify and we close this matter.

MS NAMUYANGU: Mr Speaker, when we got new leaders in office – the LCI and LCII chairpersons, my permanent secretary wrote guidelines on handovers and we asked the LCs to handover whatever was in their possession as it belongs to the office, including the bicycles.

However, we gathered was that most of the bicycles were very old and many of them were written off.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we will pause this matter here. Our committee responsible for this sector should find out all these things about bicycles, facilitation to LCI and then see how to come back to the House and advise us. Thank you. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Sometime back, this House handled a matter to do with unscrupulous investors who come to this country and end up defrauding our population of a lot of money.

Specific mention was made to the likes of D9, Cloud, Crypto Currency and such stuff. Mr Speaker, I expected that Government to make a public statement and guide our people on this issue. However, today as I speak, in the media, there are a number of these companies specifically talking about the crypto currency. They are moving around advertising and gathering people and probably collecting money from them.

Mr Speaker, the population is gullible and they can end up injecting millions of dollars into this and losing money. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for the Minister of Finance, Panning and Economic Development to come and explain to us what action they have taken, where these people are getting licenses and whether you are really convinced that these are genuine investors who are not here to defraud our people. 

Wouldn’t it be proper for the nation to know so that our population is properly guided to avoid further losses? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this was a substantive motion debated in this House. It moved by the Youth Member of Parliament, for Western. The debate was quite elaborate on this subject. We passed resolutions to that effect including this new thing that they are doing. 

In addition, under Rule 217, the minister should have come back to alert us how these matters are and what action has been taken from the time we took that decision. Honourable minister, have you given some guidelines to the population? 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) MR David Bahati: Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, there is some work that we are doing. I request for one week so that we come back and update the House on the progress we are making. That would help us.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have to update the House or do you have to inform the people and warn them about the risks they are likely to take on these investments?

MR BAHATI: We will do both, Mr Speaker.  

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

(i) ON THE SUSPENSION OF ADMISSION OF STUDENTS TO GULU UNIVERSITY – KITGUM BRANCH

3.29
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to report on the suspension of admission of students to Gulu University, Kitgum Campus; a concern raised by hon. Beatrice Anywar.

Gulu University, Kitgum Campus was opened in Academic Year 2011/2012 to cater for students who could not afford to study at the main campus located in Gulu Municipality.

Despite the efforts by the university council to create and sustain a campus in Kitgum District, the instruction from the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) not to continue running unaccredited campuses coupled with the declining trends in student enrolment over the years, is making sustainability of the campus a daunting challenge.

Mr Speaker, I have indicated a table showing the enrolment trends; From Academic Year 2011/2012, the student enrolment was 104 but by Academic Year 2016/2017, it had gone down to 71. As a result of the two factors stated above, management suspended the admission of students to the campus in Academic Year 2017/2018 until the issue of accreditation and financing of the operations of the campus is addressed.

It is important to note that the declining student enrolment meant increasing percentage of budget support from the main campus, yet the main campus also has financial difficulties. The operation of the campus attracts a wage bill and need for infrastructural development, which cannot be funded from student fees collections given the low enrolment.

Mr Speaker, I would like to make it clear that the collection from the fees paid by students is about Shs 100 million, yet the growth expenditure is about Shs 500 million annually. Hence, this puts a lot of pressure on the expenditure of the main campus and it is not sustainable.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on Table a National Council for Higher Education press release on the recognised study centres and campuses for ease of reference. I beg to lay. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to make it clear that Gulu University, Kitgum Campus was not accredited and it does not meet the required standards. Therefore, before they operate that campus, they have to get accreditation. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Is there a supplementary question from the Member for Kitgum Municipality? 

3.32
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (Independent, Kitgum Municipality, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Although I am an Independent Member of Parliament and I can freely stand anywhere, the Leader of the Opposition does not welcome us on her side. Therefore, I comfortably stand on the ruling side. 

I thank the minister for the statement she made on the issue I raised yesterday on the Floor of Parliament. I made a statement here that during the Tarehe Sita celebrations when the Minister of Education and Sports, hon. Janet Museveni, was in Kitgum, we raised the issue to her and indeed she affirmed that Gulu University, Kitgum Campus would not be closed. I am surprised that the statement the minister has brought on the Floor of this House speaks contrary to what has been agreed upon. 

However, it is sad to hear the minister say that a campus that was created for affirmative action of the students who could not go to the main campus and has been operating since 2011 is not accredited.

The issue that the minister should clearly explain to us is, when they are sending out the admission list, the ministry does not separate the admission for Gulu University Kitgum Campus and the main campus. It is sent to Gulu University and the students have been applying to that effect.

Therefore, I would like to challenge the minister to tell us which data she used to indicate that the intake for Kitgum Campus was reducing, yet the admission forms did not separate Kitgum Campus from Gulu University itself. 

From the minister’s submission - yesterday I stated that we have given 100 acres of land, free of charge, but they have opted to rent very expensive premises rather than use the 100 acres of land since we gave it. How can the minister justify that the cost of running Kitgum Campus is more expensive and it demands closure of the branch? I will take the information. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Anywar, you are speaking to your supplementary question; so, how can you solicit for information? She rose on a supplementary question. We agreed on these rules so that they help us.

MS ANYWAR: Mr Speaker, I would like the minister to be categorically clear on why they have to close the Kitgum Campus when the subsequent affirmative branches in Lira and Karamoja are operating smoothly? What is the agenda behind it? We have given you free land and yet you are not using it. You are also not separating Kitgum Campus from the main campus in terms of the students you are supposed to admit. You give them blanket forms and you are here to justify that you are closing the campus because the number is reducing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Due to the nature of this issue, I will allow the two members from Kitgum District – let me deal with the Kitgum District people. 

3.37
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to applaud my colleague, hon. Beatrice Anywar, for raising this very important issue, which affects the people of Kitgum District.

I would like the minister to understand that Gulu University is a public university and for that matter, the Ugandan Government finances the operations of that university. A public good may not necessarily be created to make profit. It could be affirmative action, as she has said, to make sure the disadvantaged people in Kitgum District access education.

If other branches of Gulu University in Hoima, Karamoja and elsewhere are operating effectively, what is wrong with the one of Kitgum District that it cannot also operate effectively? I think the minister should clarify on this very important matter. 

3.39
MS MARGRET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Gulu University Kitgum Campus is not a university of itself but a constituent college of Gulu University. We are now very surprised to hear from you that the enrolment is dropping yet it is on the desk of the Vice Chancellor to admit students who can study in Kitgum District.

Madam Minister, Gulu University Kitgum Campus has operated from 2011 to date with all what was supposed to be there. Now, the Ministry of Education and Sports had been lobbying that Kitgum should give land and the people of Kitgum have given 100 acres of land free. What are we going to do to this land or can we have something else for it?  

However, the clarification I seek is, as you close the university, what should we do because we also have other facilities which have remained? For now, Kitgum District has also set up a farm institute to as a branch for Gulu University. What are we going to do with that? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the specific issue is clear. Among all those things you are raising, the only point that I picked from the minister is that there is a financing gap of about Shs 400 million. Well, that is what I was hoping you would say.

Among all the things that the minister rasied, she said, “The only problem is a financing gap of Shs 400 million.” Yes, that was the key thing because if the Shs 400 million was there, it would be running properly and that is what you said.

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Ms Rosemary Seninde): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to make it clear to this House that it is true and I would like to appreciate Kitgum District for that offer of 100 acres of land. 

Mr Speaker, even the land is there, it requires infrastructure. We have to put up infrastructure and other things that are required to set up a campus. I have also made it clear that this campus was not accredited and therefore, it cannot operate when it is not accredited. As if that is not enough –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable minister, who was supposed to accredit it? This university started operating in 2011.

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, the National Council for Higher Education (NCHE) is supposed to accredit it. There are quite a number of minimum required standards that have to be met before the NCHE can accredit.

The Certificate of Financial Implications is among the requirements. Like my brother has pointed out, this institution is supposed to be facilitated by Government. Therefore, when a university is setting up a campus, definitely that means it will have to use the resources that are provided.

I would like to assure this House that the NCHE has no problem accrediting the institution as long as the requirements are met. This is very clear; we need infrastructure and other requirements that are required for a university. As if that is not enough, from the information on the ground which the leaders must also appreciate, the students at the Kitgum campus prefer to study from the main campus. I think that is what has reduced the numbers – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, Gulu University Kitgum Campus is a branch of Gulu University. The NCHE has accredited Gulu University. The minister should not think that we do not know how NCHE works. I am a teacher by profession and I know what higher education is.

Is the honourable minister in order to come here on the Floor of Parliament and misguide this Parliament claiming that Gulu University Kitgum Campus has not been accredited by the NCHE yet the Kitgum campus is a branch of Gulu University?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It sounds like a clarification. How come the main campus is accredited and this branch has to have a separate accreditation? 

MS SENINDE: Mr Speaker, I beg my colleagues to appreciate that whether the main campus is accredited, as long as it is setting up a branch, that branch has to be accredited as well. I have made it clear that as a ministry, we are supporting the accreditation of the Kitgum branch. What is happening now is that the required standards are not yet met and therefore, we have to help. 

As we speak, it cannot continue because accreditation is not yet done. (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We are talking about the life and future of a generation. The youth are at risk if they do not acquire education. Schools are about to open and the minister is making a statement here that the campus is not going to open. This has not yet been communicated to the parents and prospective students, who are preparing to start their education soon. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right to allow the minister come back tomorrow with a detailed process? If there is need for money, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should be here to step in either with a supplementary or something to save the future of this generation. The minister has to make it clear how the main university can operate while a constituent college is detached and why it had to operate since 2011 to date. 

Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that we get this detailed report tomorrow, attaching a supplementary to ensure the continuity of the college? As we speak, these students do not have an immediate alternative and the accreditation is in the docket of the minister. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right, Mr Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, Gulu University Kitgum branch is a growing concern. There are students there. We are only talking about closure for admission but there are continuing students at the university. 

Now you are saying that the institution is not accredited and you are saying that the ministry and the National Council for Higher Education is ready to accredit. You are also saying that there are certain things that need to be put in place. Whose responsibility is it to put those things in place?

If it is your responsibility – because this is a public university - what timeline are you giving to this House that you will put whatever is required in place so that the University can continue going on as it is? (Applause) There are students and lecturers there. It is something that is ongoing so you are not starting something new. What time do you need to do this?

MS SSENINDE: Mr Speaker, I request that on Tuesday, we will come back here with the status of Kitgum campus.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKR: On Tuesday, please come with all the solutions. The solutions are from you, not from us. If it is money, then request us and we provide it.

There was a pending issue from the Minister of State for Internal Affairs. He says he has information now.

3.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Thank you, Mr Speaker for your indulgence.

I regret that the person who raised the matter is not in the House. 

As I said at the beginning, when I came into the House, I was from another meeting and I had not got a briefing; but now I have been briefed.

As a law abiding force, at 10.00 a.m. this morning, hon. Allan Ssewanyana, the Member of Parliament for Makindye West, was legally released on police bond. If there is any matter, it will continue along that line. Thank you. (Interjections)

Concerning the Jinja issue, I have not been briefed. I was told that they are getting further details and I propose that I give you the details tomorrow. Thank you. 

3.52
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Mr Speaker, the issue that surrounds arrest and release is not only incarceration of someone. Our Member of Parliament for Makindye West was performing his duties. 

Probably the institution of police, under your supervision, should help us draw a line. This is in a non-partisan manner. We operate in the city. There is no single place you will go to in Kampala and you do not have a minimum of 300 people coming around you; either consulting on a certain matter or some are just happy to see you. 

I will give you an example of Kampala Central; when you reside here, you go through the same area and you work in the same area. You meet these people and some will stop you. At what stage do we engage the police? You witnessed the arrest of hon. Ssewanyana. He was standing with about 30 people and there were journalists and he was told that he was in breach of the Public Order and Management Act, which talks about a gathering of a minimum of 200 people. 

How shall we perform our duties whether of consultation or response to the people we represent? We would like to appeal to the honourable minister, since he said that the police constitutes of law abiding citizens. Let them have respect for the leaders, including you. Today it is hon. Allan Ssewanyana, tomorrow we shall be discussing another Member of Parliament.

We, in municipalities and other areas, wherever you pass, there are people in big numbers. You either pass them by and they regard you as arrogant or you keep knocking at the door of every police station in order to seek permission.

We are torn apart and we are between a rock and a hard place. How does hon. Allan Ssewanyana perform his duties? In that instance, people called on him; there was sewage flowing into their houses emanating from Kiruddu Hospital, which is part of Mulago and these people were in an inhabitable situation. As a Member of Parliament, he had to go to attend to his people. Then the police came in, manhandled him, bundled him into a car and have incarcerated him for two days. He has not been in performance of his cardinal duties here in Parliament. 

Therefore, can we have a bi-partisan way in which we draw guidelines on how to perform because the law is the law; but the police is abusing the same law. If hon. Allan Ssewanyana could be incarcerated for more than 24 hours, what of the ordinary citizen in this country whose voice might not be brought here every single day? We have to address this. That is the only indulgence I would like to seek from you, Mr Speaker.

It hurts us because we have to pass by our own people. For example, yesterday, fire gutted Kisenyi II Parish here in Kampala, killing three people. Thousands were there. The issue is whether you have to seek police permission to go and attend to them or not.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the law made provision for spontaneous gatherings. The law makes those provisions. Where you are organising a meeting is where you are required to inform the police. However, where you have not organised a meeting and people have just come, how do you notify the police? You did not prepare for it, it is not your interest but people are there. 

MR OBIGA: Mr Speaker, I think my colleague was not here at the beginning when I made a statement. I said that hon. Ssewanyana has a right to interact with his people and address their issues. That sewage flow is of concern to a Member of Parliament and to the people. Last week, the honourable Minister of Health was on the Floor discussing what they are doing. 

There are two issues, which caused hon. Ssewanyana’s arrest:
First, hon. Ssewanyana agrees that he was organising a demonstration and a meeting and he did not inform the police.

Secondly, hon. Ssewanyana had a chain to lock the hospital, which is a public facility. Honourable members, you are leaders and you have very many avenues to address issues to your people but the avenues do not include you taking unilateral actions to close a public facility, particularly a hospital –(Interjection)- if you close a hospital for one minute probably, apart from the situation inside, many other people would die. Therefore, the police moved in purely for that purpose. 

Having realised – we do not release people at night because if you are released at night and something happens to you, you will blame the police. Therefore, this morning, after all the procedures were done, at 10.00 a.m., hon. Ssewanyana was released and I believe my colleagues who came to this House to make the statement had that information but just wanted to pull our legs. 

I agree that you have pulled our legs in this case but we did the right thing. Thank you very much.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY, 8 MARCH 2019

3.59
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Mr Speaker, I am pleased to present to you the highlights about the commemoration of the International Women’s Day which will take place on Friday, 8 March 2019. This day is marked in Uganda and in many other countries all over the world.

Under the National Resistance Movement Government, the International Women’s Day has become prominent with the increased recognition of the contribution made and the roles played by women in the development of our country. In this respect, the day is marked as a national day and is also a public holiday.

As guided by the mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the International Women’s Day remained high on the Government agenda for the Financial Year 2018/2019 and the ministry will coordinate the activities of the national celebrations in collaboration with local governments, private sector, civil society organisations, development partners and other stakeholders.

Mr Speaker, the International Women’s Day was first declared by the United Nations in 1975 at the First World Conference on Women. That year also marked the beginning of the United Nations Decade for Women (1975-1985), which was devoted to intensified action to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment. 

During the Women’s Decade, the United Nations began celebrating International Women’s Day on the 8th March. The International Women’s Day is celebrated with guidance of a selected national theme, which is adopted from the international theme. This year, the international theme is, “Think Equal, Build Smart and Innovate for Change.” This theme focuses on creating a paradigm shift for transforming mind-sets to the goal of gender equality as well as identifying new ways of advancing the women’s agenda at all levels.

The national theme is, “Empowering Women through Innovative Approaches to Social Protection: A Prerequisite for Inclusive and Sustainable Development.” The theme recognises that social protection measures for the most vulnerable segments of the population – the majority of whom are women constituting 51 per cent of the population – must be put in place in order to ensure inclusive and sustainable development of the country.

Mr Speaker, the relevance of this theme in Uganda’s context is the recognition that women play a critical role and are central in sustainability of households as well as improving livelihoods and overall wellbeing of the community.

Women sustain community resilience through informal and traditional social protection mechanisms such as participation in local credit and saving groups, mutual assistance schemes and burial groups which are essential for the wellbeing and sustenance of the household of members. With minimal capital, women have exhibited high levels of commitment in running micro and small enterprises and developing a savings culture. This commitment is a pre-requisite for attaining the middle-income status that Uganda has set out to achieve. 

Empowering women and girls is, therefore, not only key to the wellbeing of individuals, families and communities but also to overall socio-economic, inclusive and sustainable development –(Interjection)- I beg for your protection from hon. Nzoghu, Mr Speaker.

Government has put in place specific interventions, including the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP), the Youth Livelihood Programme, the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment of older persons and Operation Wealth Creation as innovative measures to support women’s participation and advancement.

The UWEP was started in 2015 to promote women’s access to affordable credit markets and entrepreneurship skills. At the end of 2018, UWEP had a total of 103,770 women implementing 8,247 projects. The primary target beneficiaries of the programme are women within the age bracket of 18-65 years, most of whom fall under the unemployed and vulnerable categories of society. They include single mothers, widows, women slum dwellers, gender-based violence survivors, women with disabilities, women living in hard-to-reach areas, women heading households, women living with HIV/AIDs and ethnic minorities.

The national outlook of the programme as well as the special targeting makes it one of the major breakthroughs for addressing the livelihood needs of marginalised and vulnerable women in Uganda.

The Youth Livelihood Programme was set up to enhance employment creation and skills development for the youth. Under this programme, 17,850 projects have been financed mainly in agriculture, trade and industry with 216,366 youth benefiting. The female youth constitute 46 per cent of the beneficiaries.

The Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment programme provides regular and reliable cash transfers to senior citizens and targets the poorest people among the population, the majority of whom are women. The current number of SAGE beneficiaries in 61 districts as of January 2019 is 157,493 and of these, 94,544 are women and 62,949 are men.

Under the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), 70,200 beneficiaries are being targeted for livelihood investments and 285,500 beneficiaries to earn income from temporary employment through the labour intensive public works component. This is aimed at improving livelihoods of the community especially, women who are primary-target beneficiaries due to the level of their vulnerability and Government of Uganda's commitment to promote gender equality.

Another innovative measure that Government has put in place for empowering women is through the extension of social services by subsidising costs of services. These include ensuring universal health coverage and introduction of Universal Primary Education (UPE). As a result, under the UPE Programme, gender parity has been achieved in enrolment and completion. There was an improvement in enrolment to reach 50 per cent, for both girls and boys in 2015. Completion for girls rose to 72 per cent in 2015 from 47 per cent in 2008 and completion for boys rose from 51 per cent in 2008 to 72 per cent in 2015.

Investment in health infrastructure across the country has improved accessibility of women to health care services. Access to safe water has also increased over the years.

Mr Speaker, whereas Government has instituted various policies, plans and programmes, the ever-increasing number of vulnerable groups in the country presents a continuous challenge and women face various forms of inequality with regard to economic opportunities and access to services. Women still have limited access to markets for their products, are paid low prices for their agricultural produce and hence become vulnerable.

The youth are susceptible to negative shocks of unemployment more than other age groups. The situation is worse for the female youth due to factors such as lower literacy rates among girls compared to boys, limited employable skills, poor bargaining skills, early marriage and sexual exploitation of girls among others.

The traditional social protection systems in Uganda are diminishing due to migration and globalisation. Communities have limited mechanisms for protection of vulnerable groups due to adoption of nuclear system of families and the deepening economic situation. This has resulted into increased number of children living on the streets in urban areas, abandonment of older persons especially, women in rural areas, grabbing of productive assets from widows and high school dropout rates of orphans and other children due to lack of support.

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I am pleased to inform you that the venue for the National Women’s Day Celebrations is selected on rotational basis among the regions of the country. Bunyangabu District Local Government was granted the opportunity to host the event in 2019.

His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda has been invited as the Chief Guest. All local governments and Kampala Capital City Authority has been informed and requested to observe the day, in accordance with the guidelines for commemoration of national days. 

I, therefore, wish to invite all members of Parliament to join us, the women of Uganda and Bunyangabu District Local Government to celebrate the International Women's Day, on 8 March 2019.
I also wish to encourage you to mobilise the communities in your constituencies to commemorate the day. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this is a ministerial statement and it attracts a debate. This debate will take the required time as stated in the rules. I will start with the Member for Nebbi District.

4.13  
MS JACQUELINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am overwhelmed by the statement of the minister and I am very happy that this time you are going to be in Rwimi in Bunyangabu District.
 
Mr Speaker, sometimes we are too theoretical. When we read things on paper and we do not know how to express whatever is happening – what is the reason for having it in Rwimi in Bunyangabu? Sometimes we need explanations from the minister.

The other issue is that if only we could have more explanations – not being read - that it is this and that because I am in the House; I think we need more explanations. Since we are all coming to Bunyangabu, what is going to happen to us? How do we transport our people to Bunyangabu? Those in favour say, “Aye” (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, “Madam Speaker.” (Laughter)

4.15
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to commend the Minister   of Gender, Labour and Social Development, for giving key highlights in regard to International Women’s Days Celebrations, 2019 that are going to be held in Bunyangabu District in Western Uganda.

It should go on record that as we celebrate Women’s Day on a yearly basis, we need to take cognisance of the fact that we have come from far and I think it is good to take stock of how far we have come and where we are today.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to call upon the House to address issues that are affecting women committedly, the way we have been doing. Three years ago, the women of Uganda started the Uganda Women’s Entrepreneurship Fund. This is a very good programme for the women and such programmes are very important especially for those rural women who do not have collateral.
	
Mr Speaker, you are aware that when I marry, I lose land from where I was born. In case I marry someone from Kumi and he divorces me, I still do not get the land because I will be in the middle of nowhere. The Uganda Women’s Entrepreneurship Fund is an option. 

However, we are also aware that the subsidies that are given to banks - the agricultural loan schemes - if women could be made aware of such schemes, it would be very imperative. Whereas we have the Uganda Women’s Entrepreneurship Fund, there could be individual women who may want to access this money to support themselves but they do not have the capacity. That is something that we should address, as a House.

Mr Speaker, as we celebrate this year’s International Women’s Day, it is also imperative to note, as we make allocations to the different sectors, that a man is the head of the family but a woman is the heart of the family. When we talk about lack of water in a household, it is the woman who is asked for water and not the man. When we are talking about food on the table, in my village the children would ask their mother for food and not the father. 

Therefore, honourable colleagues, I would like to implore all of you, as we celebrate Women’s Day 2019 to talk about innovations by women, we need to increase allocations to women issues, especially women funds. 

Lastly, - (Member timed out.)

4.18
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kibaale): I would like to congratulate the minister for giving a statement on the status of women in Uganda. We are aware that we are marking the International Women’s Day in recognition of the contribution of women to the development of this country.

Honourable minister, you mentioned an issue to do with access to health, specifically maternal health, and you said the status has improved from 50 per cent to almost 70 per cent. I would like to let you know that these are just statistical figures. I come from mid-western Uganda and I do not think this is true. Where do we see the improvement in maternal health? Much as we are celebrating this day, there is still a big gap. Where do we see a very strong maternal facility in western Uganda? I do not know what the women from your district, Bunyangabu, will say. This is a very sensitive matter to the woman.

My other comment is about the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). These are all statistical matters. When we go to the subcounties, the demand is so high and yet the funding is so limited. The women are very active; they would want to be involved in economic activities. Government is saying economic empowerment must go down to the common person, like the rural woman. 

I know women make the biggest portion of our population and a majority of them are in the rural areas and they are very active. However, the funding is so limited and accessibility is still very poor. International Women’s Day is not just a day to celebrate; it should be a day of empowerment and taking action as Government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time for debating is three minutes each.

4.21
MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. 

These celebrations are held every year and wonderful themes are selected each year. What perturbs me, however, is that the themes they choose usually end with the function and nothing much is done after. I want to know how the minister is going to involve women right from the rural areas to the national level so that they all participate in these activities. Thank you.

4.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Mr Speaker. There is a tendency of politicising what ordinarily should be national days, and I would like to invite Government to deal with this. I see it even in this statement. 

The International Women’s Day is an event that the world started marking from 1975. However, when the minister listed the achievements we have made as a country, she only listed the achievements of the National Resistance Movement (NRM). That is what is in paragraph 2. However, Dr Milton Obote constructed girls’ schools and many girls studied there. 

Therefore, as a minister of this country, when you are listing achievements, do not politicise what ordinarily should be a national thing. The last time we had this event in Mpigi, FDC Women’s League went there and they were bounced; only women with bisanja were entertained. Therefore, the point I am making, which is a serious one, is that you should find a way of uniting the country around a cause.

Secondly, when you are talking about women, look at the theme for the International Women’s Day; it is about the mind. However, this one, according to the statement of the minister, is about handouts that have been distributed and not the mind. The minister still thinks achievements are based on how many handouts they have started. 

Also, part of her statement is inaccurate. You talked about completion rates of Universal Primary Education (UPE). Every year, we register about 2 million children in primary one, but this year only 750,000 pupils sat for Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE). It means about 1.3 million children did not complete UPE and yet you are saying the PLE completion rate has risen from 50 per cent to 70 per cent. Maybe you have another UPE somewhere, but we were following the figures you presented when you released examination results; we were not sleeping. Also, I do not know what you intended to say when you were talking about boys and girls.

Finally, there is the issue of social protection. If you are talking about access to credit for people who are doing business, you should not be talking about access to the money you are giving with all the conditions you know. In fact, the President eventually said he wants to be the one to distribute the money. One of the ways of growing a country is to make credit accessible to people who meet the qualifications. It should not be those who form themselves into a group and when they see the head of state passing by, they put on bisanja and stop him. 

One of the things that bothered me a lot is the recent capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, which was Shs 50 billion. That is the amount you put in to capitalise the development bank of the country and yet the head of state has Shs 150 billion for donations. So, there is more money to throw around than money to put in the development bank.

This tokenism cannot take women anywhere. You must think beyond campaigning for the next elections. Put in place very serious measures. If you have money, it must be credit that anyone can qualify for and access. The qualification cannot be supporting NRM. You have to visit a market in Kawempe that operates by the roadside. They put posters of the sole candidate all over and there is no way you will bring down those posters –(Interjections) 

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I have listened to hon. Ssemujju, who I respect so much. He has made some good points but adulterated them with misguided submissions, which are really irrelevant and misinformed. 

It is true the President has been involved in wealth creation and poverty eradication programmes. He has done so in a very balanced and equitable manner, by not considering areas which support NRM only but he has considered all Ugandans of different shades of opinion politically.

Is the honourable member in order to make a sweeping statement and say the President only supports NRM supporters who wave at him and stop him, when we know that he has supported all areas of the country equitably without regard to political affiliation? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is very good information to the honourable member. Now he knows. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, let me conclude. The lasting solution to problems of inequality would be growing our own economy. Uganda now competes with Ethiopia in exportation of maids to the Middle East and all of you know the stories of girls who have gone to work there. Therefore, no amount of tokenism, handouts is going to empower women in Uganda if you do not fix the economy. 

With this boda boda economy, sports betting and distribution of money, you will graduate girls and one by one they will be trekking out of their country to the Middle East – Bahrain, Oman. In fact, when you take a flight from Ethiopia and Kenya these days going to the Middle East, nearly 30 per cent of the occupants are Ugandan girls going to be maids in the Middle East. 

By 1972 when Dubai had a crisis of shortage of food, Idi Amin sent them food. -(Interjection)- Yes! If you lived in this country, you would know. Therefore, you cannot have Dubai, which faced a shortage of food in 1972 and Uganda was one of the good Samaritans that helped them, becoming a destination for you to export girls. In fact, the last time we were there - if you go to parts of Deira, Ugandans girls are there involved in prostitution in broad daylight.

Therefore, as you give this statement and invite people to go to Bunyangabu, my appeal to Government is that if you want to develop a country, do not just look at the next election. Most of your actions are for temporary relief. It is like someone who is suffering from a very big disease and you give him Panadol and then you celebrate that you have given him three tablets of Panadol. Let us think beyond Panadol or pain killers, Madam Minister. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.30
MR ANTHONY SSEMULI (NRM, Mubende Municipality, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for that statement and for informing Parliament how this occasion is going to be held in Bunyangabu.

Honourable minister, this is a very important day internationally. Uganda is a signatory to so many international conventions that do address rights of women. Among those, we have the Maputo Protocol, universal declarations, the Geneva Convention. I would like to know why the minister does not address how far Uganda, and especially her ministry, have been able to implement some of these international conventions where we are a member state.

Secondly, I would like the minister to help Parliament address the issue of domestic violence. If you are talking of empowerment of women and yet they are experiencing social and cultural injustices in respective communities - There is no way we can say empowerment is in tandem with such atrocities.

I would like to know how far Uganda has gone in terms of coming up with measures against female genital mutilation, for example. These are issues which are rising in our communities. We cannot also forget that Uganda is a patriarchal society. How far have you gone in terms of fighting patriarchy? There is no way you can talk about empowerment and isolate these issues. Therefore, honourable minister, these are the issues which I consider very important.

Lastly, I beg that your speeches are always summarised in different languages because it is so painful when they invite a guest of honour and he reads the speech in English, even though it is the national language. If you are talking of people, especially women, and appreciating some of these obligations, it is very important that if you we are to address these issues, the speeches should be narrowed and reduced to different languages. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.33
MS MARGRET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I thank the minister for giving us information about International Women’s Day. 

International Women’s Day is very popular and women like to celebrate it everywhere. Even at our district level, they would like to go to the subcounty so that every woman comes out to celebrate the achievements of women. However, when I met them, they told me that the money given for the International Women’s Day celebrations at the district is very little. Therefore, let us try to increase that amount so that more women can go to the district level and participate together with others. That is the most important part of it.

Secondly, the women are very proud of the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme because this money now goes down to the villages. I was talking to groups of women in one subcounty and over 10 women groups got that money and it is working. Now, what we lack is proper training of women in business enterprise so that they can use this money properly, rather than doing petty businesses that do not yield good profit.

Thirdly, many women are engaged in agriculture but training in agriculture is only limited to men. When it comes to training, women are behind and men are the ones coming up yet when it comes to the actual work, women are the ones working. We have this policy on extension workers; we would like to know how many women are extension workers who would reach the women better? Therefore, we need to make sure that the women participate in the training.

There is the issue of the distribution done by Operation Wealth Creation; the seeds and seedlings are brought and left in the sub-county. The men who move around are the only ones who identify these seeds and seedlings quickly and grab them and the women cannot have them. We need a deliberate effort to provide these seeds and seedlings at parish level so that women can also benefit. 

Otherwise, we are very proud of the women and the achievements in Uganda where women of Uganda have progressed socially, economically and politically. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

4.37
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement but also refer her to a paragraph in which she was talking about high completion rates. We all know that there are very high dropout rates in this country especially for the girl-child. I am wondering where the minister got her statistics from.

We all know that 25 per cent of adolescent girls get pregnant in this country and drop out of school. Is the minister aware of that high rate of adolescent pregnancies in this country? If she is, what is she doing, in collaboration with the Minister of Health, to ensure that we eradicate these pregnancies so that our girls can go to school, stay there and complete school?

My colleague has mentioned something about very little money at the district level that goes into celebrating International Women’s Day. In some districts like mine, we do not get any resources for celebrating the day. The burden is always on the Women Members of Parliament to contribute and ensure that this day is successful. Honourable minister, what are you doing in your ministry to ensure that districts get adequate resources to celebrate this important day, which happens only once a year? We all know the responsibilities and roles women play in this country. 

I would like to end by thanking Government for the achievements made so far to emancipate and empower the women of Uganda. However, much more is needed so that all the women, right from the grassroots to the national level, can enjoy all these programmes the minister has talked about. Thank you.

4.39
MR OKIN OJARA (Independent, Chua West County, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also take this opportunity to thank the minister for this report. 

However, I would have loved to see more achievements of Ugandan women at the regional and also international level, which is not captured herein. When you read the report, it is like Uganda is a heaven for women emancipation. You do not seem to see any challenges affecting the women at all in Uganda. It would have been more important to reflect on the achievements of the Ugandan women. At the regional level, for example, we have had some interventions in Somalia and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) by our women - the women police and military officers – but it is not captured here. The report, therefore, seems not to be meeting that standard.

When it comes to the issue of the projects that you have been mentioning, they do exist. However, in a nutshell, when you look at their viability and level of improvement, especially on the status of rural women, a lot still is left to be desired.

You mentioned the Youth Livelihood Fund. Many times we have been mentioning this and debating it in this Parliament. However, you have not even brought to Parliament a report on the success of the fund since the operation started. To what extent have we achieved in terms of empowering the youth and the female youth? I do not think this project has done much, let alone the recovery level where you find there is a high default rate.

There is also the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF). Maybe I should come here and move a motion on this. Recently, we had a meeting in the Office of the Prime Minister and we advised the Prime Minister on the criteria that should be used to support the women groups in terms of economic empowerment. I am sad to note that in my area, this project is being implemented politically, to the extent that the selection criterion is based only on the political ideology you subscribe to. The other women are left out and they are crying. There is a member of staff within the Prime Minister’s office who keeps on saying, “I have brought to you money - Shs 280 million, for example – at this location and I have selected this and that group.”

Madam Minister, if this is the kind of achievement that we are going to be proud of in empowering the women, I do not think we will be able, as Parliament, to continue supporting budgets that will go to projects that should have enhanced capacity and empowered women in the rural areas. We need to check on the criteria, which is so skewed in terms of the selection of the groups and the women who are supposed to benefit from some of these projects. I rest my case.

4.43
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the statement but also get clarification from her. 

She stated the number of years that have been taken to celebrate Women’s Day and even hinted on NRM. I would like the minister to tell this House the following: One, in the last 10 years, how much money has been spent on women’s celebrations at national level? Two, in this current year, come March, how much money will be spent in Bunyangabu to celebrate International Women’s Day?

Mr Speaker, I have been watching and seeing these celebrations but year in and year out, I have been seeing the same faces celebrating International Women’s Day –(Interjections)– Yes! In other words, it is only women who are above average in terms of empowerment in this country who frequently celebrate at national level.

I expected that every year during these celebrations, we should have new faces from the village level also reflected and getting known in this country. Otherwise, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development and other women will go and celebrate this year and the same people will be there the following years. You will then realise that the message of women empowerment is going to the same people year in and year out.
 
In my view, we should change the approach. We have a social protection programme and I have been listening to our women Members of Parliament clearly agitating that the programme must be fully and well-funded –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Thank you, my dear colleague. The information I would like to give my great friend here is that when you go to the district celebrations, the village women are brought to the venue of the celebrations and at the end of the day, they get stuck because very often they do not have transport –(Interjection)- It has happened in most of the districts. 

Therefore, we are left as Members of Parliament to mobilise for transport to take these women back to the villages in the night. This has happened. We need to break the silence. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable, for that piece of information. My suggestion is that the money that is spent on national celebrations for women empowerment for that category can be redirected to other efforts that empower women instead of spending without necessarily benefiting the common Ugandan.

Mr Speaker, why don’t we say this year, for example, we should celebrate Women’s Day but the money that would go into that day can support five girls from each region to go to school? We can have five women from the north, east, central and western Uganda and then we have 20 women altogether being supported. I think that makes more sense instead of spending money without any reasonable result at end of the day.

Mr Speaker, when we talk about women empowerment –(Interruption)

MS AOL JACQUELINE: Thank you for giving way, hon. Nzoghu. Of course, we represent the people back home and I would like to inform hon. Nzoghu - You are saying we could support maybe five girls from each region and do this and that. However, I thought our faces are very important at the national level. So, this House can then agree that at least all of us attend the national level celebrations first and then we go to our places later. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MR NZOGHU: Mr Speaker, I do not know how costly it would be to do that and whether it would be fair for this country to take that direction.

However, my emphasis is that women are in all sections of our society - in the church, politics, business - therefore, it is prudent for the ministry to see how clearly they can reach out to the common Ugandan woman in whichever sector they are. With that, we can then know that this can broaden and empower the women generally. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

4.51
MS DOROTHY AZAIRE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also want to join my colleagues to thank the honourable minister for the statement made this afternoon about the Women’s Day celebrations that are due to take place in Bunyangabu District in western Uganda. 

I would wish that on such an occasion when we are celebrating the achievements of the women of this country and the world over, it would be paramount for the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to at least spread this information in the media so that we see what we have achieved.

Secondly, since we know that Uganda is the food basket for East Africa and Africa at large, I would wish that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development works in collaboration with other ministries so that we see how we can help the rural women. If possible, we can give them support in the area of production, where we could provide tractors at subcounty level, so that they are helped to produce and benefit from this. 

We are celebrating but as we do this, our women in this country, especially the rural women, still lack support because they use hand hoes for production. On that matter, in the last budget, we budgeted for hoes; I want to ask the Government where they have distributed these hoes to help our rural women increase production so that we see how they can progress.

I would request the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, whenever we are talking about women emancipation, every year let us have women picked from our districts and brought to Parliament for a women’s week. They can then share with us what they have achieved and it is registered and laid on the Table. They should do this, other than having the same women at the celebrations.

Lastly, I wish to say that the Government of Uganda is proud to see that women have taken the lead in East Africa in terms of management of funds. Most of the ministries and departments that are headed by women have made a record in this country. We thank the President for supporting women in these positions and we are behind him. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The time is up but I am going to extend it by about 10 minutes but shorten the time for speeches. You can see the number of Members standing. Can we just share one idea in one minute so that we can cover as much as possible? I will start from Mityana.

4.55
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for her statement. 

As Government and the NRM, we have registered a number of achievements as far as women emancipation is concerned. I would propose that as we celebrate Women’s Day, we also look at a way to increase access to funds that can help women engage in value addition and enable them process their produce in one way or another.

Mr Speaker, we have also had challenges with Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). The women councils are saying that they are the ones responsible but the Community Development Officers (CDOs) are also saying the same. Can the minister help us clarify?

4.46
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development for the statement that she has made in regard to the day. My concern is on linking the theme of the day to the Sustainable Development Goals. Sustainable Development Goal No. 1 up to No. 7 are directly linked to the woman. I would have wished for us to bring this out properly. 

We talked about social protection but only have 61 districts benefiting from this. I would have loved for the ministry to tell us how they are rolling out this programme or are putting in place funding for social protection, since we know that most of the beneficiaries of this social protection or Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE) would be the women. Honourable minister, you need to look into this –(Member timed out.) 

4.56
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. People have thanked the minister for the report and the message that she has presented here. However, I would like to talk about this emancipation that is raising the anxiety of women and at the end of the day, the women get lip service. 

I implore the minister that we should celebrate this day by encouraging women to work and also taking them somewhere to benchmark, other than getting these statements that would wash away the other intention. I think this excitement in relation to women and youth is causing more harm than good; for example, the women fund that is –(Member timed out.) 

4.58
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister, however, some specifics are lacking. Seventeen thousand projects under Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) for over 120 districts would mean 140 projects per district; how many have gone to the women? 

Secondly, by now we should have been talking about a new project. Mr Speaker, remember how we struggled here with UWEP when the President was going to celebrate Women’s Day in Kabale. We said that there must be a women entrepreneurship programme and that came to pass. What we are talking about is what we initiated sometime back. 

What is the new project that you are bringing for women, especially those that have come back from captivity? I thought in your announcement today, you would also say that this Women’s Day, you are going to come up with specific programmes for those women that have returned back from captivity –(Member timed out.) 

5.00
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to say, one, can we have what we can call “the women’s agenda” which we build on from year to year and progress, so that we know that as we develop these themes, they build onto each other? I realise that each year, we develop a theme but it does not relate to the previous themes, which means we just get a theme for the sake of celebrating the day. 

We need to see women progress - change economically, politically and otherwise. Yes, we are saying we are now in politics and doing things, but if you do an assessment from the time we started celebrating Women’s Day, is it worthwhile? Is it what we would expect? 

Mr Speaker, what hurts most is that yes, we enjoy it, but you find that the rural –(Member timed out.)

5.01
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister. I will start by asking what the criterion in selecting a place to host the Women’s Day celebration. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to take my contribution from the international theme, “think equal”. Honourable minister, the international theme talks about thinking equal and being smart. However, when you look at the innovations that you have brought before this Parliament, for example SAGE, they are not equal. Some districts are benefitting and that means there are districts where the women are not benefiting. So, what can you tell us about this being equal? 

Honourable minister, I would like to mention something about the budget for the national celebrations vis-à-vis the budget for the local celebrations, starting from the district level. We, the women Members of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

5.02
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole West County, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. My question to the minister is: You are talking about women but when will you bring a men’s day? I was in Denmark, they started with women and women have superseded. We are looking at that scenario. Therefore, honourable minister, when is the men’s day coming? 

Secondly, which gift are you taking to the people of Bunyangabu apart from merely celebrating Women’s Day? I would like to know when the men’s day is. Thank you.

MR RUKUTANA: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member on the Floor that there is no need to have a men’s day because all the days are men’s days. 

5.03
MR PENTAGON KAMUSIIME (NRM, Butemba County, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In my opinion, as we celebrate this year’s International Women’s Day, we should promise women that we are going to make it easy for them to benefit from this women’s fund. 

I have met women in my constituency; the requirements needed to write proposals, and worst of all in unclear language, is very expensive. By the time they get money – even those who do not get – they still remained angry with the Government. If we could make it easy for them either by allowing them write in a local language or by having the CDOs coming to help them on the ground on specific days, I can assure you that women would have achieved. Thank you very much. 

5.04
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Women Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to thank the minister for the statement and appreciate that the world over, people have realised the role that women play in every economy.

I would also like to appreciate the Government of Uganda for putting in place UWEP. My concern, as we celebrate Women’s Day this year in Uganda, is that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, the Government of Uganda and we, Members of Parliament, should take into consideration the following:

I have been moving in my constituency to every parish - almost 50 per cent of it - and this is –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the time is up. Can I have the honourable minister summarise in two minutes. 

5.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker and honourable colleagues, for the support and also taking note of the challenges that we continue to face, which were also highlighted in the statement. 

I would like to also bring it to the attention of one honourable member who stated that we are giving handouts in form of UWEP that this is a revolving fund. It is not a handout. If he has got that information and passed it on in Kyadondo, it is wrong; please, ensure that you give them the proper information. It is a revolving fund and people will have to pay back, so that others are able to benefit from it. 

The criterion used to pick a host for the national celebrations is on rotational basis, in accordance to the regions of the country. It is the turn for the western region and since we had had it in Kabale before, this time round it is going to Rwenzori and Bunyangabu is part of Rwenzori. It is also one of the districts in Uganda and more so, Rwimi is one of the subcounties in this country. Therefore, there is no reason as to why it should not also hold the celebrations.

Hon. Judith Nabakooba was alluding to the fact that we have little money. I would like to implore this Parliament, since you have also realised the importance of increasing funding for the women - The good thing is that these women pay back. They do not only pay back but the money they get impacts on the livelihood of the community and themselves. We would like to request you to increase funding for us in the next budget so that we can even support the councils in the districts. This would mean that there would be more activities for the councils that have just been elected.

We have offered free education; there was no need for us to add to that. The newest innovative means which we are implementing to ensure that women continue to get more emancipation are the ones I highlighted. However, the list goes on, as you have already noted, and we have been growing from stage to stage.

I would like to thank you for the support and still invite you to come and celebrate with us. Hon. William Nzoghu is on my case - How much are we spending for the national celebrations? It is Shs 250 million only. That is very small cost if you include parades, exhibitions, transport; this is very little. Out of all these national celebrations, the women’s celebration is the one which takes the least and it is highly attended because of the enthusiasm and support with which women take these issues. We are celebrating but we also taking stock of the achievements and challenges, and this is the time we congregate to discuss the new ways with which to handle some of the challenges we face. 

I would like to thank you for all the support and contributions you have made. Please, I pray that all Members - you definitely represent both women and men - hold these celebrations in your districts. Last year, it was only 44 districts that celebrated yet we are –(Member timed out)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.           
 
RESPONSE BY THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) ON THE SKILLING UGANDA PROGRAMME IN DISTRICTS

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This is a statement by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development on the concentration of skilling programmes in the districts of Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono. 

You will recall that at the 6th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of the 3rd Session of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda, held on Tuesday, 22 January 2019, hon. Agnes Taaka Wejuli raised a concern about the concentration of skilling programmes in the districts of Kampala, Wakiso and Mukono. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is implementing the Green Jobs Programme under the docket of labour, and this is aimed at the creation of green jobs in decent working environments to enhance the productivity of labour and reduce poverty. The programme was approved by Cabinet chaired by His Excellency the President on 7 December 2016. The programme targets both educated and uneducated working age population, particularly the women and youth. Some of the components of the programme are: 

(i) 	Support to the informal sector (jua-kalis) businesses through training, accreditation and certification in urban areas; 

(ii) 	Promotion of apprenticeship and volunteerism at workplaces, and establishment of green incubation centres known as the Songhai Model. 

The programme is critical to the socioeconomic transformation of Uganda. Besides tackling unemployment and low labour productivity, the programme will also lead to local production of goods that are hitherto imported. Accordingly, the full implementation of this programme will facilitate import substitution, export promotion and reduction of our trade balance. 

In order to strengthen and expedite demand driven skills development as a key mandate of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, Cabinet under Minute No. 358 (CT 2018), approved the Uganda National Apprenticeship Framework and directed the ministry to urgently design and implement the National Apprenticeship Scheme in key sectors of the economy. This in recognition of the high youth unemployment levels.

In line with the Cabinet directive, my ministry, together with other Government Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) and the private sector, has designed an apprenticeship and graduate volunteer scheme which aims at enhancing youth employability and productivity. 

The future prosperity of Uganda depends ultimately on the number of persons in employment and how productive they are at work. However, Government has concentrated more effort on pedagogy (mainly supply-driven theory) with almost no investments in work-based learning, which is demand driven. 

It should be noted that work-based learning influences both the success of school-to-work transitions for young people and for the upskilling of existing workers. Whereas the United Nations Development Programme and the International Labour Organisation are supporting the Graduate Volunteer and Apprenticeship Schemes respectively, Government is yet to honour its contribution as counterpart funding for the same.

Progress So Far  

The ministry has skilled and supported 87 youth groups in Kampala and Wakiso districts with a total of 92 assorted equipment and tools, as detailed in Appendix 1. It has also assessed the jua-kali needs of 1,744 groups with a total of 34,669 members from all districts in the country, as per the attached Appendix II. The concentration of the skilling of urban youth in line with this implementation plan of the programme is hereby attached. The ministry will cover all the constituencies subject to availability of funds.

You may note, therefore, that Shs 10 billion is required to cover 34,609 Jua-kalis in assessed districts all over the country. The ministry requires Shs 86.6 billion to cover the interventions under the green incubation model, that is, the jua-kali support, the apprenticeship programme, the graduate volunteer and Songhai Model, including supporting the district labour office. I request Parliament to support the ministry to secure the aforementioned funds during this budgeting process.

In addition, with the support from the United Nations Development Programme, the ministry has kick-started the rollout of the Graduate Volunteer Scheme to the entire country. The Graduate Volunteer Scheme will build capacity of national institutions, partners and key stakeholders to mainstream and create decent employment for unemployed graduates from 18 to 35 years old. 

Furthermore, the scheme will put in place a solid policy and legal framework which recognises volunteerism as an avenue for youth and other working age groups of the population as a pathway to enhanced employability. The scheme aims at triggering, through voluntarism, actions for employability and self-employment. The deployment of volunteers is accompanied with a full package of services including coaching, mentorship, learning from enterprise role models, connection to the private sector, financial institutions and potential employers, and facilitation of access to finance, among others, to complement the experience gained at the workplace. The scheme so far has placed 96 unemployed graduates, as detailed in Appendix III. More graduates will be selected. We are now in the process of selection to make sure that by April, more people will be placed in institutions. 

Furthermore, the ministry is in the process of rolling out apprenticeship schemes, starting with the hotel and tourism industry as well as the oil and gas industry. So far, all players in these two industries have committed to start the scheme this year. The plan is to cover school dropouts and leavers in all constituencies. 

You are aware that the ministry is implementing the Songhai Model at Kampiringisa. The Songhai Model is an integrated production system of development that seeks to reduce poverty and food insecurity by strengthening the technical and organisational capacities of communities. The model helps in building the entrepreneurial capacity of local communities to expand green employment for youth, women and people with disabilities. The model promotes a real greening through an ecosystem approach that draws nature's contributions to crop and animal growth, such as soil organic matter and soil micro-organisms, rainfall, pollination, bio-control and integrated pest management, eco services (water shades and landscapes). 

So far, 55 youth have been trained in the model at Kampiringisa and Songhai Model Centre in Benin. In addition, over 40 young people from Kampiringisa National Rehabilitation Centre, who have been in conflict with the law, are undertaking hands-on training in the model. These are former street children.

Mr Speaker, you may also recall that His Excellency the President, on 12 August 2018, successfully launched the Uganda Green Incubation Programme - Songhai Model at Kampiringisa and he directed the rolling out of the model to the entire country. His directive means that we have to continue working together to establish the Songhai Model in some of the constituencies that will act as production hubs as well as training centres for unemployed youth and women.

In conclusion, I wish to inform and request Members of Parliament to note that the skilling programmes under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, that is, the National Apprenticeship Scheme, Graduate Volunteer Scheme, Songhai Model and Jua-kalis Certification, will progressively cover all constituencies. I request for your support in mobilisation of youth who are in urgent need of this intervention. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, this particular matter falls under our rule 46, so please do not stand up. Rule 46 refers to urgent questions and the person who raised the question is entitled to a supplementary question. Can we receive a supplementary question from the Member who asked this question? If the Member is not around, that is the end of it.

STATEMENT BY THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION

5.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION IN PARLIAMENT (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to interest people in reading Psalm 31:24. It is about being strong and courageous when you hope in the Lord. That is how difficult it is for us, the Opposition, to move. However, we are happy that Uganda has a motto that says, “For God and my country”.

I have a statement to make but I feel pain because I have to call out the names of one of my brothers, who also attempted to block us when we were on official duty of Parliament of Uganda.

As provided under rule 52(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, I hereby present a statement on the interference of the Leader of the Opposition's parliamentary oversight visit to northern Uganda.

Mr Speaker, Parliament authorised me to lead a delegation for an oversight visit to northern Uganda to the districts of Gulu, Nwoya, Amuru, Pader and Lamwo. The delegation was interested in issues regarding land, health, education, refugees, works and transport. The delegation, for instance, was establishing the status of land conflicts in Apaa, Aswa Ranch in Pader District and Paracelle in Lamwo District. Sometimes they call that area of land Limu or Padwat.

We formally informed the local leadership and area Members of Parliament about this oversight visit. We carried out the oversight visit from l3 to 17 February 2019 with 12 Members of Parliament. I hereby highlight the key findings that need urgent attention; the details will be included in our field report.

On l4 February 20l9, the delegation proceeded to Apaa Village. To our surprise, police blocked the road and denied us entry to Apaa. The Clerk had notified the local authorities about our field visit. Instead of police facilitating our visit, they opted to frustrate us without clear justification. 

However, during discussions with some leaders such as the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) and Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of Amuru, we discovered that the people in Apaa no longer receive health services as staff of Apaa Health Centre were withdrawn. Supplies for this health centre are stuck in Amuru. This is attributed to the fact that Apaa Health Centre is no longer considered to be in Amuru District, rather the Government has placed it in Adjumani District.

Secondly, the honourable engineer Hillary Onek, the Minister for Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, wrote a letter advising the Clerk to Parliament to discourage our delegation from going to Lamwo, particularly to Paracelle where there were allegations of land conflict.

In October 2018, my office received a petition from the residents of Paracelle Village about unidentified persons seen surveying and building pillars on clan land, claiming that it was being done under instructions of the Ministry of Water and Environment. The petitioners further alleged that they have never been involved or consulted by the ministry. However, my office established that the Ministry of Water and Environment consulted some elected leaders and did not involve clan leaders and the residents.

Mr Speaker, it is disheartening for a Government minister to allege in his letter that the Leader of the Opposition is not competent to undertake an oversight activity into the allegations raised in the petition. We find that the conduct of the honourable engineer Hilary Onek is uncalled for and undermines the office of the Leader of the Opposition.

My prayers are that:

1. 	All state organs should accord the necessary assistance to the office of the Leader of the Opposition to do its work.

2. 	The Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline investigates the actions of hon. Hilary Onek.

3. 	Parliament expedites the constitution of the select committee to address the issues of the people of Apaa.

Mr Speaker, one of our prayers was about Aswa Ranch because the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and Databank (NAGRC&DB) is there illegally and somebody called Barnabas is also there illegally. Aswa Ranch was land given to Uganda Livestock Industry but right now it is NAGRC&DB, which is there. The land is vast but the animals we saw were just being reared the way I, an ordinary person, would rear animals. There is no professionalism in looking after them but they were just emptied and left there. 

We asked the manager about the land title and he said the land title was not with them. Our prayer is that this land should revert back to the owners, that is, Pader District, and another memorandum of understanding be prepared where the local people can also benefit. Right now, people are just using that land for individual benefit. We need a clear memorandum of understanding about how that land or whatever project is on the land can benefit the people of Pader and Acholi.

I am very grateful, however, that Pader did not give us any resistance but instead facilitated our smooth movement to Aswa Ranch and we finished our discussions in a very peaceful atmosphere. This is what we want. Even if Paracelle was very peaceful, what is wrong with us visiting it instead of sending youth who you give waragi in sachets and they become rowdy to disrupt these findings? Our visit was a fact finding visit.

I would like to thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I would also like to thank Parliament. I request that my minister in charge of lands, who was with us, also says something –(Interjection)- Yes, he is my minister. If he were yours, I would say so. I mean the minister in the alternative government. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is one of those in-between procedures. The rules are couched in such a way that this has to relate to a response to the State of the Nation Address, the Budget Framework Paper, the budget itself or alternative policy statement. The only addition was “action upon any matter”. “Action upon any matter” is like explaining what happened. It is like an explanation to an event that happened, which, in the opinion of the Leader of the Opposition, amounted to interference with the action that the Leader of the Opposition and her delegation wanted to undertake in terms of fact finding. 

The House has received that information. The difficulty is that it is not typically a statement from the Leader of the Opposition but more like a statement of personal explanation about what happened. I think you see where I am coming from on this. I will allow that intervention from the shadow minister because he has come under rule 52. Be brief, sir.

5.33
THE SHADOW MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Mr Paul Luttamaguzi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will not take more than two minutes. Mine is to supplement what the Leader of the Opposition said. 

The problem of Government officials sitting in ministries and deciding to deal in land without involving the affected communities is not only limited to Paracelle. In Aswa Ranch in Pader District, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is busy allocating land to individuals without consulting the local communities, to the extent of giving land to people from other regions of the country. The local communities are not involved, Mr Speaker. 

During our visit to Aswa Ranch, we noted that NAGRC&DB, which runs the ranch, does not own the land. The manager of the ranch informed us that in 2014, the Government, through NAGRC&DB, restocked this ranch. As Parliament, we have been appropriating funds to NAGRC&DB which does not have the title to this land. 

Mr Speaker, in conclusion, the issue of Apaa land and the issue of Aswa Ranch should be taken seriously by Government and should be drawn to a logical conclusion before it spreads to other areas of the country. The people of northern Uganda are really suffering. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.

MS AOL: Mr Speaker, this is the letter of hon. Hilary Onek, which followed us to the field. I would like to lay it on the Table as evidence that he really stopped us. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the record capture that. Before the Minister of Lands, Housing and Animal Industry comes, this is what I would say: The Leader of the Opposition said a report will be brought to this House; I think that will deal with the broader issue of what their findings were and we can deal with them then. However, this particular issue is on the interference. The issue raised by the shadow minister is now on the general matters that will come in the report. 

However, the specific issue we are dealing with here is the issue of interference with the operations of the office of the Leader of the Opposition. The specific prayer is calling upon the Government to respect this office in its operations and requesting that hon. Hilary Onek should be investigated by our Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline. The other aspect is about what was discussed about two weeks ago on the situation in Apaa, and I think there was an agreement that a select committee should be instituted and the prayer here is that, that committee should be expeditiously set up so that they commence their work.

Essentially, the prayers deal with administrative issues. On the prayer referring this matter to the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline, the committee will engage in due consultations and the Speaker will make a pronouncement on this in the course of tomorrow’s proceedings. Thank you.

MS AMONGI: You have rightly guided, Mr Speaker, that the detailed report will be debated. 

Regarding Apaa, when the Leader of the Opposition was in the field, the Prime Minister had called a meeting on Apaa and a team of security officers were in the field trying to address the matter. Therefore, I would like to request the Leader of the Opposition to engage the Leader of Government Business and have a meeting on the issue of Apaa. Otherwise, the security team went to the field, brought a report and the Government team will be having a meeting tomorrow on the matter. I wish to re-emphasise that we are taking this matter seriously and a lasting solution is being designed. 

On the issue of the land title, when they bring a report, I will be able to respond. However, I would like to assure my colleagues that the land title of Aswa Ranch exists. It is a freehold title and the matter is with the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and I have appeared before this committee and Apaa remains Government land.
	
Mr Speaker, the procedure of acquiring Government land is different from that of acquiring individual land. Therefore, the procedure of consulting the local people on Government land, which has a freehold title, is different. However, I agree with the Leader of the Opposition that when a project is going on, on such land, consultation and involvement is important. I think the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries will bring a comprehensive report on how Government has resolved the matter with Parliament. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. On the extended matters, there will be communication tomorrow regarding the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, you had said that Government should explain the matter of interference. We can wait for matters relating to the land conflict. I was part of the delegation and we were nearly beaten by policemen.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought that is now a matter for investigation.

MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, the interference was broader; we met two roadblocks and we could not proceed. We are civilised people and so, we did not quarrel with them. 

Imagine a minister of Government saying, “Do not come to my area.” We would require Government to explain whether it is a policy that we must first obtain a permit from ministers and the police to move within the country.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, would you like to comment on the issue of Apaa? The minister said there was another group that was there. Is there any explanation as why it happened the way it did; why the Members were stopped from accessing Apaa?

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, we heard a complaint that had come from the area members of Parliament before the Prime Minister; that there was a conflict in the area between the people of Adjumani and the people residing in Apaa and that there was violence in the area. As such, security was requested to ensure that no one goes there because they wanted to handle the issue of the two communities that were conflicting –(Interjections)– I am explaining the reason the roadblocks were put.

Security was requested by the Prime Minister to investigate the matter. The Prime Minister called a meeting on a Sunday before their trip and constituted a team of security to go to the ground and ascertain the violence that was reported by both the Resident District Commissioners of Amuru and Adjumani and the team on the ground.

 Based on that, the security team was on the ground –(Interruption)– Can I finish my explanation?

MR OKIN OJARA: Mr Speaker, I was part of the delegation that went to Apaa and we were very humble and peaceful. When we approached the first roadblock, we asked the security personnel manning the road block and the information they gave us was that we were not allowed to go to Apaa because Apaa is in a different district called Adjumani. That is what they said.

They received our letter, which stipulated that we were going to Apaa in Amuru District. For that matter, we were not going to cross over to Adjumani that allegedly has Apaa. That was the explanation from the security personnel. Therefore, is the minister in order to state that there was a meeting the other side when actually, on the ground, we were informed that we could not cross from one district to another? That was the purpose for which we were stopped. Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, now you know better. (Laughter)

MS AMONGI: Mr Speaker, if my colleague had waited a bit for me to conclude, the order would not have arisen. I was saying that the reason the roadblock was put was because Apaa is an area under dispute. A border was opened and Apaa was put in Adjumani.

The two communities that are settled there have started tribal based violence. The allegation we heard is that the Acholi and the Madi communities were engaged in violence with spears. The contestation is that there are still a lot of issues that require resolutions. 

Therefore, the security was told that since the border falls in Adjumani, the matter cannot be reported to the Resident District Commissioner of Amuru. Therefore, road blocks were put for the security team to go and analyse the cause and extent of the violence and report to the Government team. Therefore, it would be right if you were told that you were not allowed to enter because you did not seek permission to enter the place because it is in Adjumani. That would be correct information.

Mr Speaker, what I am requesting from my colleagues is that Government has good will to resolve the matter with everyone. Can the Leader of the Opposition reach out to the Prime Minister so that all the issues can be harmonised and we move together? Otherwise, we have already agreed with another political team on how to resolve this matter.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give this very important information to the minister. She said that there is violence between the Madi and Acholi communities in Apaa but that allegation is extremely wrong. We do not have any problem between the Madi and Acholi who are living in Apaa. They have lived there for so many decades. The problem we have in Apaa is with the Government through greedy people who want to grab that land and give it to an investor. The problem we have in Apaa is between the Government using its security personnel; the police, UPDF and the Acholi community who are occupying that land. As a result, they would like to create a situation that appears as if there is war between the local people. The reality on the ground is that those people have no problem.

Government should avoid inciting tribal conflicts between the Madi and Acholi. That is the information I wanted to give you.

MS AOL: The roadblocks did not start on the day we were there; they have been there. There is an already established barracks for the UPDF and police. However, we thought that since we were very peaceful, they would allow us in. For your information, that roadblock has always been there to stop leaders because leaders are not supposed to reach there.
	
They even swore that we would not step beyond the roadblock and we respected them. Otherwise, we were also capable of fighting without guns. We said –(Interjections)– Yes, we fought there when my late husband was still alive. They wanted to spray me with pepper spray. My husband was on one side and hon. Kelly Komakech was on another side. We fought until we entered. Three days ago, we said we were not going to fight these people because they are taking orders from above.

Therefore, you need to know that it was not only because of the Prime Minister’s meeting that, that roadblock was put. The roadblock is there to stop leaders who want to find out the truth on the ground. Thank you.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The procedural matter I would like to raise is that there seems to be bad will on the side of the Executive to communicate. Listening to the Leader of the Opposition, this was an official trip that was cleared by Parliament. This means that Parliament was doing its work. This office is constitutional. 

I have also seen elsewhere commissions that are doing their lawful work for which they were appointed, being blocked by security officers, some of them very junior. I think this issue needs to be addressed because if the Prime Minister, for example, was aware that there was another committee there, what was wrong with communicating directly to the Leader of the Opposition and saying, please, can you halt your trip rather than allowing a senior leader to be humiliated? I watched the RDC and security officers barking at the Leader of the Opposition. I also saw a security officer threatening a Justice of the High Court. 

The procedural matter I am seeking is whether it would be possible to guide the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to have an open channel of communication to avoid this impasse, which makes it appear as if you are not respecting Parliament or you are not according the constitutional offices all the support they require. It would be prudent that they are guided so that once they have certain reservations about these official trips, they communicate rather than humiliating leaders. 

It goes to the same persecution that has been mentioned this morning about lawful activities of political parties when they assemble. The transgression continues even when the Leader of the Opposition is doing work that is meant to enhance peace and security in this country. I thank you.

MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. When I made my remarks, I said that we received information from the RDC, security people and the area Member of Parliament on the matter. I spoke to hon. Lucy Akello for over three hours on that matter and she briefed me on the problem that was on the ground; the violence and all the allegations. I made it very clear that these were allegations. Because of that, the Prime Minister decided that there is need to constitute a security committee to go on the ground and find out these allegations that came from both the area Member of Parliament and the people who were giving us the information, including a petition from a civil society organisation, which makes allegations about a tribal conflict. 

We went on the ground to verify these allegations and the report is coming before the team headed by the Prime Minister tomorrow. 

I still would like to emphasise that the Leader of the Opposition needs to reach out to the Prime Minister so that we – I do not think if you had reached out to the minister or the Prime Minister, you would have been blocked. You requested to go to Amuru but then you were going to Adjumani instead. That is the major contest in that area; the issue of Amuru versus Adjumani. 

Even in the report we have, there are civil society organisations that want to help the people in that area but they were going to Amuru District instead. The RDC asked what they should do. Of course, under the local government structure, that is under Adjumani. We then guided the civil society organisations that if they wanted to help the area, they should go through Adjumani. 

Therefore, I think the biggest problem is that you went with the idea that you were going to Amuru and not to Adjumani. If we are to –(Interjections)– You need to notify the leadership so that they prepare for you. The Leader of the Opposition is a very important office. The Resident District Commissioner and everybody have to wait for the Leader of the Opposition and receive her. If you do not notify the administration of Adjumani District and you go to an area when they are not ready for you –(Interruption)
	
MR SSEMUJJU: Mr Speaker, hon. Betty Amongi lives in Kira. We do not issue her with a permit everyday she goes there. Under which law do I need to obtain a permit to travel to Adjumani? Is the minister, therefore, in order to say, contrary to the Constitution of Uganda, that there are certain areas and districts in Uganda today where if you do not seek for a travel permit from the local authority, you will not access those particular areas?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, I think the point is simpler than that. This is what the minister said, “The Leader of the Opposition opted to communicate officially about her trip.” In her communication, she said she was going to Amuru and nstead, she decided to go to Adjumani. I am repeating what the minister said.   

I am just trying to understand because it has just come to me as it has come to you. Therefore, the question you would like to ask is, would she have written another letter to Adjumani to be able to go through because they opted to use the road that passes through Amuru to go to that place? Would that -
 
MS AMONGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is good that you stated that she wrote that she was going to Amuru. Writing does not mean that you are seeking permission. It means that you are notifying. A Leader of the Opposition, a minister or a Member of Parliament cannot just wake up and go for a very important matter like that. When you reach there, you do not have the LC I, LC III, the District Police Commander or the Resident District Commissioner to receive you. 

However, the final issue is, let us engage and resolve this matter together in an amicable way that will benefit everybody. We have all the good faith to resolve the Apaa matter and any other matter. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we get opportunities of this nature, it helps to state what actually happened. I remember I got a phone call about a situation in a place called Acholi Ber where they had torched people’s houses, they had dug out graves and exhumed bodies and I am the one who called the Chief of Defence Forces (CDF) and they flew there to find out what was happening.

Therefore, if we come here and say there is no conflict, we would be contradicting what is happening on the ground, which may not be fair for our causes. Bodies were exhumed and houses were burnt. How can we then say there is no problem? We would like to find a solution and only the truth will set the situation and all of us free. There was a problem in Acholi Ber and I am the one who called the CDF. Let us not try to make things look better than they are; let us deal with the problem as it is. 

Personally, I will also be finding ways of accessing those places with or without permission. I will be going to those places to see what is going on. For the notice of the House, I will be going to Apaa tomorrow to find out what is happening. I have not written to anybody, I have called the people who should know that I am going there and I will go to Apaa to see what is happening. I will do that tomorrow.

LAYING OF PAPERS

SPECIAL AUDIT REPORT ON THE SHS 478BN INJECTED INTO CRANE BANK LIMITED BY BANK OF UGANDA

5.59
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Mr Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table a report of the special audit report on the Shs 478 billion injected into Crane Bank limited by Bank of Uganda. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. It stands referred to the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE) to look at and advise the House on how to proceed with this matter. Thank you. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs - Honourable members, in the circumstances and looking at the time, we cannot start any substantive business in form of a Bill. Therefore, we will skip all the Bills and come to that amended part of the Order Paper to accommodate other urgent matters. 

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE LAND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”

6.01
MR SIMEO NSUBUGA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Kassanda): Mr Speaker, thank you for this opportunity. I beg to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Land Amendment Bill, 2019” moved under Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and rules 120 and 121 of our Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.

“WHEREAS Article 79 of the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws on any matter for the peace, order, development and good governance of the country;

AND WHEREAS Article 94 of the Constitution and rule 120 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognise the right of a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE THAT the Land Act, Cap. 227 was enacted in 1998 to provide for the tenure, ownership and management of land; to amend and consolidate the law relating to tenure, ownership and management of land and to provide for other matters related thereto;

FURTHER AWARE THAT in 2010, Parliament amended the Land Act to enhance the security of occupancy of lawful and bona fide occupants on registered land in accordance with Article 237 of the Constitution;

NOTING THAT tenants by occupancy enjoy security of tenure and this 1egal guarantee of continued occupancy rights for the tenants by the Land Act is aimed at enhancing productivity and sustainable livelihoods and to reduce recurring instances of massive evictions in the country;

FURTHER NOTING that registered owners of land are estimated at 600,000 while tenants and customary owners are estimated to be over 20 million Ugandans and these include tenants who have occupied that land for all their lives and have never known nor had any alternative source of livelihood for the last 35 years;

CONCERNED THAT massive evictions of people from land is not a foreign occurrence in Uganda and many evictions have been carried out including but not limited to the most recent Lusanja eviction on the Mpererwe-Kiteezi Road in Kampala, which left more than 300 families homeless;

FURTHER CONCERNED that most landlords are jeopardising the right of tenants through the deliberate refusal to accept ground rent or by evading the tenant to the extent that it becomes impossible for the tenant to pay the landlord. This situation exposes the tenants to evictions, which may lead into a national catastrophe if not curtailed in its infancy;

RECOGNISING the importance of securing the rights of tenants further by providing an avenue for the tenants to deposit ground rent with a court of competent jurisdiction;

NOW THEREFORE be it resolved that:

This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member’s Bill for an Act entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Act” a draft of which is hereto attached and do order for the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its First Reading.”

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by the members of Parliament for Mityana North and Gomba East. There are two secondments. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The object of the Bill is to amend the Land Act, Cap. 227 to provide that a tenant shall deposit ground rent with a Magistrate Grade I or Magistrate Grade II Court where a landlord refuses to accept any sum in payment of ground rent or where it becomes impossible for the tenant to find the landlord and make a payment.

Mr Speaker, there are defects in the existing law. The Land Act Cap. 227 was enacted in 1998 to provide for the tenure, ownership and management of land; to amend and consolidate the law relating to tenure, ownership and management of land; and to provide for other related matters.

In 2010, the Land Act was amended to enhance the security of occupancy of lawful and bona fide occupants on registered land in accordance with Article 237 of the Constitution. 

The relevant section is hereby reproduced: 
 
“32A. Lawful or bona fide occupants to be evicted only for non-payment of ground rent. 

(1) 	A lawful or bona fide occupant shall not be evicted from registered land except upon an order of eviction issued by court and only for non-payment of the annual nominal ground rent.
(2) A court shall, before making an order of eviction under this section, take into consideration the matters specified in section 32(1).
(3) 	When making an order for eviction, the court shall state in the order, the date, being not less than six months after the date of the order, by which the person to be evicted shall vacate the land and shall grant any other order as to expenses, damages, compensation or any other matter as the court may think fit. 
(4) 	For purposes of this section, the word "court" shall mean a court presided over by a Magistrate Grade II or a Magistrate Grade I as the case may be and reference to the Land Tribunal in this Act and amendments thereto shall be interpreted accordingly.”

As a consequence of the above provision, landlords of tenants by occupancy, having realised that non-payment of ground rent is the only way in which they can evict the tenants by occupancy, have deliberately refused to accept ground rent or made it impossible for tenants by occupancy to effect payment of ground rent on them. This has led to the accumulation of unpaid ground rent, which is a status quo that threatens the right of occupancy of tenants on registered land.

Under section 29 of the Land Act Cap. 227, tenants by occupancy include persons occupying land by virtue of the repealed Busuulu and Envujjo Law of 1928, Toro Landlord and Tenant Law of 1937 and Ankole Landlord and Tenant Law of 1937; and persons who before the coming into force of the 1995 Constitution had occupied and utilised or developed any land unchallenged by the registered owner or agent of the registered owner for 12 years or more; or had been settled on land by the Government or an agent of the Government, which may include a local authority.

Mr Speaker, lawful and bona fide occupants enjoy security of tenure. This lega1 guarantee of continued occupancy rights for the tenants by the Land Act is aimed at enhancing productivity and sustainable livelihoods and to reduce recurring instances of massive evictions in the country. Jeopardising their enjoyment of the right of occupancy on land, some of whom have occupied for more than 30 years may result into national catastrophe.

Remedies

The Bill, therefore, seeks to amend the Land Act, Cap. 227 to require a tenant to deposit ground rent with a Magistrate Grade I or Magistrate Grade II Court where a landlord refuses to accept any sum in payment of ground rent or where it becomes impossible for the tenant to find the landlord and make a payment. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion is clear. It has been stated and justified. Are we going to have a secondment so that the motion is properly before the House before we take any action? Can I have a seconder of the motion briefly stating the reason for seconding the motion?

6.13
MR HENRY MAKUMBI (NRM, Mityana County South, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am the first seconder of the motion. We know very well that in areas where we have mailo land, most of our people have been evicted and courts have made orders basing on the issue of non-payment of Busuulu by the tenants.

Of recent, what has happened in Lusanja and other areas in Mityana and Luweero have the same background that tenants fail to pay ground rent to the landlords.

In that Act, there was a gap that there was no clear provision in case a tenant wishes to pay Busuulu to the landlord and the landlord deliberately refuses to accept the payment. In most cases, they decide to hide so that these tenants are caught up by time and so become answerable before the courts of law. The Act stipulates that tenants are obliged to pay their landlords Busuulu and in case they fail to pay, they are supposed to be evicted from their land.

Mr Speaker, I support this motion that there be a provision inserted in this Act that in case a landlord fails to accept Busuulu from a tenant, the tenant has the freedom to take his money to the court and the courts receipts the money. As a result, landlords will not have room to evict people like it is happening today.

This country is divided between the rich and the poor and that is a natural law. Most of us are in Parliament because of the masses who are the poor. We are here to legislate to make sure that the poor are protected. We are here talking about other issues when the poor are being evicted. I would request the honourable members to support this motion unanimously because we have had enough.

Most of us own land but there is no reason you should go and pay for land when you know that this land is occupied by the poor people and yet, there is land where there are no people. Why would you dare to go and buy land where the poor have been for over 30 years and hide behind the law because you know that these people will bring the Busuulu and you will exploit the gap in the law to evict them?

Mr Speaker, this motion has been initiated in good faith to protect the interests of our common man. Therefore, I urge all Members to rally behind this motion so that we save the common man. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now propose for your debate is that hon. Simeo Nsubuga, MP Kassanda South, be granted leave of this House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “The Land (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” That is the motion for your debate and debate starts now. 

6.18
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to first sympathise with the principle that the Member wants to address. The principle is that there are tenants on registered land and the Land Act stipulates that when you do not pay the annual nominal ground rent, this is a ground for eviction.

In addition, that many landlords either cannot be traced or are not available to receive the rent or intentionally hide. In the circumstances, the Member would like to bring an amendment to determine where you can pay when you are not able to access the landlord.

The principle is not opposed by Government. What we are opposed to is that you do not need an amendment to The Land Act to address this matter. Mr Speaker, Section 93 of The Land Act deals with regulations. It says, “The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, with the approval of Parliament, make regulations generally for better carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.”

The Member clearly, in his motion, stipulates that The Land Act has comprehensively addressed and protected tenants from being evicted. Therefore, under operationalising Section 93, the ministry issued what we call the Annual Nominal Ground Rent, which stipulates how much a tenant is supposed to pay to the landlord.

Therefore, what we can do under Section 93, which is subjected to the approval of Parliament, is to bring an amendment to the Annual Nominal Ground Rent Statutory Instrument. On top of the amount declared in that Statutory Instrument, which a tenant is supposed to pay, we can include circumstances enumerated by the Member where if a tenant has failed to access the landlord to pay that amount, the tenant can then opt to pay it elsewhere.

When he talks about the Magistrate’s Court, very many tenants are also disputing this. We have engaged the Association of bibanja holders on this matter and the members of this association are saying, if they are to give an alternative place for payment of this Nominal Ground Rent, it should be a place nearer to them like a sub-county chief office, which is receipted by Government and banked and receipts given to the tenants.
Therefore, where he is also bringing the issue of the Magistrate’s Court, the tenants are arguing that it is very far from them. Therefore, we need to thoroughly discuss the principle of a convenient place where they can pay.

Therefore, I would like to ask the Member to work with us and the House gives us a timeframe within which we can come back to the House with an amended Statutory Instrument. 

Beyond this matter, we are even putting guidelines on evictions. The law says that if a magistrate or judicial officer is making a court order for eviction, they should state this six months before eviction. Unfortunately, the court and most people have been abusing this. These days, you find that somebody has given an order and the next day, they are evicted. Therefore, we are also bringing guidelines for eviction and laying them here.

In respect to what the Member is alluding to, within the tenancy relationship, there are also other intricate matters. For example, you can have a tenant and then somebody renting the land who also wants to pay. The discussion that has been going on between Government and other agencies is, if we are bringing a law to deal with rent, it should not only be depositing rent in respect to busuulu because we also have ordinary rentals where you are renting a residential house and somebody wants to evict you because you cannot pay.

Therefore, it will be broader. I would like to appeal to the Member to work with us so that we move under Section 93 and amend the Statutory Instrument. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member and mover of this motion, what is your assessment of this intervention by the minister?

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As you guided me when I was starting this motion, I gave a copy to the minister this morning and we have had some discussions. However, there are some points of departure. For example, when she says that the nominal ground rent should be paid to the sub-county, we discussed that issue but at the moment, you might not have someone at the sub-county to receive this money. We found that the appropriate place for this money to be received is at the Magistrate’s Court and the Grade II Magistrate’s Court sits at the sub-county. 

I do not have any problem; we can harmonise with the minister, provided you give us a timeframe. The seconder of the motion has just mentioned that this is a serious matter, especially in our constituencies because people are being evicted. 

Honourable colleagues, you have to appreciate our concern, especially some of us who represent constituencies where there is mailo land. It is a very big problem; the owner might wake up one day and say, “please get off my land.” 

Another point that I would like to clearly explain to the minister is that she was trying to mix up two issues. There is what we call contractual rent and I am aware that there is a Bill before this House, the Landlord and Tenant Bill, 2018. This Bill is entirely on the contractual tenants in Kampala and other places and has nothing to do with the ground rent or the tenants that I am talking about in our respective areas. 

Mr Speaker, in summary, as long as you give us a timeframe, I do not have any problem. We shall sit down with the technical people in the ministry and the minister and come up with a common position on this matter. Thank you. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since I joined this Parliament, you have been guiding us very well and whenever you are here, Mr Speaker, I can tell you that members feel very well guided. 

There are certain practices here that we have adopted as a Parliament. One, when a Member is to move a motion, make a statement or present a report, the members must be furnished with copies of those statements, motions or reports. For this one, I have checked my iPad but the motion the honourable member has moved is not there. 

Secondly, this Parliament appropriated money to the Land Inquiry Commission and it is still doing its work. Even when this Commission ran out of money, they came back to this Parliament and this Parliament gave them more money to do work, which His Excellency, the President of Uganda, commissioned.

Thirdly, hon. Nsubuga was in this Parliament when there was an attempt to bring Article 26 of the Constitution for amendment. This Parliament, in its wisdom, persuaded Government to withdraw that Bill and it was withdrawn. In my interpretation, I have not understood the issues that hon. Nsubuga has attempted to explain to this House because he has been crisscrossing them. 

Mr Speaker, in line with my submission and that of the honourable Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development who represents Government that she is not comfortable with the amendment that hon. Nsubuga wants to pursue on this Floor, there is going to be a challenge with the Certificate of Financial Implications. 

Owing to those considerations, I am seeking your indulgence, Mr Speaker, whether hon. Nsubuga is moving procedurally well in light of those contradictions. If he is not moving well –(Interjections)– I am not ruling but I am seeking the indulgence of the Speaker.

Mr Speaker, this Parliament must use its time appropriately and effectively. I would like to seek your indulgence and guidance as to whether we are proceeding well regarding hon. Nsubuga’s motion and whether this Parliament can continue to debate it amidst those contradictions. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I need to rule on this, unless you want to assist me with the ruling. I have seen honourable members rising; so, maybe they want to volunteer to assist me. 

The honourable member has raised a procedural matter and a series of points to elaborate the procedural point that he is raising. Let me start with the last one. He says that the minister is not comfortable but I did not hear that. The minister said she is comfortable with the principles being articulated but what she advises is that she has authority, under Section 94 of the Act, to cause amendments to the rules, which rules would be approved by Parliament, to capture the spirit of what is being proposed by the Member. 

In other words, she is in agreement; she is not uncomfortable at all and that is what she stated. She said that she agrees with the principle but there is another way of implementing what the Member desires to bring.

Secondly, the amendment to Article 26 that was withdrawn is completely different from this one. The amendment that was proposed to the Constitution was in relation to Government projects, roads and other infrastructural projects that have to access land but owners of the land are reluctant or refuse to accept compensation from Government. That law was seeking that when that compensation is assessed, Government should be authorised to deposit in court and proceed with the work. That was the proposal in the Bill, which was eventually withdrawn on the advice of Parliament. 

On the issue of the presence of the land probe, I am not so sure whether you are suggesting that each time there is a probe, Parliament should stay put and not do any activity in that area until that probe is done. 

I do not know what precedent we would be setting for this House if we said that Parliament should not do anything in relation to land because there is a land probe; let us wait for what they are going to advise. I do not think that would be a good way to proceed for a legislative institution of this nature. This Parliament cannot wait in anticipation. Suppose they finish their report and there is no recommendation or proposal for changing the law? We would have waited in vain and the people identified by the Members would have continued suffering. 

Therefore, in my assessment, I do not believe that, that would be a correct reason to stay a proposal of this nature; that due to a land probe, any proposals related to land should not be brought forward. I do not think that would be a good way for this House to proceed. This House has its independence under Articles of the Constitution. If it is within its powers to do, it is authorised to do. Maybe, what it will do will now render the job of the probe redundant in which case they will have to wind up and go home. Therefore, I do not believe that we should incite the land probe to stop Parliament from doing its normal work.

On the issue of copies that should have been circulated, I asked this question in the morning before I altered the Order Paper; whether copies had been submitted to the Clerk’s office and there was confirmation from the Clerk’s office that they had received a copy of this motion and it should have been uploaded. That was the comfort that I had in amending the Order Paper to allow this motion to be brought.

Are we proceeding properly? Yes, we are, with the exception of the agreement by the honourable member who has proposed this motion in relation to what the minister has said, that this amendment can be accommodated in the statutory instrument, which statutory instrument will still have to be approved by Parliament. 

In other words, this principle will still be handled by Parliament anyway. If the Member is now comfortable with that, I will, therefore, say that we stay the motion and let it be in abeyance, waiting to strike should the minister be reluctant to deal with the issues of concern of members of the community that are grossly affected by what the Member has articulated. 

We will not debate the request by the honourable member that he may be granted leave; we will stay it. Since you are just amending the regulations but of course, they have to go through the processes; through Cabinet, First Parliamentary Counsel and come back. We will give you one month. (Laughter)

If you are not able to do it in one month – Okay, let us give you the time we give to members of Parliament, which is normally 45 days. If you are not able to come back, then we will see how to activate the processes to grant the Member leave in whatever way because it is a substantial matter and the decision will still be taken by Parliament anyway.

Honourable members, in view of the time and lack of business - Oh, there is one but the members are not here anyway. In view of the time and lack of any business that can be handled at this time, this House stands adjourned to tomorrow at 2 o’clock. Thank you very much. 

(The House rose at 6.37 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 21 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
