


Wednesday, 24 February 2021

Parliament met at 3.13 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting and I apologise for the late start. A number of chairpersons have been coming to consult on how to complete their work during the remaining time but I am sure that we shall catch up. 

There are few matters of national concern. Let us start with hon. Noeline Kisembo taking up two minutes. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of procedure. On 13 February, 2021, H.E. the President addressed the nation on the missing Ugandans. Indeed, he said that he does not want to listen to the word “disappearing” or “disappearance of Ugandans.” He also said that all the missing Ugandans are in the hands of security agencies. 

Madam Speaker, His Excellency, assured Ugandans that the list of all missing Ugandans is going to be released. It is now two weeks since the President addressed the nation but up to now, we have not seen any list being released by the ministries of Internal Affairs and Defence, yet the President owned to the fact that all missing Ugandans are in the hands of security agencies. 

My procedural issue is, could you, Madam Speaker, intervene and ask the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to present the list from His Excellency the President of all missing Ugandans so that all Ugandans and their relatives know where they are? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the matter does not exactly qualify to be a matter of procedure but I think it is a matter of violation of human rights. Therefore, I will ask the Government – but the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs is here. 

3.17
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, to the best of my knowledge, all the security agencies have complied with the directive of the President by handing over the list of all the people that were arrested to the Uganda Police Force. 

The Minister of Internal Affairs is in a better position to come and address the House and release this list to the country. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, what the minister is saying is not true because when the President instructed the security agencies to release all the names – we have not seen any names being released by any of these security agencies! Up to now, many Ugandans are still searching for their missing relatives who are nowhere to be seen.

THE SPEAKER: I do not think I heard what the President said. Did he say each of them should release the names? Who is the central person supposed to compile and release those names?  

3.19
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Madam Speaker, since the minister is here and he has said that they delivered this to police, there is nothing he loses by giving us these details here; his list from the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. This is because it is now a public document so let him give us his list and it comes before us. 

I know hon. Adolf is a genuine person. Just give us your list and we move with that one. However, in the public domain, nothing is known. 

THE SPEAKER: If we have several lists from several ministers, this will mean three or four different debates on the same issues. Why can’t we have the Government undertake to bring the list tomorrow? If it is there, bring it to us tomorrow.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, these people arrest them separately. I think their cause of action might be different. Do not think that people kept in the UPDF face the same comfort and beating like those in police. They do not have the same – when you talk about Nubian Lee, Eddie Mutwe they are with the UPDF and are still with you, so the list is different. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I would like to urge the Prime Minister to facilitate the production of this list. You can say these 100 are under the UPDF or with the police but let us have one list so that we can look at the issue. I want the list tomorrow, Prime Minister. 

3.20
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Your instruction will be carried but we shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs, who is in charge of security dealings in the country related to civil societies, to bring the report here. If they are incomplete, then, that is another issue. 

We shall ask the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring whatever he has tomorrow but members should not direct the different ministries to bring their lists. That is not the way to run the Government. We are not going to be run by members of Parliament –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am raising a point of order to the Prime Minister. When these people are being arrested, you do not seek directives from Parliament. What is read on the wall, which is factual, is that the Army arrests people; the police are also arresting people.  

Therefore, we came in to seek for the list of these people and the minister, seated next to the Prime Minister, has accepted that they delivered their list to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 

Is the Rt Hon. Prime Minister in order to intimidate us in front of you, Madam Speaker? Is he in order to say that we cannot demand for lists from the UPDF or any other security institution, when we raise matters of violation of people’s rights? Is he in order, Madam Speaker - because of his size - yet he knows that he was in Saudi Arabia with Amin taking relief to Saudi Arabia and Dubai at the time when the country was very poor? Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Leave those Dubai and Saudi Arabia issues. (Laughter) The Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to come here tomorrow and present a full list of all those in custody, whether under the UPDF or Police. This is a question of violation of human rights, it takes priority over other business and, therefore, we want the list tomorrow.

3.23
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national concern about the failure to complete the construction of Nyamarwa Seed School in Nyamarwa sub-county, Kibaale District.

Quick Construction Company Uganda Limited was offered a contract to construct a seed school in Nyamarwa sub-county in the Financial Year 2018/2019. The completion date was supposed to be May, 2020. The contractor asked for an extension of six months, which was granted by the district leadership, but by December 2020, when the extension expired, nothing had been completed.

The school has stalled at plaster level. The centre (Ministry of Education and Sports) guided the procurement of these contractors and they were clustered. In this particular case, the cluster has five districts and it looks like the contractor does not have the capacity to complete the school anymore.

The district leadership called the contractor but he does not respond. He has not requested for any extension and the school has stalled.

At the moment, guided by the Ministry of Education and Sports, the district is in the process of procuring ICT equipment for the school but it cannot receive them without completion. 

Madam Speaker, I have two prayers: that since the Ministry of Education and Sports guided in the procurement of the contractor, they should guide the district leadership on how this school will be completed.

Secondly, I request that the Ministry of Education and Sports brings a statement to this House, giving an update on the status of these seed schools’ construction and completion since this programme was countrywide so that we know. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, sometime back during the last session, we had issues about the seed schools in Uganda and the ministry came and gave us a report, which appeared as if a number of schools were about to be completed. Apparently, there are still problems. We require the Minister of Education and Sports to come and update us on the issue of Nyamarwa Seed Secondary School and the others, especially now that the children will be going back in March and April. Let us have a response on that on Wednesday next week.

3.26
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. This concerns non-compensation of victims of Lord’s Resistance Army war that ravaged Northern Uganda for a long period.

The people in Madi sub-region who became victims of this war have not been compensated. This has become a big problem because we have seen other regions being compensated.

I pray that Government gives us feedback about the promise over this compensation, and we need to know when exactly this promise is going to be implemented. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, the Leader of Government Business is here, please can you arrange to give us a response on the issue of compensation for the Madi sub-region. Can you give us a response next week, Rt Hon. Prime Minister?

3.28
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I will get information but I will not promise because what I must bring here must tally with that of the Government. Therefore, I cannot promise that I will bring here what is requested. If I get, I will bring and if I do not get, I will come and tell you.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I think what the people of Madi sub-region want to know is whether they will be compensated. That is the answer they want. Not how much but the principle of compensation. Will they also be compensated?

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: I have not said no, but I have also said that I am not aware of everything. I will bring whatever I get.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, we shall wait for what you will bring.

3.30
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I thought the Chairperson of the Budget Committee could have been of great help on matters of compensation. The honourable member from Madi was speaking even for the Members of Parliament from Bukedi sub-region. We are witnessing selective compensation or picking of interest. What we saw in the budget was about Shs 200 billion. The verification is ongoing and the parent ministry is Ministry of Justice where this Parliament, through the Legal Committee, also oversees. 

We know that before the election period, trips were made Northern Uganda and Teso sub-region but now we only hear rumours. I think the Prime Minister may not afford himself the luxury to say that he will bring if he gets.

The matter of compensation is a matter that touches many individuals. We need to know the way forward on compensation. Teso and Northern Uganda are being settled. We have people in Bukedi and even some parts of Busoga - Lakwena stopped in Magamaga. Therefore, we need all this to be brought up and settled once and for all, Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, let us put the record right. Teso has not been considered up to now - we have not been compensated. I am one of the people who lost cows and I have not got even a calf. When did they consider giving us?

Therefore, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you cannot say you do not know what you do not know or that you will bring what you have. I beg that Government really considers handling this as a policy matter that the whole country needs to be compensated at ago, not this discriminative and selective kind of handling things. Teso is waiting for the cows.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want you to remember that sometime during this session, there was a report here concerning some - I do not remember what the report was, but it involved compensation I think to Acholi, Teso, and this House said the Minister of Justice should go and verify and ensure that the money is processed. Therefore, if that is what is going on, it was our directive. We are the ones who told them to verify but that does not mean they should not pay the Jopadhola and the Basoga. 

3.33
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We must all know that that is capital compensation. It is just capital and it is also not for all. The Acholi are complaining. A lot of us were properly put down, not only because of this cattle compensation but also other compensations. Those who lost their limbs or their lips also need to be compensated. Even those who lost their people. 

This compensation must be comprehensive. It should not be cattle only. The Leader of Government Business must do quality work and should stop saying that he brings only what he knows. He must go and dig out the information and bring it to us here so that we are able to debate on it. 

3.34
MR EDWARD SSEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I am rising on a matter of national importance regarding the current state of Matugga-Semuto-Kapeeka Road. The road is located within three districts of Wakiso, Luweero and Nakaseke. 

As we speak now, it is covered all over with potholes which are always filled with soil, with the assistance of young boys from the community. The road has now changed from tarmac to a murram road with road accidents happening daily. 

This is the same road leading to Kapeeka Industrial Park. Heavy loaded vehicles from neighbouring countries are always using this same road for purposes of transporting their commodities. 

It is truly shameful to all of us to see members of the foreign community travelling on such a muddy and dusty road in our country. 

My prayer is that the Ministry of Works and Transport should consider taking immediate action to see how this road can be upgraded to a better tarmac status.

On a similar note, I wish to remind the same ministry that Bombo-Ndejje-Karasa Road is one of the 25 roads Government planned to upgrade to tarmac status in 2019 after the presidential pledge in 2006 but nothing has been done up to today. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Fortunately, I see the minister of state for works here. I wonder whether she has something to say about the Matugga-Ssemuto-Kapeeka Road. 

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): I am going to report these roads and we see what we can do, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we shall give you a fortnight to investigate the Kapeeka-Ssemuto Road and the other one of Ndejje-Karasa and come back to us with a response on what you are going to do. 

3.37
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

On 04 February 2021 at Te-Obia, Omuge Parish, Bala Sub-County, Kole District, unknown policemen and army personnel went to the burial ground of a one Okello Cerino in a vehicle UAU 252S, Super Custom and sprayed bullets onto the people who were at the burial ground. They arrested Onyinge Christopher. 

As we speak now, Onyinge Christopher is in police cells in Kole District. He is being beaten day and night. They just bring him out to be beaten. 

I do not know the current law which the policemen and the army personnel are using in Kole. If we calculate the detention hours which are mandated by law, he has spent over 480 hours now and this law is not in Uganda. Instead of 48 hours, it is now 480 hours for Onyinge in cells (Laughter). He is being tortured daily. This tantamount to total abuse of human rights and the law of Uganda. 

My prayer is to request the minister in charge to give Onyinge justice like any other Ugandan. They should also stop beating Onyinge.

Finally, let these people also tell us the law they are using because the law they are using in Kole does not apply in Uganda. Where do they report?

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Fortunately, I see hon. Obiga Kania who is in charge of police stations. Can you please take an interest in this issue and find out why Christopher Onyinge has been placed in custody beyond the 48 hours, and the fact that he is also being tortured. When can you come back to us, honourable minister?

3.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Madam Speaker, since the election, this is my first time to speak here. May I take this opportunity to congratulate you and colleagues for having successfully gone through the elections. 

Having said that, the matter my honourable colleague has described is serious. I am definitely going to take interest. I will get in touch with him immediately after here and get those other details. I will then get in touch with the police station. I will give a report, if possible, by tomorrow and if not, by Tuesday. 

We shall also take action to make sure that that man is not tortured, for whatever reason. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So, we expect the report as quickly as possible. 

3.41
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter concerning high transport costs across the country. 

Aware that semi-candidates are reporting to schools beginning Friday this week, the bus owners and taxi owners – some time back, His Excellency the President gave the directive that they should carry half the capacity because of COVID-19. 

As we speak now, buses and taxis load passengers to full capacity yet transport costs remain the same. A case in point is: the fare for a journey from Gulu to Kampala, passengers used to pay Shs 20,000 before Covid-19. During the pandemic it was raised to Shs 45,000. When they were carrying half the capacity and right now, they are carrying full capacity, the amount remains the same.

The fare for a journey from Kitgum to Kampala used to be Shs 30,000 but right now it is at Shs 70,000. The one for a trip from Hoima to Kampala used to be at Shs 13,000. Now it is Shs 25,000. From Mbarara to Kampala used to be Shs 15,000 and now it is Shs 35,000. From Arua to Kampala used to be at Shs 35,000. Now it is Shs 75,000.

The business community and parents are complaining a lot. While fuel prices have remained the same, transport fares are extremely high.

I pray that the minister in charge of transport intervenes to ensure owners of public transport consider reducing transport fares to the normal ones. Small businesses from upcountry have gone down. The minister should take it seriously, now that in two days to come learners will be returning to schools whereupon the burden of such high transport fares might be levied on the parents. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, hon. Hillary Lokwang last Wednesday raised a similar issue and hon. Moriku undertook to liaise with the Ministry of Internal Affairs to ensure that social distancing in the transport system is adhered to. I do not know who is going to address the issue of the fares. Who is going to deal with the issue of fares? 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (Transport) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): We held a meeting with the taxi owners and taxi drivers and agreed that they observe the Ministry of Health Standard Operating Procedures on Covid-19. Most of them told us that no passenger would allow somebody to squeeze them.

They told us that any extra passengers that enter their transport vehicles are chased away and that they observe the SOPs. Police commanders also attended this meeting.  So, we hope that they arrest them because we agreed with them to observe the SOPs.

Even when our children are coming back to school, we agreed SOPs have to be adhered to, to avoid Covid-19. So, I do not know why buses are carrying more than what we asked them to do.

3.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week this issue was brought on the Floor of Parliament and I recall very well that I pledged to work together with the Minister of Internal Affairs, on how to regulate the number of people carried in those buses and taxis.

We all know that because of Covid-19, taxis and buses are allowed to carry only half capacity of passengers basically for the safety of the people.

We tried to call upon regulators to reinforce this directive. When taxis and buses were allowed to carry half capacity, they instead raised the transport fares.

It is important for us to note that instead of carrying passengers at half capacity, as per the instructions issued, they are now transporting at full capacity, which is not allowed. In line with Covid-19 SOPs, we still encourage the transporters to follow the guidelines that have been issued.

The situation of Covid-19 is coming down but we should not get excited, until 60 per cent of our people are vaccinated. Half capacity for taxis and all other public transport vehicles is still the mode of operation as of today, until such a time when they are given ago ahead to carry full capacity.

Once again, I pledge, together with the Minister of Internal Affairs, to regulate and reinforce these guidelines as per the directives. Thank you.

3.48
MR ABOTT OUMA (NRM,	Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, when my colleague was raising this point I was listening carefully. I noticed that the major concern was the hiking fares. He gave a very clear picture of where transport fares used to be Shs 35,000 but now is at Shs 70,000; where it was raised from Shs 15,000 to Shs 40,000 and I expected the ministers to respond to that. 

At the time they negotiated with these people to ensure SOPs are respected, did they put in mind the fares that are now being hiked day and night?

His concern was: now that learners are going back to school the parents will not manage these high transport fares. The minister should clearly tell us whether it is a laissez-faire situation that everybody can hike transport fares the way they want or are they going to help parents? That is what I expected the minister to tell the House. Thank you.

3.50
Ms ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. As the previous member said, hon. Gilbert Olanya raised the issue of high transport fares as schools reopen. At least the Minister of Health was a bit clear though vague. 

However, we expected the Minister of Works and Transport to explain the mechanisms that her ministry has put in place to ensure that those who are travelling on water – I heard the member clearly and vividly asking about those using the boats. How is the ministry managing or is there capacity to manage, for example, those students who cross Lake Bunyonyi to those schools? That is what we want to know. 

At the same time, when she talked about her meetings, those are meetings which are in her office. We wanted to have – really, before they move on, do these transporters even have capacity to control the number? The minister said they have talked to them about the numbers. Fine; you have talked to them but who is there to monitor and ensure implementation of the half-capacity?

I come from Sembabule. I have seen many schools now open. I have seen boda boda riders even carrying six students on one boda boda. Likewise, I have seen taxis from Sembabule to Masaka or Kampala operating at full capacity.

So, we do not want to subject our children to this and say we have talked. What are the mechanisms that are there to ensure that the costs are not going to be raised, and that the SOPs are being observed? Do not sit and come to say you have talked to them. Yes; so what? (Laughter) Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think we need commitment from the Government on how to control the prices, especially now that a number of children are going to be moving back and forth. Anything, minister or the Prime Minister? Is it going to be nobody’s business? Are you going to say the forces of demand and supply will determine what is paid?

3.54
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, at least, if it is not the Minister of Works and Transport, the Leader of Government Business should be able to assure us because our children are going back to school. 

Moreover, when they say half-capacity, they hiked the transport fare which was at Shs 30,000 to Shs 70,000. Why Shs 70,000? Why do you put that extra Shs 10,000? If you had put it at Shs 60,000, at least we would understand. Right now, they carry at full capacity everywhere, even on the Gulu-to-Kitgum route. They operate at full capacity but still double the transport fare.

The Leader of Government Business should take it up with his ministers who are directly concerned with transport fares. You should know that this COVID-19 has caused a lot of suffering to our people. 

The parents are poor to the extent that a lot of them will not even be able to send their children back to school. Therefore, we are adding more salt to the already painful wound. This COVID-19 should be addressed holistically, instead of addressing those people who are at the receiving end only while those at the giving end are made to suffer very much.

Leader of Government Business, please do us some favour - if you think it is a favour – but it is your responsibility. We should not run away from responsibility. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, the instructions to observe SOPs are Government instructions for our health and livelihood. However, I think the community should be assisted on how to travel without being exploited.

3.57
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): We shall see how to bring all those concerned together for a meeting in the Prime Minister’s office and find a way forward.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, Prime Minister.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE CAUSE OF A FIRE THAT GUTTED THE PALACE OF THE OMUSINGA OF RWENZURURU ON 26 JANUARY 2021 DESPITE THE PRESENCE AND WATCH OF ARMED SECURITY PERSONNEL

THE SPEAKER: Before he comes, I think the Leader of the Opposition had something to raise. I think the Clerk did not register you but you speak it.

3.58
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I am up here for an issue of national importance – actually, resurrecting something which was discussed here and it died.

We had our Uchumi employees who were supposed to have been paid in 2015. There was this Uchumi Supermarket, which closed but is active in Kenya.

The staff of Uganda were supposed to be paid and the payment was to address up to nine areas such as one month’s salary of October, inclusive of basic housing and transport allowances; November salary prorated 4 November 2015, inclusive of basic housing and transport – up to nine, where they say shortages, company debts or overtime already earned but not paid.

Nothing has been done and this is directly under the docket of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because this is about labour. 

I tried to discuss it with the MPs representing the workers but they have taken long. The members who have not been paid have been pestering me and rightly so. We are here to represent our people.

Madam Speaker, my prayer to the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development is that he should intervene quickly and pay these people. If there are issues, they should come out clearly. You know when you are suffering – this is the time when our people are suffering a lot with COVID-19. COVID-19 has caused a lot of economic problems and so they also think about what is due to them, which is not being handled. 

Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development or maybe the state minister in charge of labour, why don’t you take this up and finish this issue? It was an issue discussed here many times. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, if I am not mistaken, that company is under official receivership. It is under the official receiver, who is under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

Therefore, I ask the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to update us on the situation because the official receiver is under your docket. After that, maybe we can go to the gender ministry. 

However, we need an answer to this issue from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. It has been on the Floor a number of times. If you could, come back to us next week with the position of the official receiver on Uchumi Supermarket. Thank you.

4.01
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a statement regarding the fire outbreak or suspected arson, which occurred at Buhikira Royal Palace of the Obusinga bwa Rwenzururu in Kasese District on 26 January 2021.

Madam Speaker, at the 5th Sitting of the 3rd Meeting of this session of this Parliament, convened on Tuesday, 9 February this year, I was required to make a statement on the concerns which were raised by hon. Franco Centenary, Member of Parliament for Kasese Municipality, regarding the fire that gutted the place of the Omusinga of Rwenzururu, on 26 January 2021.


Madam Speaker, the following are the set of facts, which I have been able to access from the Uganda Police with regards to the 26 January 2021, incident of the fire outbreak, which occurred at the palace of the Omusinga of Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu located in Kigari village, Nyakabingo II Parish, Nyakabingo Subcounty, in Kasese Municipality, Kasese District by unknown persons. 


Upon receiving the information of the unfortunate fire outbreak, the Uganda Police and the fire Brigade in particular, rushed to the palace and extinguished the fire. This unfortunate incident was reported to Uganda Police, as case Reference Number CRB 48/2021 and investigations into the incident have commenced. 

The investigation team has collected exhibits of some burnt items and ash from different rooms of the palace for purposes of forensic examination, and forwarded them to the Government Analytical Laboratories. Statements have also been collected from some of neighbours to the palace. 

The policemen who were deployed to guard the palace namely: Police Constable Maghetse Jonathan No. 65213 and Okot James No. 71996, were arrested and have been charged for neglect of duty.

Madam Speaker, the findings and observations so far are that:

    1.  The fire is believed to have originated from one of the inner rooms, where it is suspected that the properties were first put together, then set ablaze and subsequently, fire spread to other rooms and eventually outside to the compound. 
    2. It is highly probable that the fire was an act of an arsonist since the palace had had no electricity at the time the incident happened.

Madam Speaker, previously, the police also got information about the Kingdom's Prime Minister, Rt Hon. Kule Muranga Joseph had received an anonymous letter threatening that something would be done to him. This case of threatening violence was reported to the Police on 18 January 2021 and investigations in this case are ongoing and are being conducted under Case Reference Number; CRB  15/2021. 

The police have developed some working versions and are working with other sources to establish the motive of burning the palace. This is the farthest I can report so far. As soon as the police investigations are complete, we should be able to give a more comprehensive report in this incident. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. (Hon. Centenary rose_) Do you want to speak again? Do not go into the evidence because the matter is under investigations.

4.07
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am here to thank the minister for at least taking and accepting responsibility as the Government, that they were in charge of that scene of crime. I would like to therefore propose that even when they are investigating and have people under incarceration for negligence of duty, the Government should take it upon itself to put a plan of compensating the losses that were registered at that palace.  Otherwise, we had a lot of valuable properties and items in that palace. By the time the fire brigade came to put off the fire, the whole palace had been set ablaze to ashes and nothing was redeemable in that palace.

I would like to implore the Government that even if they have arrested some suspects and collected evidence, Madam Speaker - I would like to advise that the village is not Kigari. It is called Kyajuki village and it is not in Nyakabingo Subcounty but in Nyakabingo Parish, Central Division of Kasese Municipality. Kindly, correct your records for future references.

I request the Government to come up with a compensation plan and rebuild the palace of Obusinga Bwa Rwenzururu. I know there are some items that are irreplaceable but we can settle for that. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The matter is sub judice and so, we cannot go into a lengthy debate. However, the requests are legitimate and the Government will handle them.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE TRANSITION FROM FACE TECHNOLOGIES TO UGANDA SECURITY PRINTING COMPANY ON THE SERVICES FOR THE ISSUANCE OF DRIVING LICENSES

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda, represented by the Minister of Works and Transport, entered into a contract with M/S Face Technology Ltd for the design, printing and supply of computerized driving permits in 2003. This was in an effort to improve road safety through minimising driving permit forgeries that were being issued as paper booklets. Riding on the expertise in this field, Face Technologies Ltd introduced computerized driving permit cards phasing out all the paper booklet driving permits.

The contract with Face Technologies Ltd was expected to end in May 2020 but was extended up to 20 February 2021 to allow the proper transition to Uganda Security Printing Company, as a result of the effects of the current COVID-19 Pandemic across the globe.

Uganda Security Printing Company (USPC) is a joint venture company between Uganda Printing and Publishing Corporation and Veridos of Germany. Under this joint venture USPC was charged with printing all the Government’s security documents. These include among others: passports, National Identity Cards, driving licenses etcetera. 

Madam Speaker, as a result of a joint venture agreement, my ministry initiated the procurement of USPC in February 2020, after thorough preparation of the statement of requirements and preparation of the user requirement specifications of the Uganda Driver Licensing System (UDLS). 

The procurement of Uganda Security Printing Company was successfully concluded resulting in signing of the contract on 15 October 2020.The USPC is now fully set to commence operations on the 01 March 2021.

Transition from FACE to USPC

Operations by Face Technologies Limited will come to an end on Saturday, 27 February 2021 at their current main facility at Kyambogo. 

On the 01 March 2021, USPC will commence operations at the Uganda Railways Corporation Station Building and at all the other upcountry offices of Jinja, Mbale, Gulu, Arua, Fort Portal and Mbarara.

The driving permits or licences issued by Face Technologies will remain in use for the period of their validity, alongside the driving licences issued by USPC.

The transition from FACE to USPC will also coincide with the introduction of new vehicle groupings for the driving licences following the amendment of the Traffic and Road Safety Act, 1998 in May 2020. 

The Amendment Act also provides for a five year validity regime for the driving license. A media campaign, sensitisation and training on the new features and groupings of the driving licenses has commenced starting with the Uganda Police Force.

A credible database of 1.1 million drivers from paper permits to computerised driving permits was developed by FACE containing all vital information on drivers. This data has already been migrated to the new Database of the Uganda Driver Licensing System by USPC.

The existing equipment by FACE has been handed over to Government including the Data Recovery Centre.

Capacity Building has been achieved over the years on management, system design, maintenance and support of driver licensing and regulatory systems.

Status of implementation for the transition of issuance of driving licences from FACE to USPC

Development of the software for the Uganda Driver Licencing System:

The development of the software was completed. The Final User Acceptance Tests were concluded on 12 February 2021, giving the software system fulfilling all its functional requirements.

Delivery of equipment for the Uganda Driver Licencing System: All equipment, furniture and tools required for operations for the issuance of driving licences were delivered and installed.

Re-modelling of the issuing offices 

All the issuing offices (Kampala, Mbarara, Mbale, Jinja, Gulu, Arua and Fort Portal) have been re-modelled in line with the business processes for the issuance of driving licences. 

The main office for Kampala will temporarily be accommodated at the Uganda Railways Corporation awaiting construction and completion of the One Stop Centre Building.

Recruitment of Staff 

Both technical and operational staff have now been recruited to fill up all the available positions. Priority was given to staff formerly employed by Face Technologies Limited. Eighty percent are Ugandans employed by the project, while the two per cent are expert staff. 

The expatriate staff have a contractual obligation to build capacity and also carry out knowledge transfer.

Training

Training of staff on the new system and business processes commenced on the 15 February 2021. Training of the Uganda Police commenced yesterday, on the new features of the driving licences and vehicle groupings.

Design of the Driver Licence Card 

The Design of Driving Licence Card was completed and approved in November 2020. The Driving Licence card conforms to ISO 18013 Part1-IV standard. The security features and layout of the card conforms to the standard. It is machine readable and has been assigned an Issuer Identification Number (IIN), which identifies the Ministry of Works and Transport as the issuing authority of the driving licence in any part of the world. 

Uganda is the only country within Eastern and Southern Africa or the tripartite region of the three Regional Economic Communities of COMESA, EAC and SADC with IIN. (A copy of the new Driving Licence is attached as Annex I).

Public Key infrastructure
 
A framework for a public key infrastructure has been developed. This provides for encryption of information and digital signatures of the driving licence.

Delivery of the first batch of Driving licences and Learner Driving licence

The first batch of the blank driving licences cards (300,000 in number) and learner driving licence security paper (150,000 in number) is already delivered and is in stock.

Traffic and Road Safety (Driving licence) Regulation 2021 

This statutory instrument has been prepared and is in the process of approvals and gazetting. The instrument provides for gazetting of the format of the new driving licence, the application forms, applicable fees; and introduction of a five year driving licence regime and professional driving permit for drivers of commercial vehicles.

Future plans

Opening up of new centres

Plans are underway to assess and set up more issuing centres in the following towns or cities: Moroto, Lira, Hoima, Masaka and Kabale, in effort to bring services nearer to the people.

Construction of a One Stop Centre Building 

One Stop Centre Building, which is expected to house the main driving licence facility, motor vehicle registration and other regulatory and licensing functions will be constructed. The detailed designs are complete and are undergoing approvals.

Integration of the Systems 

The Uganda Driver Licensing System will be integrated or interfaced with other systems such as Uganda Police Force for implementation or express penalty schemes; Uganda National Identification for purpose of digital – NITA and signatures and other systems under development to enhance regulation and service delivery. 

Conclusion 

On behalf of the Government, I wish to thank the outgoing service provider, Face Technology Limited, for the outstanding service rendered to this country and wish them well in their future endeavours. 

Lastly, I thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable members of this august House, for the support rendered to my ministry in the areas of road safety. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. That was a response to our query about the transition from Face Technologies to the Uganda Government. I think we have got it.

4.23
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable minister for the report which is an effort to reduce road accidents. However, as I went through the report, it looks like if we only focus on motor vehicles - moreover these commercial ones - then, we will still have a lot of accidents. 

The main cause of accidents on the road are the boda bodas. I am sure that our young people, whose main employment right now is riding boda boda motorcycles, will not afford these licences because I know that they are very expensive. Is there any way for us to try and reduce accidents on the road? Can we make some deliberate efforts to try and help the boda bodas access cheaper or free training? They are the ones causing a lot of accidents - you want to protect them and you may end up off-road. They are very young but we cannot stop them from riding motorcycles. 

Madam Speaker, this is what we also want to see integrated for the boda bodas; we should probably just come up with free training and licences. Licences will help us know that they have gone through training and are not going to cause problems on the road. Otherwise, they are the main problem of drivers on the road. Thank you. 

4.25
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I raised this issue last week and I thank you for directing the minister to come up with this response. 

My major concern was how to handle the transition because right now, the new company has not yet started issuing driving permits. When drivers go to Face Technologies, there is definitely nothing. The drivers complained that when they are driving on roads, traffic officers charge and harass them simply because they have not renewed their driving permits. Others are being harassed because they do not have new driving permits yet they had already paid with Face Technologies. 

Do we see a situation where, until the new company is in charge, the drivers are not going to be disturbed on the roads if they present receipts or a confirmation that they have already paid to Face Technologies but have not received their new driving permits due to this transition? That was my major concern, Madam Speaker. Up to now, traffic officers are harassing them as if they do not know that there is this kind of transition. 

4.27
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luweero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the ministry for the work they have done.

However, my concern is on the graduation from one to another; we have been issuing driving permits and now we are going to issue driving licences. Permits are local and licences are regional and international but the minister did not show us what improvements the ministry has made before the issuance of licences because we are used to issuing driving permits. That is a worry to me. As you heard, she said, we are the only ones not issuing driving licences in the region. 

Are we rushing? Are we ready? Or we might find ourselves being blamed. I would like the ministry to tell us exactly how we have prepared ourselves to graduate from issuing permits to licences. 

The second issue that worries me is this mass transfer of people from Face Technologies into the new area. It is not a good practice. You should have gone deep to see whether these people are worth being transferred into our new organisation; from that private sector into the new one. I think you should look into that one. We may find ourselves in more problems. I thank you, Madam Speaker.  

4.29 
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Mine is a very brief one. First of all, I would like to commend Face Technologies for the work they have done and the way they have been very effective in the issuance of the driving permits - without queuing for long time; they have been very efficient and effective. For all the time I have been there, I did not take long. 

Madam Speaker, what I need is an assurance from the minister that what this new company, the Uganda Security Printing Company, is going to do it even better; that they are going to maintain the standard. Otherwise, we do not want to get back to problems like we have had with NIRA - where we have had to queue for long hours to get a national ID. We do not want to get to that. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.30 
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the report.

Honourable minister, I would like to capture two areas: Many times, we have requested the ministry if they would extend the issuance of the driving licence to the districts. It is still a very long way as you see people from Lira going all the way to Gulu where they take many months, and not days, to acquire these driving licences. 

Secondly, whoever drives a motor vehicle must know the right of way. Many times, most of our drivers or the motor cycle riders do not know the right of way. This has caused many problems in our country. If you go to Mulago Hospital, you will find many victims of accidents.

There is no way you will begin learning how to drive or ride a motorcycle in one hour and you apply for a driving license and tomorrow you are granted. When you go on a ride, you do not know whether to turn right, left, or go forward. You end up being knocked or you knock somebody. 

It is not a matter of just getting a driving license and buy a car or motorcycle. This is the main thing that we should focus on as a country, to save the lives of our young people. They get so excited when they get these machines. He may be carrying a beautiful girlfriend and wants to show off and yet they do not know where you are going. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, what hon. Acon has said reminded me that one time in the House we talked about the Government establishing a driving school. I do not know whether it is lying somewhere.

4.33
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you Madam Speaker. Mine is a transitional question. Up to date, people who are seeking to renew driving permits have been paying money to Uganda Revenue Authority and some to Face Technology. Where will those people get their driving permits? As we wind up Face Technology, it would have received the money but these people only have temporary driving permits. Can we get assurance where people will pick their driving permits from so that it removes the dilemma that people are in? 

4.34
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I listened to the minister’s long statement. It is not a question of just issuing driving licenses. What type of licenses are you going to issue - you are talking of international licenses but what type of drivers?

The most important thing is to get people trained. This country has the highest accidents among the African countries and the world. This is because these licenses are just issued. Government should put up a school where they train people and those who qualify should get licenses.

Madam Speaker, I have seen police officers failing to get driving licenses when the United Nations tests them when they are going for peace keeping. This is because they do not know how to drive. 

When you drive on our roads, you find a lot of mess because people do not know how to drive. They pay money and get driving licenses and that is why we lose many people on roads in Ugandan.

Therefore, we want Government to come up with a training institution where people are going to learn road signs, and regulations of the roads. Those who qualify should be the ones to get licenses. If we do that, we shall save our people. However, every time you hear police issuing records of accidents at the end of every year.

Secondly, international license are given for years. I got my driving license from abroad, it goes on until 2025, and I have had it for over 25 years. 

When you issue international licenses, you must be able to drive in those other countries and know the traffic laws. That is why we are asking you honourable minister that the Government must come up with an institution as the Speaker has just said. Train people properly, then we shall be proud when you drive in other countries without causing accidents.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this license is for five years. When they expire, do I come back to be tested again or I automatically get a new license? What is the magic about the five years?

4.37
MR ROBERT KAFEERO (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In light of what was mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, when you look at the categorisation of driving licenses, even boda boda riders are taken care of.

However, according to our observations the major challenge is that there is no clear mechanism of compelling these riders to be trained before they hit the road. Someone goes back home, sells ekibanja, buys a boda boda and the next morning, he is on the road without being tested properly.

Therefore, until the ministry comes up with clear mechanisms of compelling boda boda riders to be trained before they begin riding on public roads, that challenge will remain.

The minister also talked about construction of a one-stop centre. Indeed, Government at the beginning of this financial year came to the committee with a promissory note saying that as we phase out Face Technology a private company, we want Government to take over issuance of driving permits. The Government is taking over, but in my opinion, it is still more or less a private company talking over.

As if that is not enough, the Government also told us that they wanted to construct a Government one-stop centre for issuance of driving permits and registration of new vehicles and transfers. This very Parliament appropriated funds in billions for construction of that building. However, during our engagement with the ministry, trying to find out how they have performed this financial year with the money we gave them, we realised that not even a foundation of that building has been laid anywhere in Uganda.

According to the Permanent Secretary, they wanted to do it at the ministry headquarters, now I do not know for what reason, because they did not give it to us, they decided to go to the Uganda Railway Corporation land. The circumstances for shifting is not clear.

As a committee, we have decided to arrange an oversight visit to the ministry of works and the proposed new venue or location of the building on 15th March, to ascertain whether indeed, these plans for construction of a one-stop centre building is still ongoing. Thereafter, we shall update the House on our finding. I beg to submit.

4.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have failed to understand how Government operates. Good enough I have been on this committee for almost the last 15 years. When Face Technology was procured, it was initially for five years and it would pass back to the ministry of works. When the five years elapsed, they extended. In the agreement, this was supposed to revert fully to the ministry of works.

It is surprising that the Government is now telling us about a joint venture. Face Technologies was renting. We had been told earlier on that we needed capacity building and indeed capacity has been built. Therefore, this was supposed to be passed over to Government after about 12-15 years. 

What is this new company bringing? The capacity has been built, the technology is there, the software is there, and our Ugandans have been trained. They were supposed to pass all this onto the Ministry of Works and Transport. What is this German company going to bring?

Even now, it is the Government of Uganda that is providing the housing. What happens to the issue of the standard gauge railway, if we are grabbing part of their office? 

Earlier on, we had proposed in the committee - and the chairman knows very well - that it is moved to the ministry of works structure that is opposite where Face Technologies is now. We are surprised that today, it has been moved to Uganda Railways structures. 

These are the things that need to be cleared. If I had known earlier, I would have brought the two agreements with Face Technologies on what was supposed to be done. It was not supposed to be given to another private company. 

This company called Veridos - I would like you to do some research on it and find out the people behind it. Take it from me that come Monday, 1 March 2021, there is going to be a scuffle. 

They are telling us that there is a company that is going to help us with passports. You saw the scuffle which was in immigrations this week. We are going to get back to the time when we were having forged diving permits, and delays because it takes a month or two to get a driving permit. 

Now that you are saying this, chairperson, I wish you had let us go and see these things early before they started because now we are going to do more of a post-mortem. When you go to URC and find it is not there, what will you do? Nonetheless, we shall go and see what is on the ground.

I wanted to bring it to the attention of the members that we are yet to see bigger problems regarding the driving permits and other documents because of the way – If you ask how this company was procured, it is surrounded by so many things. If we had time, we would unearth all this. 

Can the minister tell us when they advertised? How many companies bid? Let her tell us and disprove us. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Before I invite the minister, we would like to know, how long this company is going to occupy the premises of Uganda Railways. I thought this country is interested in a vibrant railway system but now the headquarters is being borrowed. For how long? Where will the trains go?

4.45
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Ms Joy Kabatsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this new project, licenses will be issued to boda boda riders. Riders with no licenses will be no more. 

Face Technologies is still issuing permits and those who have paid will get their licenses, and licenses from Face Technologies will stay valid until the date of their validity. 

The licenses were introduced by the new Act which we passed here. Whatever we are doing now, we are following the Act that we passed here. We are the ones who passed the five years driving license. We passed everything that we are doing now. 

Hon. Byandala, we did not take all the Face Technologies people but we have to acknowledge that Face Technologies had very good people and they knew what they were doing. So, most of them passed the recruitment test. The ones we took, we recruited, we tested and found them good. 

Do not worry about queuing up. The new system will give you your permit in one hour or less, depending on what you present. 

The leadership of the ministry will make sure that new stations are set up. We also have a mobile vehicle that will also do the testing and giving of permits. 

We are also going to intensify the riders’ and drivers’ testing. Regarding the quality of drivers, we are going to strengthen regulation and quality of driving schools. The ministry is also exploring means of setting up schools to train our drivers.

The people who have paid Face Technologies will pick their permits from the new USPC offices at railways. 

There was a question by the Rt hon. Speaker about the renewal of driving licenses. The law, which we passed, stops us from testing afresh once you have your driving license and that is what we are following.

Before issuing a permit, an applicant must be tested by police. Police is responsible for testing the drivers. The inspectors of vehicles are the ones going to be responsible for testing the drivers. 

Regarding the building, the one centre for testing and licensing the designs of this building have been done and are complete. We have procured a contractor and we hope - all approvals being given - this new building will soon be up. 

The Uganda Security Printing Company is a public company. The Government of Uganda, represented by the Office of the President and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are the majority shareholders in this company. Therefore, USPC is a Ugandan company owned by the Uganda Government. Thank you. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I beg your indulgence. The minister has finished her submission. A lot of concern has been raised on the accidents caused by boda bodas. The minister is saying that the driving schools will be improved. She is not answering the specific concerns that the members have raised. 

I would like to know, after Face Technologies developed this system, what is the role of this German? We are just going to approve this document without understanding the technical skill the German company is bringing on board? If I read it correctly, 98 per cent of the staff will be local and so, it means that a big proportion of staff are already trained and know what to do and only two per cent is supposed to be technical.

Are you going to tell me that you need a whole German joint venture in order to fill the gap of two per cent? We need to understand this. I feel there is something wrong about this document. 

I want it to be recorded that I do not agree with this submission and there are many porous areas that have not been clarified and therefore, I feel that this document should be looked into.

We need to set up committee to dig further into how the joint venture came to be and how the Government is going to set schools, train drivers and you have said that the valid licenses will continue until they expire. If the reckless drivers already got licences, how are you going to improve them? This document needs to be polished and as an institution we are not going to pass a document where we have seen a lot of defects. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this came in response to a question raised on the Floor of this House about the transition from Face Technology to the Uganda Government, it is information for us and not to adopt.

However, the chairperson of the Committee on Infrastructure says that they are conducting an oversight visit and are going to file a report here. He has heard the issues that the members are not happy with; we hope that he touches them and report to us when you come back and please, do it quickly.

MR KAFEERO: Madam Speaker, indeed, there are very many porous areas that need to be touched up and the minister will agree with me that even at committee level we were not satisfied.

I, therefore, undertake on behalf of this House to bring back a comprehensive report after our oversight visit so that we can take it up from there. I beg to submit.

THE SPEKER: Honourable members, yesterday, when we adjourned, I had the following members on the list; hon. Angeline Osegge, hon. Nambeshe hon. Centenary, hon. Odur.

4.54
MS ANGELINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker for the opportunity and probably request from the onset that you allow more than two minutes.

The first issue concerning the report is the proposal to have the Parliamentary Commission interview the Clerk to Parliament. I remember that in this Parliament, for lack of a better word, we mortgaged our rights as a House and as the legislature, concerning the election or appointment of the commissioners of this House. 

To restore authority of this House, we might have to change the way we appoint commissioners to this House so as to fulfil this aspiration that is expressed in the bill.

My second issue is the proposal to get the office of the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) out of the system. Yesterday, as I sat here and listened to honourable colleagues, many expressed the thought that the office has only changed names but has been in existence through many regimes.
If we have been in this country and following things happening in the offices of Government, you notice that there is a lot of duplication of services, the proposal to remove the office of the RDC is in good faith if we are to look at reducing public expenditure and efficiency in terms of public offices. 

In my opinion, the office of the RDC is killing the responsibility of the District Police Commanders. They seem to have more authority than the District Police Commanders. If we are to build and strengthen institutions of Government, we need to reduce duplication of service therefore, I support the removal of that Office.

I would also like to comment on the appointment of ministers from within members of Parliament. Yes, there was an argument that it needs someone to apportion their time correctly but the principle here is about separation of powers and the independence of the institutions and different arms of Governance.

Whenever we have an issue on the Floor of this House, there are people with conflict of interest. They may know what is right for this country but because of their position they cannot express themselves and therefore, we lose out on objectivity because people have conflict in terms of execution of their duties both as a minister and as a Member of Parliament. 

There is a belief that it will increase expenditure, I think we have the prerogative to recommend to Government to reduce the size of Cabinet and go back to the 21 ministers as recommended by the constitution of this country. I would support that position for purposes of separation of powers and independence of officials. 

My comment on the Electoral Commission, which according to the committee report on page No.7 recommending; throwing out the proposal that is brought by the Bill and yet it gives reference to what is going on with the African Union and other regional associations. 

The arguments expressed in the report are very alien to the recommendations that are given thereon. I do not know who gave the recommendations and who wrote the body of the report.

I think these proposals were in good faith; intending to return power to the people as provided for in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

On the removal of Army representatives, it is about time that it is implemented. We have to look back at the reasons we had the Army represented in the House and now, the time is right for them to go back to who they are and to what they are supposed to do.

We have to be progressive if we are going to be a true democracy. On the recommendation on the proposal to introduce a panel of Speakers, Madam Speaker, I thank God for your being here because you are a very strong woman. You can sit on that chair for hours, weeks and months. We do not want to be inhumane in thinking that you do not get tired and exhausted. 

One time, we almost lost you; we thank God for His mercy. We know that it is only overworking that is causing some of these problems. 

Madam Speaker, in jurisdictions where there are panels of Speakers, the work is made lighter. If this House wants to achieve more in terms of the work of this House, I think it is only prudent that we introduce a panel of Speakers, so that there is no time where we cannot sit because the Speaker is either unwell, engaged, indisposed or whatever the case may be.

The business of this House will always be attended to consistently and continuously; and that will improve the output of this House. 

Therefore, I support the fact that we institute the panel of Speakers to enable the Office of the Speaker to be well supported. This will help us not to exhaust whoever will be in the chair as the Speaker. 

I know you will not have my vote but I want to pray that you be in that chair and that God gives you the Grace to go on. Otherwise, we need this panel of Speakers established.

Madam Speaker, my last comment is on the recommendation of the committee as regards term limits. I want to support this strongly and I am glad that the larger part of the House, the society and Uganda at large support the fact that we reintroduce term limits in the Constitution of this country.

Madam Speaker, as regards changing the term of Parliament to seven years, it is unfortunate that yesterday, as I listened, the chairperson tried to deviate us from what is actually in the report. On page 28 of the report, the committee recommends that term limits be reinstated as it is in the Constitution. However, on the same page (iii), the committee also says Government should consider thinking about introducing a seven-year term for Parliament.

I think this is an attempt to confuse this House. This was an assumption that probably we could not see or read it. Madam Speaker, I do not see the relationship of the spirit of the report of the committee with the recommendations that they brought forth.

I want to state that the extension of the term of Parliament from five to seven years is uncalled for. Already, we have tested the ill – what should I say? We have tested the fact that long stay in power is causing a lot of disgruntlement in the country.

Much as we talk about regular elections, I do not want us to bury our heads in the sand and pretend that we are having free and fair elections. Going forward, the experience of this last election can only show you that the next elections are going to be bloodier. So, I think it will serve this country better if we be open, objective and sincere to ourselves. Let this term remain at five years only.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.06
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me add my voice to the voices of other colleagues in saluting the committee for the report presented, particularly on the restoration of the five-year presidential term limits.

Term limits are very important for strengthening democratic institutions and for the democratic progress but more importantly, for political transition. A country like - for instance – Uganda, which has never witnessed a smooth and peaceful transfer of power from one President to another, would yearn most to see a smooth, peaceful political transition.

However, term limits also help to mount pressure on a given President or leader, to ensure he delivers results in the duration of time stipulated, so that he leaves a legacy behind. Individuals or leaders, no matter how powerful or popular they may be, cannot be indispensable because of term limits.

Even a very popular man I have read about in history, Washington, in 1951 had to relinquish the chair, even when he would have won many more times. That is why they are a superior democracy and model for the rest of the world.

So, term limits will help to promote healthy competition, which is needed to strengthen our democratic institutions and for democratic governance.

Madam Speaker, on the removal of UPDF representatives from Parliament, I support that proposal as was moved by the sponsor of the Bill. However, when I go through the report – and I would like to read it – on the recommendation of the committee on the retention of army representatives in Parliament, bullets (1), (2) and (3) - recommendation three says: “The committee recommends that in recognition of their cardinal duty as listening posts and to ensure that any army representatives do not participate in political arena, taking sides in any matter before Parliament, as well as shielding army representatives from partisan politics, army representatives should be ex officio members.”

Madam Speaker, I have gone through all the laws that are in our statute books. There is no formal document anywhere that outlines the cardinal duty of these Members of Parliament - the UPDF in Parliament - as listening posts. The cardinal duty; the cardinal role.

I do not know where they have smuggled this from, as a committee. I am baffled about this because their cardinal role here in the House is only to act as listening posts, Madam Speaker. I am astounded and I would like to wonder whether we do not have a provision in Parliament. Even if we were to go through the Rules of Procedure of this House, they generally provide or apply to all of us. 

There are no specific provisions in our Rules of Procedure that specifically address special interest groups in this House like UPDF and that they are directly addressed to them.

Madam Speaker, if it is true that the cardinal role of the UPDF in this House is act listening posts, then that could easily be covered because in the provision in this House, there is a public Gallery. (Laughter) They would only come in the public Gallery and execute that role perfectly by listening from the Gallery.

Two, we have a record. This is a House of records, Madam Speaker. We have a Hansard which they can read. I know most of these Army Generals are highly educated. A number of them are learned and I suppose they can read the Hansard.

Thirdly, committees provide for those who are interested to go to some of these meetings and listen. However, the committee should not import or smuggle or even sanction something and make it one of the cardinal roles of a Member. Among the roles of a member of Parliament, I have never come across this one. (Laughter) I know representation, appropriation, oversight and legislation. Therefore, the committee must be put to task to explain to this House, in detail, where they smuggled this new role of a member of Parliament from. 

Madam Speaker, the constituency of members of Parliament representing the UPDF is known. They are elected by a given constituency of fellow men and women in uniform. Unless the committee is recommending here that they should be ex officio members, like Members of Parliament who are appointees of the President. Unless they are recommending that the President should be the one to appoint because he nominates about 30 of them and they are then subjected to an election by members of the military council.

However, here, the committee presupposes that they should also be treated like ministers, who are appointed from outside Parliament, to be ex officio Members. These ones should be subjected to the same treatment that other interest groups that go through electoral colleges – such as the youth and workers – are.

The continued presence of UPDF in this temple of democracy, in a multiparty Parliament, contravenes even Article 208 of the Constitution, which provides that the members in uniform – UPDF – should never ever participate in partisan politics. Therefore, in a multiparty Parliament like ours, they cannot avoid - they say they are merely listening posts but I have witnessed a number of them speaking here. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, you vividly remember that in 2005, when two of them – Col Bogere and the then Brig. Henry Tumukunde – spoke and incidentally it did not go down well with the powers that be, they were punished by being removed from Parliament. Therefore, indeed, they are not supposed to speak. Moreover, Parliament comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. Now that these are a special category of colleagues, who have zips on their mouths –(Laughter)– that should be justification enough to have them removed from this House.

On the issue of “Deputy President” versus “Vice-President”, the committee has maltreated the proposal that was made by hon. Niwagaba in his Bill. It was not a proposal to merely change the nomenclature. What it means here is the enjoyment of that security of tenure. If you were to compare –(Member timed out.)

5.16
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just like I have always said, you will miss my vote. If I had come back, surely, my vote would be yours. However, going back to these amendments and starting from where hon. Nambeshe stopped, the UPDF is supposed to defend and protect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Uganda and the Constitution that encapsulates people’s sovereignty through popular will. I do not see them executing this mandate in this august House. They can do it elsewhere but not in this House.

We are going to find ourselves in a precarious situation where we are over empowering the UPDF. I witnessed this during the recently concluded elections where troupes of UPDF soldiers in uniform were being dumped at different polling stations to execute a civic mandate on behalf of the citizens from a different constituency where they did not even understand which candidates they were going to vote. However, they were coming with specific instructions to “vote for the bus”.

These are the people who are coming, first of all, to choose for us leaders in the various constituencies but also come to Parliament through their Electoral College representation to also represent. This means that we are going to find ourselves giving numerical strength to one force.

I foresee a situation where they are going to retire very many generals to come and start competing in the constituencies and also in the electoral college of the UPDF and we shall end up having an army council representing Ugandans here. I, therefore, disagree with the continued representation of the UPDF in this Parliament because we are representing them enough.

After all, even when they are representing, the majority of the problems that the UPDF are facing are being faced by low-ranking personnel. However, when they are sending representatives here, they send people such as Gen. Elwelu, well paid and well facilitated. He is not going to represent the private officer. The plight of that soldier –(Interjections)- Yes, they have completely different interests.

Madam Speaker, on the extension of the term limits, we should be honest to Ugandans. When every one of us went to seek re-election or even those who sought a new mandate, it was clearly marked out on our posters that we were contesting for a period of 2021 to 2026 and that is the social contract that we made with Ugandans.

It would be very unfortunate for us to turn around and be duped by the report as it states that those who will have passed this Bill or law, will not be the ones to benefit from it. This means that we should do the dirty work for the Eleventh Parliament – we pass the law and they come and enjoy the seven years and we go to the population to be bashed for having connived against the population – even we who never made it back – to extend the term of office from five to seven years.

I know there are democracies, which are more advanced than ours such as the United States of America but their term of office is only four years and they have been able to deliver the services as expected, effectively.

Regarding the RDCs, I do not even know why that position was created other than it being an extension of the district NRM office. In my own district, I have witnessed the grievances within the political party of NRM being resolved by the RDC. If it is not possible to remove that office, the political activities of the RDCs should be restricted and regulated.

Additionally, the qualifications should be set. We have RDCs who do not even know how to write their names – and these are people coming to supervise Chief Administrative Officers with master’s degrees, PhDs and all sorts of qualifications.

Therefore, I think they should also apply competitively to become Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), if we need to maintain that office. Otherwise, they are public officers facilitated by public coffers.

About the ministers, I think the spirit of separation of power is only being abused between the Executive and Parliament; the Legislature. I have not seen judges being appointed as ex officio members in Parliament. 

If we want to promote democratic governance in this country, we should emphasise the spirit of separation of power. If you are becoming a member of Parliament, legislate. If you want to be in the Executive, stay there and if you want to remain in the Judiciary, remain there.

The unemployment rate in Uganda is very high to the fact that you cannot even afford to fuse powers into one person. If hon. Centenary is a member of Parliament, let hon. Nandala-Mafabi become a minister so that all of us are able to participate in the governance of this nation. Otherwise, many of our legislators, especially those who are coming in, are going to be compromised with the hope that they will be appointed ministers. Therefore, they will find themselves in a situation, where they have to bear two allegiances between the electorate that brought them here to represent them and the Executive or the President who appointed them.

I agree with the minority report that we need to separate powers. You either choose to become a minister or a Member of Parliament.

On the issue of Electoral Commission, we have suffered under its hands, most especially, the current one of Justice Byabakama. This is where they issue directives and they are not even sure how to execute them in regard to the electoral processes. This is a disgrace and shame to this country.

I think it is high time these commissioners went through a public veto process. They nominate, bring them before the public and we scrutinise their characters and qualifications so that we have a people-centred Electoral Commission. It should not be an Electoral Commission that is supposed to go and prostrate before a presidential candidate who is the appointing authority. I think we are relinquishing, maybe, by design through our laws and policies, the powers of the citizens of Uganda in the hands of the presidency. It is high time we started legislating pro-people centred policies.

Our Constitution has suffered enough. In fact, if it were mortal, it would suffer from amendment fatigue. We need to give it time to rest and be preserved - as we swore here, when we came in 2016 – and uphold it. I see a reason, why we should treat our Constitution like a piece of cloth, which needs to be tailored, when and as somebody changes size. In this regard, I am talking about the sentiments of the powers that be. When they want to overstay in power, they bring a proposal that we need to remove the age limit or term limits. When they think they are comfortable, they say, “we need to bring back the term limits.” 

It is high time we sanctified our Constitution because it is supposed to be the supreme law of the land. The moment we lose constitutional stability in this country, we do not expect to have the onus of a sovereign state, as it ought to be. Uganda is supposed to be a sovereign state, which is supposed to be enjoyed by every one of us.

I would like to also become a president maybe one day. (Laughter) There are many other young people who want to be. When we were amending the Constitution, the spirit of lowering the age limit was for inclusive leadership. That is why they reduced the age limit to 18 years. Why don’t we give an opportunity to other people to participate in leadership?

You have seen the fracas we have right now in court, where petitions cannot be heard and they are being withdrawn. Some judges are even threatening that if you do not believe that this court is going to deliver justice to you, you should go and create your own court. That level of arrogance is being entrenched in our policies. It is something we need to safeguard against. 

This time around, when we restore the term limits, I would like to plead with this honourable House that we should entrench and ensure that whoever wants to remove the term limits, it should be done through a popular vote of a referendum. 

For those who are coming back for another term, I would implore you that our sanctity is in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. If we want to retire dishonourably, then we can allow these seven years to pass and then we shall see what will happen to us when we go back to the population. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.27
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to broadly speak about the methodology and scope of the consultation that the committee carried out. My submission is that if they did it differently, they were going to arrive at very different conclusions regarding the proposals in the Bill.

This Bill is well-intentioned. The Government, especially the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should surely feel embarrassed that we are continuously having private Members come here to amend the sacred document of this country.

I would like to point out that when the committee mentioned three areas: First, they cited Article 259, of course, in tandem with Article 262. The reading of those articles is very clear that the articles of the Constitution that this Parliament can amend include nearly all the provisions that hon. Niwagaba proposed. In the middle of their report, they cited Article 78 and said that it cannot be amended. This is when I believe that this committee never paid attention at all to do thorough work on this Bill.

In 2017, when we had only four clauses of the Constitution to amend, we consulted more than 60 stakeholders. However, for this, where we have more than 26 articles to be amended and the committee chose to consult only seven. Therefore, I would like to invite members of Parliament to disregard the recommendations of the committee. Even this House is fully constituted because we are more than 400. This means that our opinion will be better than the seven members that the committee decided to consult.

I will give you an example. The Bill proposed to strengthen the Electoral Commission and make it transparent in order to ensure that elections and the election results are acceptable to Ugandans. The committee blatantly went and said that it is not necessary. Even in their analysis, they cited African Charter on Democracy and the African Union Resolutions. They cited very good examples but in conclusion, they said there is no need to improve the Electoral Commission. That means that the committee just did this work without giving it due consideration.

I also saw that the committee rejected a very good proposal to have a person qualified to be a judge to chair the Electoral Commission. They forget that the Electoral Commission is clothed with powers to sit as a semi-judicial authority. When there are conflicts, it is referred to the Electoral Commission and to ensure that there is fairness. We need somebody who can adjudicate.

It has been a practice in this House that where a body has tribunal powers, the chairperson of that body is a judge. Therefore, when I saw the recommendation of the committee ignoring that proposal by hon. Niwagaba, I wondered.

On the issue of the army members of Parliament, I would like to agree with the submissions of my colleagues that have spoken here. I only want to add one thing; if the Army is here to listen to us, it is okay. If they listen to us, where do they take those stories? Why doesn’t that person come here to listen on their own? Let them come here; whoever wants to listen can come here. 

In fact, by saying the Army members of Parliament are listening posts, you are amending Article 79, which outlines the roles of members of Parliament. Among the cardinal roles of members of Parliament that we know here, there is nothing like listening posts. 

I would like to conclude with the issue of term limits. Madam Speaker, President Obote was here from 1962 before President Amin removed him. He spent more than seven years in power and he never concluded the business of this country. President Amin was here for more than nine years and he never concluded. Nobody will conclude the issues of this country. The current President has made 35 years and now 40 years but he will never conclude the affairs of this country. 

Therefore, we cannot borrow and adopt the reasoning of the committee that five years are not enough for one person to fulfil his purpose. Uganda is not about one person. If I cannot, another person will come and take over. 

I, therefore, urge Members to support the restoration of term limits. Let it be five years because the Odoki Commission recommended five. When the members of the political parties came, they all said five years. I do not know where the issue of seven years came from. I invite Members to reject it. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.33
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I contribute on this subject matter of the constitution amendment, I would like to implore the House to give me an extra 30 seconds. I will be very appreciative because we are very few remnants of the Constituent Assembly. 

I am here, therefore, to remind Members of a couple of things that we could have forgotten. Madam Speaker, I am just pleading for some 30 seconds or so. 

Whenever we talk about the constitution amendment, particularly matters of politics, we should be reminded of the preamble of our Constitution. The preamble was discussed and we all reserve it as people of Uganda. We should first and foremost recall our history that was characterised by political and constitutional instability. That was fundamental.

We also recognise the struggles against forces of tyranny, oppression and exploitation. Therefore, we resolved as the Constituent Assembly, that the Constitution we were to make should resolve to re-establish a system that would ensure stability, peace and unity in Uganda. 
Therefore, Members, we are talking about some of the issues raised by the committee. By the way, I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for bringing this up. It has been an outstanding issue and it is important that we confront it head on. 

I will just be very brief. First of all, the reinstatement of term limits should not be a matter of discussion. This was resolved in the Constituent Assembly and we, Ugandans, who follow political events, know why it came to be removed. It was a very heavy weight by something called “Kisanja” which I do not understand. Nonetheless, it became very forceful and heavy and moved the hands of Parliament to do the unthinkable.

Now that wisdom has been restored, can we, therefore, resolve, without any discussion or question, to restore the term limits? 

Madam Speaker, on the removal of the Army, the same Constitution has told us that we should recognise – we had a spirit that we carried with us. Although, the other time, when I talked about the constitutional spirit, hon. Nandala reminded me that we should not turn Parliament into witchdoctors, because only witch doctors talk in the language of spirits. I think we see ahead, therefore we provide for it. 

Term limits should go hand in hand with age limits. I believe by now, the purpose for which the age limit was removed has now been resolved. I would rather, if the committee does not mind, that we move an amendment to also restore the age limit to 75 years, as it was and it should start from next year. I would like to tell you that by 2026, I would have already reached the age of 75 years and I will not be a subject of any elective office. I will have to abide by the spirit of the Constitution.   

The removal of the Army is a very sticky matter but it is also a constitutional matter. We have clearly defined the role of the Army, which is non-partisan. The Army must be subordinate to civilian authority. When Parliament passes a resolution, whether on security or deployment of military in Somalia, the Army must be subject to the authority of Parliament. That is the voice of Uganda speaking and they can only obey and implement. That is what is enshrined in our Constitution, in Article 208, in case somebody doubts me. 

As far as I am concerned, we are putting the Army in a very difficult situation. The moment we adopted a bi-camera Parliament in 2005, we decided that there must be a Government side and Opposition side. When you bring in the Army, they are at a loss.

I remember during the Oyite Ojok time, he used to sit with the DP but then his colleagues used to laugh at him. Who of our military persons have you seen seated with hon. Betty Aol here? They all side with the Government and that is against the spirit of the Constitution, in Article 208. We are making the life of the military we are bringing here difficult –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, one minute for the remnants. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I have a very important matter on the issue of the qualification of the electoral commissioners. You know it very well, Madam Speaker. History has taught us that sometimes, a Member loses an election and then, he is appointed to be Resident District Commissioner (RDC)and go back and work in the same district he was defeated. We are not being fair to ourselves. We are being unfair if the person that was defeated in the election is appointed commissioner and he is the one to supervise the election. We need to re-define the role of these commissioners and the RDCs. As I far as I am concerned, I believe that we should stop using RDCs as a political tool or operatives. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, you guided the House on 29 May 2020, on the issue of the panel of speakers. This is a practice all over East Africa; it is in Tanzania and Kenya. You know Uganda is like a model and people learn from us. 

What happened to you last year hit all of us. We came to realise that two persons are not enough to steer the House. We need the Speakers’ panel in order to ease the burden on the huge roles that the Speakers have. I think that was a consensus and was already passed as a resolution. It is not a matter of debate. We just have to adopt our own resolution that we passed on 29 May 2020, for those who would like to look at the Hansard. It was resolved that there must be a panel of Speakers. However, I would like to add that the panel of Speakers must again carry the spirit of our rules, which accommodate all the political shades. I beg to submit.

5.41
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to comment on the report of the committee regarding the constitution amendment.

Let me start with the issue of members of Parliament being appointed ministers. My view is that all the ministers should be members of Parliament. The issue raised here of separation of powers does not hold any water. The Seventh Parliament was able to hold the Executive accountable and censured ministers. Were they not MPs like us today? The problem is with us, the members of Parliament, who fail to hold the Executive accountable.

I had a meeting with the Speaker of Kenya and the President of the Senate of Kenya. You know Kenya is going to have a referendum; they are reversing the appointment of the ministers because currently, in their current Constitution, all ministers must be from outside Parliament and they have found themselves in very difficult situations. They do not even appear in Parliament. They said there must be a real separation of powers.

So, there is nothing like the Prime Minister’s Question Time or the questioning of the Deputy President or the minister by the House. They can only appear before the committee but not in the House. Ghana is on the way to reversing it too because it is another country in Africa and the Commonwealth where the Cabinet ministers come from out of Parliament. 

We want to go where people are leaving. I would still stand that the members of Cabinet must be from the House. This will make them able to understand what challenges members of Parliament face in the constituencies. Imagine a situation where a member of Cabinet is not a Member of Parliament, he or she does not understand the challenges a politician goes through. When you raise a matter with such a member, he would not bother because he does not understand.

Therefore, all ministers should come from Parliament and the committees of Parliament should be able to hold the Executive accountable.

Madam Speaker, yesterday, I heard some Members talking about the issue of term limits to members of Parliament or elective positions. I think we are mixing things up. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal would have reminded us - because she is one of the remnants of the Constituent Assembly; the reason there were term limits for the President and not members of Parliament was because members of Parliament do not have Executive powers. They are not fountains of honour or commanders-in-chief. That is why the term limits were put only on the presidency. (Interjections) You do not have the same powers like the President, do you? 

Therefore, the issue of term limits should only be limited to those who have excessive powers such that we are able to check them.

On the panel of Speakers, this is something that should have been done long time ago. I do not know why the Executive finds it very difficult to accept this. I pray that this time, the MPs of the Tenth Parliament should be able to pass this and let us see what happens because we have seen in the Commonwealth and Inter-Parliamentary Union, most of the countries have the Speakers’ panel - Zambia, Malawi, Kenya, South Africa, Ghana, Tanzania - all have them. Why can’t we also have the panel of Speakers? The issue of the cost does not arise here; after all hon. Niwagaba secured a certificate of financial implications. It was covered. Why are we talking about the issue of financial implications? This should be the time to take this up.

On the issue of the appointment of the Clerk, we struggled in the Seventh parliament to pass this that they should be appointed by the Parliamentary Commission but we were defeated. I hope this time, we should be able to pass it.

The issue raised by hon. Centenary that unless we reverse, the others are simply administrative - we can reverse the issue of appointment of Commissioners and it gets back to members of Parliament because the Parliamentary Commissioners deal with the welfare of the MPs and staff. Therefore, we should not allow our powers to be taken by the Executive or the parties. They should be elected by MPs.

Finally, we are demeaning and ridiculing our UPDF by calling them listening posts. I do not know where this has been imported from. Whoever created that word - because I also saw the day they were being elected, a statement that was issued after their election that they were going to be coming here - maybe that is where the committee picked it from; that they should only be here as listening posts. That is not the role of members of Parliament. I think that must be expunged from our records. We cannot demean the UPDF to that level.

However, when they created the UPDF at that time, it was meant for that time but when we crossed to multipartyism, I think we need to have done away with it. If we are to retain it, maybe if we are to have a middle way, we reduce the number to five. After all, we have the youth who are the majority but they are only represented by five MPs. We can go stage by stage until we get them out of Parliament.

Madam Speaker, regarding the term limits, it is high time we reinstated this because once we have the term limits, what would be the need for us to have the age limit? Whether you come to power when you are 75, we know you shall only rule for 10 years and you retire. If you come at 18, we know you will only be there for 10 years and you retire. Therefore, there would not be need for age limit.

Therefore, I would only support and go with the issue of the term limits. It would sort out all these things. We know and those who were in the Constituent Assembly know the reason the age limit was brought at that time. They wanted to lock out Dr Apollo Milton Obote because if he came in, at that age, he would qualify to serve for two terms. Therefore, we could only reinstate the term limits to two terms of five years. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.49
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the first place, I want to complain that Government, instead of setting up a commission to handle these amendments, decided to sit back and ignore their responsibility. We are talking about more than 23 amendments, which in normal cases should not have been from a private member. It is very embarrassing.

Apart from that, it is my duty to speak on behalf of my people and therefore, I would love to ignore that and participate in this debate.

I want to comment on the issue of the Speakers’ panel. I do not know whether there is a difference between the Speakers’ panel and the panel of Speakers but I want to speak about the Speakers’ panel. I agree with those who say that we need that panel.

If we had such a team, it would be a breeding garden for our future substantive Speakers of this House. That to me, is good.

Secondly, this is not the first House to be considering this matter. I am aware that in 2015, there was such a proposal and there was a minority, which was carried by this House, to the effect that they supported it. Who are we not to support it? I think it is for the common good. It is for the good of this House and the good of that Chair. 

Madam Speaker, it is also international best practice to have such a panel. Why not? Some people are talking about Article 93 of the Constitution; if you removed the other one last time, can’t this one be removed? If you did it, can’t this one be done? (Laughter)When we sometimes talk about these matters – I have a lot of respect for the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, however, when we are talking about certain things, allow us the non-legal to bring our perspective on board. That is what they call collective responsibility. 

There are special circumstances where we know that maybe the person who is in the panel cannot be able to handle the Chair. In such a case, the real Speaker comes back to handle the business of the House. I do not see a problem with this.

In Kenya, they have such a panel. In India, they have it. In Australia and many other countries, they have adopted this as best practice. Therefore, Uganda can follow suit.

About the issue of the qualifications of a chairperson Of the Electoral Commission, I am one person – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude

MR AOGON: As I conclude, it is only fair that we let those who qualify to fill the position but not necessarily to dictate that somebody must have been a judge of the High Court. After all, I am seeing nearly all entities have a proper backing of legal technical experts. Why are we trying to discriminate against others? We have had engineers before. We have had social scientists and teachers. I can also chair that commission. Why are you discriminating against me? We need this to be shared amongst all the citizens of Uganda.

I have seen the issue of representation of the Army here. When they were bringing the Army to Parliament, what happened to the Police Force, the Prisons Service and the private security guards? Why did you leave them out? I feel it would be discriminative and unconstitutional to continue having the UPDF in the House whereas the others are left in the backyard. I reject the decision to keep the UPDF in the House. They have a lot of duties to help this country. We are overburdening them by keeping them here.

I would also like to say something simple on the issue of the term limits. It would give a chance to the people like the Iteso to be in power once power is rotated. It is good to have term limits. When you have term limits, opportunities rotate all over. The star moves around and it falls on people’s heads after every ten years. What is wrong with that? I think it is proper practice.

On the issue of the ministers being appointed from outside the House, I believe that all people who are going to be ministers should be members of Parliament so that they have the support of the people. 

Secondly, people who are not elected by the people tend to become arrogant because they feel they are not answerable to the people. They will be careless. They can decide to do anything. That will be dangerous for this country. It is an abomination.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I invite this House to support my position. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, concerning the Speakers’ panel, in fact it was not in 2015, Rt Hon. Ayume, the second Speaker of this country after the new Constitution was the first one to request for a panel. It was brought again and it was blocked in the 2005 amendment of the Constitution. It is a request that has come from the presiding officers of this House over time. I think they should listen to us. 

5.56
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County west, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to seek your indulgence that you add me a few seconds – 

THE SPEAKER: You are a remnant -(Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We have been around for some time. I would like to go to the Constitution. Article 61(2) clearly says that the Electoral Commission shall hold presidential, general parliamentary and local government elections; of course, within the first 100 days. It says that these shall be held on one day. Sub-clause 3 says “except where it is impracticable to do so.”

What it meant is that these elections should be held on one day but where it is impossible, is where you can hold them differently. We went the Electoral Commission to tell them to hold the elections on one day. They said they had never tested it. 

What is needed on the election day is to line up boxes of different offices and when they identify a voter, he goes through voting up to the end. What remains is counting. The reason we changed the time for voting from ending at 5.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. was to count votes when it is still day time. 

From what we have discovered, as the number of polling stations have increased, you get a polling station with 160, 200 or 300 people. If we discover that closing the polling station is too late in the evening, we can even adjust to 3.00 p.m. but we should hold elections on the same day. 

The justification is that after presidential and parliamentary elections, the remaining elections are dangerous because the voter turn-up goes down. That is where most of the rigging is done. I recall the last elections of the LC IIIs, even Parliament sat on election day. The only day there is a public holiday is when it is presidential and parliamentary elections. All the other remaining are working days.

For us to cut costs, we should have elections on the same day. I see no reason why we should have them on different days. 

Incidentally, paying agents is the responsibility of the Electoral Commission. I would like to quote the law again. Under the Presidential and Parliamentary Elections Act, section 33(4), the person who determines the money to be paid to the agents is the Commission and it is also responsible to bear. 

I have not understood why candidates should look for money to pay when the law says the Electoral Commission should determine and pay. The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is here. They are the people who know what I am saying. The reason they should pay is to make an election not an expensive venture. You should not go to an election to look for money to pay agents. This is the responsibility of the Electoral Commission. The Government of Uganda should appropriate money for this activity. We should think about it. 

Under Article 63, it is the Electoral Commission to demarcate constituencies and under Article 64, if there is a need for appeal of the decision of the Commission, there must be the following:

Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Electoral Commission in respect of any complaint arising out of Article 61 and demarcation must go to a tribunal and this tribunal is appointed by the Chief Justice. If I am aggrieved by the decision of the tribunal, I am free to go to the high court.

On 3 September, 2020, Forum for Democratic Change wrote to the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission about a tribunal because issues had to come up to the tribunal but it was not formed. And without it, you cannot go to the High Court.

This showed that the Electoral Commission is failing in its duties because the person who is there is a judge of the Court of Appeal but he cannot read the Constitution and understand it.

Akabway was just a teacher but he conducted the Constituent Assembly and did a lot of work. I have discovered that you do not need to be a judge to be in the Electoral Commission. Even Engineer Kiggundu did far better than the Justice of the Court of Appeal.

When you call him, he says some of those matters are above him. He allowed the police and army to take over the role of the Electoral Commission and yet, at that time, they should have been under his control. We need to think about how this Electoral Commission performs its duty and goes scot free. 

I happy that my “mother”, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, is here and remembers. One of the things she forgot is that at that time, you would not get clearance to contest without my signature. I am the one who cleared all of you.

You may look at me like that but you would not contest without my signature. That is why the Speaker is smiling. We made a Constitution, which was very good but along the way, we have started destroying it and, in the process, I am sure it is blank.
It is important that we look at the Constitution of 1995 in totality. What was the purpose? 

On Cabinet ministers, Article 113(2) says, “The total number of Cabinet ministers shall not exceed 21 except with the approval of Parliament.” Incidentally, for the current Cabinet and ministers of state, we never made a resolution to exceed that number.

They are here illegally. We should have had 21 ministers and this is always done at the beginning. Whoever disputes me, the Hansard is there.

Under (4), “A minister shall not hold any office of profit or emolument likely to compromise his or her office.” I heard hon. Okupa speaking. These ministers are being compromised by being both ministers and members of Parliament. They do not reason.

When they come here, they fear collective responsibility of being a minister. When he is here, again he says, “I am a member of Parliament” for purposes of emoluments.

The reason Cabinet ministers decided to be paid as members of Parliament was because of money. A minister should be a minister and should speak as a minister; not looking at his or her feet and biting her nails as though she is shy. (Interjection)

Those are the ones who do it. If you do not, why are you saying, order? That is why we give them vehicles –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Madam Speaker, whereas hon. Nandala-Mafabi is trying to drive home a very wonderful point, he is trying to femininize it because I do not think – It is women who work on their nails and when you say that ministers come here wasting time looking at their nails, that is a direct attack on a woman and on a woman minister who sits in this Parliament.

Despite the fact that we have a parliamentary language of respect, this shows that the ministers in this House have not added any substance to this House basing on the way hon. Nandala-Mafabi is talking. 

Is he in order to demean the ministers whom he inquiries from all the time on issues pertaining the running of Government while we execute the duties of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, what is the word you used? 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: No, what word did you use? Chewing nails?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I never said he or she. I said chewing nails, looking under and I meant he or she. I would like to make my case -

THE SPEAKER: The ministers are here responsibly. I have never seen anyone chewing their nails in this House. That is un-parliamentary; please, withdraw it.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala-Mafabi should have confessed his sin; that when a woman comes here with nicely painted nails, instead of being attentive, he is watching those nails. There is nothing wrong and I have not seen any minister chewing their nails but I have seen hon. Nandala-Mafabi looking at women’s nails.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I would like to withdraw the statement of chewing nails but you have seen our ministers sitting - Even now, they are not around, maybe they have gone to the salon to work on their nails.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, when you talk about salons, you are talking about women. What is your problem with women, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I mean men and women. I would like to make the case as follows - (Interruption)

MR MBABAALI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Nandala-Mafabi is a senior member of this Parliament and irrespective of the party that you belong to, we must respect colleagues. I do not want to believe that hon. Nandala-Mafabi reasons far above the ministers here.

There are members of Parliament who stood for these positions. They are lucky that they are appointed by the President to be ministers. It must not be a crime. We must respect our colleagues. There is a language we can use when we are in the canteen taking tea but there is a language we must use when we are in Parliament, irrespective of the differences. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, hon. Nandala has been advised but he is insisting. He switched from nails; he has gone to salons and is going to whichever statement. We must desist from this.

Is hon. Nandala, as a senior member of this Parliament, who must teach others and as a Secretary-General of a party who must show respect, in order to insist on demeaning and insulting the ministers who are held in high regard in this Government and who form another arm of Government called the Executive? Is hon. Nandala really in order to demean them?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala, please, concentrate on the Bill before us and you are not supposed to use unparliamentary language. You had withdrawn; then you brought something new. You are out of order.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. “A minister shall not hold any office of profit or emoluments likely to compromise his or her office.”

I would like to thank my colleague who has just spoken that these are members of another arm of Government. He has even made my case better. There is the arm of the Executive; the other one is the Judiciary and there is Parliament.

It will be criminal for somebody to be in two arms. You must serve one arm. My case here would be that if you want to be a minister - like my sister from Ngora, who is now here; but for you, you are lucky you can be now without any compromise – it should be those who are not members of Parliament. If you want to be, you become an ex officio member.

The justification is for you to concentrate on the role of a minister so that others concentrate on the role of Members of Parliament. You can see ministers are not there in the House because they are in the offices doing other work, yet, they are supposed to have been here doing the work of a minister.

THE SPEAKER: I see the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, Minister of Local Government and Minister of Public Service. I see the Attorney-General. I see the Minister of East African Community Affairs. They are here. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, if they are here, the total number is 21 plus 21. Under the Constitution, it should be 42 –(Interruption)– I am going to call hon. Abala, please. Do not disturb me; sit down. Madam Speaker, an induction course should be conducted for the outgoing MPs. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, in that regard, I hope that as we are making the amendments, we should look into how we can improve the performance of Parliament without compromising it with people being in more than one arm of Government.

In the next election, frankly speaking, if we do not make a good Constitution, we are going to be affected heavily. What took place in the last election – if you look through it – was really tough and the next one is going to be tougher. The Constitution we should make should really be looking at curbing those excesses which will take place next.

Madam Speaker, this Constitution we are going to make, I am pleading that we should look at what hon. Ogwal meant between 1994 and 1995. Of course, I am the one who moved it and it was removed by the current Chief Justice, when he expunged it; that I never consulted but it was in good faith.

Term limits are good and the age limit should come back. I am certain that if we want to be safe and if we are worried of the current leader, we can say age limit is for the new one, with exception of current one. (Laughter)
You see, age is a very important thing. Madam Speaker, you come at a time when there are people. If you look at below 30 years, there is a problem. If you look at above 75 years, there is still a problem.

That is why in civil service, people retire at 60. Justices of the High Court - is it judges of the High Court; I do not know very well – and I think Supreme Court retire at 65. At Supreme Court, they say – is it – 70. They know that there is diminishing return in life.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want us to really think about reinstating age limit, with an exception provision.

Finally –

THE SPEAKER: Please wind up.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I want to wind up. Finally, the panel of Speakers is important but also, it would be important to know when the Speaker sits in the chair, he is not debating for his constituents.

We should also think about the Speaker. Should the Speaker remain a Member of Parliament? We should handle these things with firmness. If I am a Speaker, at what time do I really do represent my constituency? Even the Speaker, to me, should be an ex officio member. If you become a Speaker, you should leave the office of being a Member of Parliament. If you are not a Member of Parliament and have come from out, it would be better.

Madam Speaker, I am raising all this in good faith to improve performance of the House. I know why; you know I have been a culprit of those who were in the last amendment of age limit. I was suspended for a good number of days by the House because of acts which took place. However, I want us to make this Constitution in such a way that next time, if amendments take place, Members of Parliament are treated with dignity.

I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: You know, members of Parliament also have the duty to behave responsibly when in this House. Hon. Mbabaali, hon. Pacuto, hon. Noeline, hon. Elotu.

6.17
MR MUYANJA MBABAALI (Independent, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am going to make contributions on clause 3 on Article 78, clause 5 on Article 82 (b), clause 17 and 18 on Article 113 and 114 and also clause 22 on Article 166.

Madam Speaker, clause 3 on Article 78; do we remove the Army from Parliament? Let us have a clear history on why the Army joined the House. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal was about to say it when she mentioned the Constituent Assembly.

As Uganda, you must recall that since 1966, the Army made a coup. As you may recall, in 1971, on January 25th, the army made a coup. As you may recall, Uganda was invaded in 1978 because of military rule and the entire world joined efforts to liberate Uganda.

Since that time, Uganda was looking for stability. It is only this time around that Uganda is now enjoying political stability. The Army is there, not as a listening tool but they are studying the situation, so that the reoccurrences of what happened in 1966, 1971 and 1978 do not occur again. It is not until Uganda is free and stable that we can say the Army is now free to leave Parliament.

For that matter, I really feel and greatly support that the military should remain in Parliament. There are other friends who wondered why police and prison officers are not represented, yet, they have not made a coup. The reason is, it was only the army, which called for political instability in this country. Therefore, on that clause in Article 78, I support the soldiers to remain in Parliament. 

In clause 5, about the panel of Speakers, it is clear that in today’s Parliament, we are 428 Members. The next Parliament will have about 539 Members of Parliament. You can imagine about the volume of work. 

Therefore, without any question, the panel of Speakers must be included to have a substantive Speaker and three deputies. That goes without saying. Imagine guiding a House of 539 members’ issues. It is not a simple matter.

Think of a situation where our Speaker has been here since 2.00 p.m. up to date and has not had a chance to even whisper to somebody somewhere. Such work is very seriously tiring.

Madam Speaker, on electing non-members of Parliament to the executive, I would like to say - it is true that we have been grilling ministers here; so, if a minister doubles as a member of Parliament, she or he has got several excuses. To become a minister is a bit of a technical job, which must be evaluated at the end of the day.

However, being a member of Parliament, only voters can evaluate you. This can be temporary because separation of power requires performance and we expect ministers to perform and lead this country ahead. For that matter, I recommend that the Government considers this clause so that not only selected members of Parliament go to serve in the Executive.

Madam Speaker, allow me to talk about Article 166(22) where the Bill gives the Public Service Commission powers to determine the salaries and allowances of public officers. This should be done in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. How can they determine the allowances and salaries without knowing what is in the basket?

I would like to propose that Article 166(22) be adopted but with an amendment that this is done in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.23
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to make a direct comment on one of the clauses of this Bill. I have particular interest in clause 5, which refers to the Speakers’ panel. I would like to agree with a number of honourable members who have supported it for very many reasons that I do not want to dwell into, given the time now.

However, I need some clarity, which I believe many of my colleagues here also do. I would like to know how many Members will on the Speakers’ panel. What will be their term of office? Will they also serve a period of five years like the Speaker and Deputy Speaker? Or, at one given time, they can be relieved of their duties or changed?

Another area of clarification that I would like to seek is that if they are not presiding, for instance, if the Speaker is in the Chair, are they allowed to participate in the debate like any other member of Parliament since they are representatives of their people?

In case there is disorder in the House, would a member of the Speakers’ panel have powers to either dismiss or suspend a Member from the House? Those are grey areas in this report and as members of this House we need clarity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are different ways of doing it. In some jurisdictions, they are nominated at the beginning of the session to serve for that session. That is what they do in the House of Commons and Australia but other countries do it differently. Let us agree on the principle and the details can be worked out later.

6.26
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank you for your decision to extend this debate to today to allow more Members to speak to this Bill. I would like to raise in support of the restoration of term limits. Term limits should be restored to two terms of five years each. This will provide for a peaceful transition of power from one Government to the other, which this country needs to have.

Madam Speaker, when you sent us to consult in 2017, this is one of the issues that my constituents sent me to bring to this House. Unfortunately, that time, despite the many times I stood up, I was not able to catch the good eye of the Speaker. I am happy today I have had the opportunity.

It is my considered opinion that in this provision, we do not only restore term limits but also entrench that removing this from the Constitution will require the consent of the majority of Ugandans. I have noted in the report that this entrenchment would impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund by holding a referendum. Yes, if it be then it is worthwhile that the majority of Ugandans will have to decide on whether term limits should be removed or not. It is my considered opinion that this provision be entrenched in the Constitution.

Regarding the extension to seven years, we have just concluded an election in which we agreed with the electorates that our mandate would be five years, from 2021 to 2026. Therefore, it would be uncalled for to extend the term to seven years.

I would like to also make a contribution to the establishment of the Speakers’ panel. I would like to differ from the committee that rejected the establishment of the Speakers’ panel. In the Tenth Parliament, I have witnessed instances where the House would not sit or would delay to sit, simply because the Speaker or Deputy Speaker or both are engaged in other parliamentary duties. This is a welcome idea.

There is an issue in the report that this would increase on the cost of running parliamentary business. I imagine and understand that in this Speakers’ panel, the Members will be drawn from members of Parliament, probably chairpersons of committees who are already paid and facilitated to do their work. Therefore, if there must be any extra cost, I would not think it will be too high for this Parliament to bear. Therefore, in a bid to help our Speaker and Deputy Speaker to be more efficient, effective and to rest, I support the establishment of a Speaker’s panel. Thank you.

6.30
Mr cosmas elotu (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I have not congratulated you upon your victory in the last election; congratulations. We look forward to seeing you in the Eleventh Parliament.

The Speaker: Thank you.

Mr elotu: I rise to contribute to this debate. First of all, I would like to thank the committee and the mover of this Bill for bringing up very pertinent issues that we need to consider in our Constitution. 

I was particularly happy to see Mama Cecilia calling herself “a remnant of the Constituent Assembly”. Our Constituent Assembly did a very good job for us but they also left us with a very big task; I remember the last amendment we made to the Constitution regarding the age limit and issues that have been debated in this Parliament today like representation of the army and others. These are issues that were brought into our Constitution and they have become very controversial over time. I call that “the results of our history”. 

My brother, hon. Okupa, brought it out very critically and gave an example of the issue of age limit. I think the same applies to army representation. Therefore, I totally agree with this issue being debated in the House and, probably, having a very strong consensus agreed on the way forward.

Allow me to comment on the issue of ministers being Members of Parliament or ex officio Members. To the best of my understanding, a minister is both a technical person and political representative. Having ex officio Members purely as ministers may give us difficulty in terms of understanding the issues at constituency level. I feel more comfortable working with a minister who fully understands the challenges at constituency level. Therefore, I still believe that ministers should be Members of Parliament.

On the issue of term limits, as one of the colleagues said, I think it goes without debate. However, bringing up the issue of term limit and age limit may not apply. Again, I would like to borrow a colleague’s argument and say that if you are 75 years old and you are given two terms of whatever duration, that is adequate to address the issue of age.

In many countries, presidents are very old people, for example, in the United States of America. I think it holds some water. Young people have many unfulfilled requirements in life and they definitely pursue different goals. However, I feel that an old person may be more focussed in office. Therefore, the issue of age may not come in here. 

However, term limits are very paramount for every chief executive officer for purposes of accountability. Having endless durations in office definitely will make you sleep on the job or recycle the same issues over time. Therefore, I think we must restore term limits without debate.

On the tenure of Parliament, this is a very big issue that we must look into. I have heard colleagues say that our electorate gave us a mandate over this period of time, but that is why we are here. We are here to deliberate on issues that we feel if changed, it will be for the good of our people.

Madam Speaker, if you came here during the time of campaigns, this was like a deserted place. In the United States, the Senate is divided into three sections. One-third of the Senate is elected after every two years. By so doing, the Senate is fully operational at any point in time. 

Back to our issue, if you came here last month or two months ago, there was no activity taking place and this affected the delivery of services to our people. My point here is that whether the tenure of Parliament is ten, seven or five years, we must devise ways to ensure that Parliament is always functional at any one point in time for purposes of accountability and continuity of governance.

Lastly, I would like to agree with my brother, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, on the voting. After the presidential and parliamentary elections, any other election is no longer meaningful.  I, therefore, call upon this House to prevail over this and say that elections be held on one day. Counting of votes may vary but let the votes be cast for all elective positions on one day.

This is my brief contribution. I will yield my time back to you or the next speaker. Thank you.

6.36
The minister of state for local government (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba and the committee for coming up with these proposals. 

I would like to start with the proposal on city land boards. You are aware that we have created cities and they do not have land boards. Therefore, I support the proposal to have city land boards created in our Constitution.

The other issue is about the presidential, parliamentary and local government elections being held on the same day. We have had a challenge as local governments where after the President and MPs are elected and people know that their candidates have lost, they lose interest in coming to vote. This time, it was even more challenging because the local government elections were in the middle of the week. Therefore, the civil servants could not travel many times back and forth to their villages to vote. Therefore, I would like to agree with the proposal that we should have elections on the same day, including those for the local governments.

I would like to support the idea of the Speaker’s panel because we are human. We have sat here at times and the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are engaged, yet we must conduct business. However, I would like to know if they will be entitled to similar benefits like the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker. Also, will it be at liberty of the Speaker to dismiss any of them? I know that will come maybe in the Rules of Procedure or the subsequent laws, but these are things we need to talk about.

About the army, our Constitution talks about interest groups - the women, youth, persons with disability, workers’ MPs and the army. Why do we pick out only the army to be removed, yet the Constitution has a proviso that we shall revise this after every 10 years? Why don’t we wait to have that process done? Why should we only allow the army to go and fight for us to have peace in this country but not enjoy the privilege of sitting in this House?

I do not support the idea that the army should be disbanded from this House. If we feel that other security agencies should come in, let us add them, but let us have the army in this House. I do not agree that they are just listening posts. They contribute to this House. I have heard colleagues contributing meaningfully.

The other issue is about the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs). They are useful, and I am speaking as a supervisor of local governments. I went to Abim District to supervise the roads under the Development Initiative for Northern Uganda Project (DINU). The local government leaders chose to take me to the good roads and decided to hide the bad roads from me. However, it was the RDC that brought it to my attention. These RDCs help us to monitor the Government programmes. If there are challenges, we can improve them but we need the RDCs around. 

There is the issue of ministers serving as both ministers and Members of Parliament. Madam Speaker, some of us volunteer to be ministers. We are paid as Members of Parliament. We actually help the Government to save money. Therefore, I support the status-quo now, where the President is given powers to appoint some ministers but selects a majority of the ministers from the Members of Parliament. 

I do not support the idea of removing the Office of the Prime Minister because he is one of the chairpersons of Cabinet. We also have deputy prime ministers. These are all leaders of Government business in Parliament. The President does not sit here. If we remove the Prime Minister, then who is going to do all those duties? I do not support the idea of removing the Office of the Prime Minister.  I support the status-quo. 

I would like to end with the matter regarding the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General not being members of Cabinet and Parliament. I think that is suicidal. The Attorney-General and the deputy are the Government advisors. We handle matters for which we need legal advice in both institutions. We cannot say that they will be appointed on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission yet they are not Members of Parliament or Cabinet. Again, I support the status-quo. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. 

6.42
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to congratulate you upon winning the elections we just concluded. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MS JANEPHER MBABAZI: Madam Speaker, I believe that this august House, at the time of making a decision on removing term limits, saw this as the best option. However, we have since learnt from that decision. The circumstances today demand that we reinstate these term limits. 

The justification is that removing term limits has shown us that in the unfortunate event that we have a bad leader, we may not have a chance to put that leader to order. I, therefore, support that the term limits be reinstated as one of the measures to curtail bad leadership. This should be applicable to all electoral leaders, right from the President going down to the local governments. 

I also propose that they only come back after serving two terms. This will save the country a lot of anxiety in succession planning. I am aware that some developed countries do not have term limits but they have more robust institutions that can tame bad leadership, which is not in a developing economy. 

I also support the proposal of appointing non-Members of Parliament as ministers to allow separation of powers. Ministers will concentrate on service delivery as opposed to politics. I think we should be sincere that there is a lot of workload for these ministers; if you are both a Member of Parliament and minister, then you may not perform to your expectations. It will also give ministers time to concentrate on their jobs. There are very many professionals in this country. I think the President will get a chance to appoint the most specialised and qualified professionals to lead these ministries. The Government will benefit from this. 

I think the issue of elections being held on the same day is a very good idea. This will save time and money for the country, and the intrigue that is usually among the candidates. We should all know that after electing people to the high offices, like the honourable minister has just said, people lose morale and we do not get the best from the lower offices. 

On changing the five-year term to a seven-year term, I think five years is good enough to judge one’s performance. I, therefore, propose that we remain with the contract we made with Ugandans for five years. 

I believe the choice of the commissioners should be the mandate of Parliament. This will improve efficiency and effectiveness of these commissioners. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to submit. Thank you.

6.46
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to others and thank hon. Niwagaba for successfully moving this private Member’s Bill to its final debate. 

Like hon. Cecilia Ogwal, my senior said, some of us had the opportunity to be part of the Constitution framers in 1995. We are proud that together with other colleagues, we managed to come up with an honourable Constitution. It is one of the best Constitutions in the continent, as you can testify, Madam Speaker. It is the first Constitution, if I may say, of its kind that is gender sensitive. 

The issue of term limits, as you have rightly said, came up during the Constituent Assembly debate. For the record, in 1995, I strongly supported term limits. I am on record that during the constitutional amendment of 2005, I was again strongly convinced that term limits were not a necessity. 

As of today, at every opportunity to amend the Constitution, the issue of term limits arises. I have been thinking through this and reading some of the notes. From what has transpired here, both term limits and no term limits have been tested, and the merits and demerits are well known.

Like hon. Cecilia Ogwal said, during the Constituent Assembly, we were not driven by politics because if we were, I think hon. Cecilia Ogwal and I would not have been on the same side. This time, I see that the issue tends to be driven by politics. However, for the common good of all, for the good of the framers of the Constitution and what they had envisaged for our country, and to have this issue be put to rest, I highly support that term limits should be reinstated. My conscience is very clear and I am very convinced. If my grandchildren want to come here and do the reverse, I know I would have done my best this time.

On the issue of ministers being Members of Parliament, Madam Speaker and my dear colleagues, let us be sincere to ourselves. Let us take the practical experience in this House. You see that some ex officio Members are detached from what is happening and from the reality. You have seen some ex officio Members who have demonstrated that they are completely inefficient in their ministries. Therefore, there is no reason for that proposal.

Added to that, these ministers do not have the mandate of the people. As Members of Parliament, we have to work because we must be accountable to the people. The ex officio ministers are mindful of the appointing authority, and that is where they normally tend to pay allegiance.

Madam Speaker, I always like being practical. Most of these ex officio Members, at the time of elections, went back to seek the people’s mandate. That shows that they are not satisfied with what they are. They want to be representatives of some entity. Maybe it was a vote of no confidence in the appointing authority, which I do not think it was, but they think they are not fully incorporated in this institution called Parliament. They do not have a vote on national issues, so why do we keep them here? It is high time we had MPs in Cabinet for accountability.

We are supposed to play an oversight role. When doing this, we are supposed to monitor ministers; how do you monitor somebody who is not part of the resolutions that you passed as they were not there? I am strongly opposed to this, not because I am a Member of Parliament and want to catch the eye of the appointing authority, but the principle should be that we have those who have the people’s mandate as ministers.

On the panel of Speakers, there is no doubt in everyone’s mind. As you are aware, at most African Speakers’ conventions, this issue has been debated. Parliaments in Africa - I have the opportunity to represent this Parliament in the Pan African Parliament, so I am speaking with authority - have debated this issue and said it is high time the member states put in place panels of Speakers.

Madam Speaker, as you have rightly said, in the Constituent Assembly, this issue came up. When it arose, at its initial stage it had a lot of support, but it was abandoned on the way because of time; we were running out of time. 

Members, you have seen how our Speaker has performed - the hours she puts in, let alone how she represents us at international events. So, the performance of our own Speaker, which I stand here to confirm – Honourable members, this Parliament is one of the highly respected and honoured parliaments on our continent because of the stewardship of our Speaker and your participation.  Therefore, I support this, as I did in 1995; we should have had a panel of Speakers yesterday other than today.

On the UPDF, there is what they call institutional memory. There is also the issue of going to the archives. When we go back to the history of this country and how UPDF was incorporated into this institution, there were strong voices that said “we do not need the army here” and there are those who said “no” –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude.

MS KAWOOYA:  Madam Speaker, there are those who said “no” because of the Constitution’s mandate on the protection of the citizens and their property. In this regard, security is paramount. 

The UPDF acts on behalf of Government, so we cannot have them outside. Let them be part of this august House in making decisions, so that they are part of these decisions. This would bind them not to go and act in any way they want.

Finally, about the seven-year term, my colleagues who want the seven-year term, I am not with you - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Mbabazi Prossy, then hon. Kibalya, hon. Angura and hon. Kiwanuka.

6.56
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am the one who caught your eye and I know that the facemask – 

THE SPEAKER: Oh, it is you, hon. Oketayot –(Laughter)

MS OKETAYOT: Thank you for this opportunity. I also want to join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report. 

I would like to submit on the proposal to provide for a Speakers’ panel. I am grateful that many colleagues support of it. The committee, in its report, made good observations in support of this proposal. They even went ahead to state that it is considered as international best practice in most Commonwealth countries. However, the committee concludes on this proposal in a very disappointing way. They rejected it after making very good observations. 

It is not easy to amend the Constitution every now and then, so why don’t we use this opportunity to try and address this very glaring challenge. As it has been pointed out, this issue has been discussed before; it is not the first time this is being discussed. It was discussed in this House in the past and recommendations were adopted. I think it is high time that we amended the Constitution to have this panel in place.

Madam Speaker, I believe that this panel will greatly improve on the performance of this House, because the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker are human beings; it is not easy for them to sit for many hours, and it is not healthy. Even those here from the medical profession will tell us it is not healthy to sit for long hours. We have been having gaps and challenges in the past. So, from this experience, I would appeal to all my colleagues that –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: The Members who do not speak today can contribute tomorrow. I shall note your names down. 

7.00
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the idea of the Speakers’ panel. We strongly support the provision of a Speakers’ panel. Our few challenges will be addressed. As you said, we shall discuss the modalities on the day we are reviewing. 

A colleague said that maybe the panel should represent the different shades of political affiliation. I am looking at a situation when the Speaker and Deputy Speaker are not there and hon. Nandala-Mafabi is in the Chair presiding over this House; I wonder what will happen, really. So, Madam Speaker, we need to look at that and see how we can move. 

The second issue is on the RDC’s office. As a colleague suggested, the RDCs are useful. We are having issues with the technical teams in the districts. There could be a difference somewhere, but I do not support the removal of the RDC’s office. I strongly support the retaining of the office of the RDC so that in one way or the other, if someone has failed to make it to Parliament, he or she can be given the office of the RDC somewhere and they can still serve this country. 

About voting on one day, I would like to say that when it comes to voting for the President, constituency representatives and woman MPs, it takes two days to declare a winner. I am looking at how long it would take if we to vote for all the offices in a single day - councillors at the subcounty, councillors at the district, chairpersons and all the others. If it takes three days to declare a winner for three posts, what will happen in the case of ten posts? 

Therefore, I do not support voting on one day. We only need to check the mistakes that we are making and put things right. We shall promote the rigging that is everywhere. If we vote on one day for every office, rigging will just be the order of the day. 

Regarding the issue of term limits, we strongly support term limits. However, if we are going to reinstate term limits and leave it open like it was before, what we did in 2017 or what those MPs did in 2005 will be done at that time when we are not there. That will happen, unless we do something different like ring-fencing it and making sure that Parliament has no powers to change it unless there is a referendum. 

As for the ministers, let us have ministers selected the same way we have been having them. Let some come from MPs and others be appointed by the President. 

For the army, the mode of voting the army representatives is the problem. Let the army representatives be voted for from different areas and not just Bombo with the Commander-in-Chief plus a few other people present. Those do not represent the interests of the other people. 

On the issue of the Deputy Speaker and Speaker not being Members – no, they should be Members of Parliament and they should be voted by us. 

The seven years’ story should not surface. Let us have five years. If we want seven years, let us first come to office in the next Parliament and debate it for another Parliament that will come after us; we should not have our selfish interests represented. 

Lastly, on the issue of the Prime Minister, I would like to say that we still need the Prime Minister in Government. On most occasions, we do not have people to answer our questions much as the answers are for their docket. The Prime Minister, Ndugu Ruhakana Rugunda, will give you the answer he wishes to give, but we would rather have those funny answers than not having any at all. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Minister, this is your docket, so you will come last. I am writing down the names of all those who are interested in speaking. 

7.04
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee and the mover of the Bill for coming up with these wonderful pieces of legislation that we are looking at now. 

The Constitution is a living document. Members have talked about the amendments and how long we take to make amendments. However, since it is a living document, it is also subject to dynamic situations that keep coming up whenever we feel necessary. 

I would like to make a comment on the panel of Speakers. Yes, I also subscribe to that. It is even good that you have reminded us that during the Constituent Assembly, the Rt Hon. Ayume also had this discussed in the House and many other proposals were considered. 

Commonwealth countries are slowly but surely adopting this practice of a panel of Speakers. Perhaps, what will need to be harmonised and managed in detail is how many Members we shall have on the panel of Speakers – that is, besides the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker – and we can move with that. 

I know, Madam Speaker, you always do a lot of work here. We need to give you an opportunity, where necessary, to have Members support the House in moving issues that you think can be pushed to the panel. 

I also would like to make some comments on the RDCs. The RDCs are very important persons in our districts. All they need is to be supported. Looking at monitoring of the various projects that are taking place in the districts, at times we do not get very good results when we liaise with the civil servants, but the RDCs are very important and instrumental in ensuring that some of these projects move. Therefore, we need to support that office. Support those people with more resources and we will be able to get the Government programmes moving very well. 

Regarding the issue of elections, it is true, as hon. Kibalya mentioned, that it takes long for winners to be declared. True, two days have always – (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude in half a minute.

MR ANGURA: In the recently concluded elections, I know many of us were declared after almost a day and a half. However, you may also recall that immediately the presidential and parliamentary elections ended, the other elections for lower levels, which are equally important in the day-to-day management of the affairs of this country, had a turnout of very few people. The turnout was very poor. Therefore, we need to give an opportunity to everyone who elects the President and Members of Parliament to also participate in the election of lower level leaders - the LCs III and others. 

Additionally, we can even move amendments here stating that the declaration of results for LCs III be done at the respective subcounties. If we do that very well, with good management from the Electoral Commission, we can go to their headquarters for the declaration of the MPs and President. The subcounties can then also manage declarations at those levels. 

On the issue of ministers being appointed from outside Parliament, I think let us give opportunity to Members of Parliament to continue serving in this role as ministers, if they catch the President’s eye. We can still have a few ex officio Members come here, but the opportunity to interact and interface with our own, who always come here and respond to issues that we need them to, is very important. No wonder, these days ex officio Members also present themselves to be elected; so, let us maintain that opportunity here and allow Members of Parliament to serve in those respective capacities.

On the army Members of Parliament, I would like to say that recently, you have seen the police in the limelight, being questioned much more than the army, because the army seems to be hiding amongst the police. I would, therefore, implore us to consider looking at how we can get the police here, so that all these arms of Government responsible for security at that higher level are accountable to us as Members of Parliament.

Finally, on the appointment of the Electoral Commission chairperson, I know that the Electoral Commission will always be in the spotlight when elections end, like it happened during this period that we have just gone through. I know that there are challenges, but we need to continue- (Member timed out.)

7.11
MR KEEFA KIWANUKA (NRM, Kiboga East County, Kiboga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity to speak on this very important matter. 

I would like to congratulate the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for an excellent job. The report is well researched, written with evidence and a lot of reference to case law and a bit of benchmarking. When hon. Odur was referring to the methodology, I agreed that the committee undersold itself there, because many of these aspects were not reflected in the methodology, but the issues in report were very well argued and the report is very persuasive.

Clauses 15, 17 and 18 of the Bill seek to cut down on the number of Cabinet ministers, restricting them to 21 and also restricting them to being ex officio Members. Part of this is redundant because it is already provided in the Constitution, in Articles 113 and 114, that the number of ministers will be 21 expect with the approval of Parliament. 

At the moment, we have a total of 31 Cabinet ministers, 49 ministers and the Vice-President, making a total of 81. How did we get here? It is very surprising because the spirit of the Constitution was to restrict this number. Even if Parliament was to authorise and add, I do not see Parliament tripling what is provided for in the Constitution. My worry now is that with the next Cabinet, this will be the benchmark. The fundamental question is: How did we get to 81 instead of the 21 provided for in the Constitution?

I strongly support the proposal of holding presidential, parliamentary and local government elections on one day. There is the question of how we shall deal with vote counting; we can deal with that later. As we witnessed from the just concluded elections, there is increasing voter apathy and many of us were being asked to help in transporting voters. The only way we can deal with this is ensuring that there is a lot of energy on a dedicated day for elections and voting takes place on that day.

Term limits were removed from the Constitution because there was a provision for age limit. Age limits have now been removed. In framing the Constitution, these were the safety mechanisms that the framers of the Constitution had, but all these have been removed. 

Term limits offer peaceful transition of power, political stability and with it economic development because there is confidence in what is going on in the country. Therefore, I strongly support this. It was a mistake not to have it entrenched right from the beginning. I agree with a colleague who said that we should deal with this now, once and for all, and have it entrenched, so that if it is to be amended, it should involve going to the people.

MR KEEFA: I would like to conclude with the issue of the Speaker’s panel. I am very impressed by the research that was provided by the committee on this, and I strongly support it. However, I see a problem, which the committee highlights - (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you got a lot of extra time. Honourable members, if we agree on the Speaker’s panel, we can pass the principle, then in our Rules of Procedure we can specify how it will be done.

I would also like to clarify the impression that has been created here that there was no resolution to increase the number of ministers. That is not true.  A proposal was brought to this House and passed. What I can say that it is often done very early when there a lot of expectations.

7.16
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Niwagaba for this. I will comment on a few issues. 

One, I would like to comment on the army. The army played an instrumental role in liberating this country. It has had a paradigm shift, in that there are now intellectuals and disciplined officers. Therefore, we feel that they should be part and parcel of Parliament. I support that idea.

The appointment of commissioners should be the mandate of Parliament. I support the proposal of a Speakers panel because the Speaker is going through a lot of stress sitting in Parliament every day. It is too much.

On the issue of term limits, currently it is okay but in future when our children and grandchildren are around, how can we ensure that we have a safe landing for them? You might have someone who might not fit the needs of the people or a monster, so maybe we need to go through a referendum. Politics is dynamic; I remember I voted for removal of term limits but when I went back, people were different, so maybe we need to reconsider that.

On Members of Parliament and ministers, speaking from experience, it has been very difficult balancing both. However, the President has the discretion to mix - to choose both. Seven years in Parliament is not appropriate; let us stick to the Constitution’s five years.

The Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business in Parliament is the one who evaluates our performance. He is the one who has the scorecard; he is the Leader of Government Business and I support that. I wish to submit, Madam Speaker.

7.19
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Islands County, Namayingo): Madam Speaker, I begin by congratulating our Members and I submit as follows:

One, I concur with the recommendations that local government, parliamentary and presidential elections should be handled in one day. When you look at our neighbour, Kenya, the elections of the Members of the County Assembly, governors, county representatives and so forth – they are very many – are handled in one day. I also concur that we should have it in one day.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the issue of term limits is important. I think reinstating it is something that is important and Ugandans require it, so that we are not haunted.

Thirdly, on the army, I shudder when Members talk about recalling our history. It is right, but the army should be non-partisan. Sometimes when I talk, you may think that I am hurting them and so forth, but if they are outside Parliament, they become non-partisan. I say that they should not be part of Parliament.

On the issue of the ministers, I think the status quo should remain - that the appointing authority is given powers to appoint from within and from without, so that he considers people who can serve well.

On the issue of the RDCs, I want to say that the RDCs are playing a vital role. From colonial times, we had the district commissioners. When Museveni came in, we had the Special District Administrators (SDAs) and then we went to Central Government Representatives (CGRs). They are now called RDCs. 

I think the major and important issue is to define their role because when you go on the ground, I think the roles are so complicated for some of them that sometimes, they overstep where they are supposed to be.

Lastly, I also want to say that when we went to the people to look for votes, we had a social contract of five years. It would be defiling our Constitution for anybody to try and smuggle this thing in. I think what he or she should do is to surrender and ask God to pardon him or her, so that we remain with five years, as it is.

On the panel of Speakers, it is important. I also agree with it. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to announce the following names that I have noted of Members who want to speak. In no particular order, we have - hon. Alyek, the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Taaka, hon. Masika, hon. Nyendwoha, hon. Akurut, hon. Ssenyonga, hon. Ssozi, hon. Oshabe, hon. Wamai, hon. Waluswaka, hon. Kenneth Lubogo, hon. Kinobere, hon. Karubanga and hon. Amongin.

Debate will continue tomorrow. Those are the Members who should be here in time; we will start with them. Thank you very much. The House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.24 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 February 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

