Tuesday, 24 February 2015

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I want you to join me in welcoming a delegation from Kamwenge District. They are led by Mr Gerald Tumwebaze and the district councillors of Kamwenge together with Mr Kateyingwa, the Chief Administrative Officer of Kamwenge. They are represented by hon. Nshaija, hon. Tumwebaze and hon. Nulu Byamukama. They are welcome.

Honourable members, as you recall, a few weeks ago, I enacted the Public Private Partnership Act, 2014 but His Excellency the President has returned it for the second time requiring us to reconsider our decision. I want to read his letter for the Hansard and later we will commit the same to the committee for quick perusal.

The letter is dated is 7 January 2015 and addressed to the Speaker. The subject is Public Private Partnership Act, 2014. 

“I have received the Act of Public-Private Partnership, which I referred to Parliament earlier. Parliament returned it to me without the requisite amendments I advised you on. I am again returning the Act to Parliament because all expert opinion and my own judgement is of the view that debating possible Public Private Partnerships in Parliament will deter foreign investment in the country.

Those who are pushing are guided but erroneous thinking to the effect that these foreign partners are dying to come to Uganda. They have failed to realise that Uganda is not China. It is not a compelling magnet that will pull in investors as if they have no alternative. Many of the partners even insist on confidentiality clauses. These partnerships are not the same as loans; these are investments. A quieter body like Cabinet will give us better results. 

I know a number of projects that were mishandled in Parliament when people like MP Kiraso misinformed Parliament regarding how Museveni had sold Dairy Corporation for $1. It was in the papers. The Thai Man’s Board cancelled the offer. It took us many years before we got another investor.

A number of other opportunities have been lost. Unemployment of the youth is a big threat to the future of the country. 

I again refer this Bill to you. 

President Yoweri K. Museveni.”

Honourable members, I will refer the same to the relevant committee to report back by Thursday. Thank you. At a later stage, I will allow the minister to formally move a motion but I wanted to communicate.

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday I commissioned the security system of the Parliament and as we speak, every part of these precincts is under surveillance, including the neighbouring institutions. I can assure you that any part of Kampala is now visible from the centre here. It is a very powerful facility. (Applause)

Honourable members, you may have noticed some booths, which are in the four corners. I want to remind you that you will have to register. Those facilities register with the index finger. Press your finger three times on the gadget and it will record you and each time you vote, it will just recognise you.

It will be used for voting but also for registering your entrance and exit. As you enter, press your finger and it will record that you arrived at 2.30 p.m. and if you are leaving at 3.00 p.m., it will also record that you left at 3.00 p.m.

I ask all Members who have not registered to do so because the whole system is integrated including your cars coming in and getting out. So far the turn-up of Members for registration has been low so we are extending it up to 13 March 2015. Please make sure that by 13 March 2015, your data has been entered within the system. 

I also wish to inform the Members that the Ministry of Health has developed and published a statutory instrument for vaccination of health workers against Hepatitis B. The instrument will be laid here to provide the procedure for reducing the risk among health workers. 

That is what I wanted to communicate for now. There were a few Members who had some issues.

2.49
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We want to congratulate Parliament for the electronic system because by God’s grace and by the blessing of the people of Tororo County, this matter has been on demand by Parliament for the last 20 years. I want to really congratulate you and tell my colleagues that Parliament has demanded for this and let us embrace it. 

On the issue of health, Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I have been told that Parliament is getting a doctor. However, I think there must be an oversight that we do not have an ambulance. My request to you -

THE SPEAKER: No, it is in the pipeline.

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much. I was requesting that to be included.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the Distinguished Stranger’s Gallery, we have the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia, Dr Jamal Abdul Aziz M.S. Raffa. He is there. He is welcome. He has come to observe the proceedings and as you know, at some stage during this month, we shall be paying tribute to the late King Abdullah. One of these days, we are going to put it on the order paper so that we can do the needful. 
2.51
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you talked about the communication from the Ministry of Health but in that communication, talking about parts (a) and (b), they are telling us they are going to help the medical workers to protect themselves from infection.

Some time last year, we reported here about the outbreak of this disease in the North and East and especially in Teso where Serere and Ngora districts have been hard hit. I remember at that time, we put it to the government, which promised to put this on the list of those vaccines that the population shall receive free from this year onwards. 

We are wondering when this will start because in the private hospitals and clinics, it costs Shs 40,000 per vaccination. I have just concluded mine at Kampala Hospital where I have had to pay Shs 40,000 every time I need the vaccine.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank you, hon. Okupa for giving me the opportunity to give you this information. 

I just returned from Agago this morning and I wanted to inform the House in regard to Hepatitis B outbreak. Yesterday, I buried a one Paul who died of Hepatitis B and within the last four days, we have lost three people to Hepatitis B. It is a very big problem that is threatening the lives of the people especially in the North, as hon. Okupa has said. So we really need to do something as Parliament had earlier asked. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Parliament has said a lot on this matter and we have debated it about three or four times. The rest remains with the government to provide the vaccines. We had even asked that if necessary, they should borrow money to provide the vaccines because if you are borrowing for roads, why don’t we borrow for medicine? It is really up to Government to tell us how they are moving. 

2.54
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to draw the attention of the House to what was captured on television over the weekend; the influx of locals to Namayingo District following the discovery of gold. For those of you who watched what was happening on television, you will agree that it is something that needs to be addressed very fast. 

One, no infrastructure is in place to accommodate the number of people flocking Namayingo District, especially the health and sanitation needs. If not checked, we are going to have a serious cholera outbreak in Namayingo District at a time when we are not prepared for it. The Ministry of Health, in the first place, should be aware of this if they did not watch the news.

Two, the education sector is at a loss because young children are not going to school as they are seriously involved in mining. They are the ones with basins and bags carrying soil and I think this is also a matter of concern. 

Above all, what has greatly compelled me to raise this matter is the question of the neglect of –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: He is a member for the islands.

MR OKEYOH: Thank very much my sister, hon. Ekwau, for bringing this out. The information I would like to provide to this House is that the situation in Namayingo needs Government’s very quick intervention because apart from the lack of sanitary facilities, there is even water contamination. These people are using mercury to purify the mineral and this same mercury is slipping into the water we are using for domestic use. The information that I want to provide is that the government should move in very fast. 

There is already conflict in the ministry in charge of minerals over who owns the piece of land and this needs urgent attention from the ministry. I thank you.

MS EKWAU: My grave area of concern is the question of the mineral sector in this country. Members will agree with me that in the last financial year, this House voted well over Shs 1 trillion to the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development. Out of the Shs 1 trillion, only Shs 500 billion is given to the mineral sub-sector. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, you can glaringly see that the ministry has completely abandoned the mineral wealth that we have in this country. If you talk about the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, it is either electricity or the new oil and gas that we are talking about. However, all the gold, diamonds, iron and vermiculite in Bugisu – mention all the minerals that we have, are being put to waste. 

We call upon the commitment of Government. If we are going to waste all the mineral resources that we have, especially the precious gold, to be given to chance, how do we therefore count for what we are supposed to earn out of this? The onus is upon the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development to come and tell the country whether we are just going to waste the precious minerals that we have, which minerals can turn this country into a first world country if handled very well. This is a matter that calls for urgent attention. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Wamanga-Wamai comes, I would like you to join me in welcoming Ms Doris Akol, the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority. She is in the technical bench and has come to listen to the tribute to her predecessor. She is there with a team from URA including Dr Christine Ondoa, one of our former colleagues. They are all welcome. 

2.58
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to raise a matter of national importance but before I do that, I want to thank you, Madam Speaker and the august House for approving a loan from the World Bank to work on roads in 14 municipalities. 

Madam Speaker, the people of Mbale got a raw deal and we keep wondering why the Ministry of Lands and Housing was given this project to supervise and award contracts for the roads in the municipalities to be worked on. 

The contractor who got the job in Mbale has done a shoddy job and it was the same contractor in Tororo and Soroti as I have been told. This contractor came and dug up all the roads in Mbale and even removed the little murram we had. They brought in a heap of murram, which I understand is not good quality and heaped it on these roads. When it rains, this murram, which is above the normal height of the roads, ends up in people’s shops.

As I speak, there is a lot of dust and people have lost their merchandise. All the computers and clothes in the shops are dusty and people cannot sell these items. When I talked to the contractor at a meeting in the town council, he said that the consultant had made wrong plans. However, I keep wondering, if these were wrong plans by the consultant, why did this contractor go ahead to implement these plans?

As I speak, my people are in terrible conditions. They are sick; they cough and the dust is so much. I am appealing to the Minister of Lands and Housing to come up and intervene very fast, otherwise, I am going to lead a demonstration in Mbale. 

I want to warn the Police and Kayihura that you should not show up because the people of Mbale are entitled –(Interruption)

DR MUTENDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my brother hon. Wamanga, for raising this issue. It is true that roads are being worked on in a number of municipalities, including Mbale, using money from the World Bank. It is also true that in the course of making the roads - at least the one in Mbale on Republic Street particularly - there has been a lot of dust raised during the dry season and it becomes muddy during the rainy season. 

However, recently, some members of the Opposition in Mbale organised a demonstration. They collected garbage from the garbage pits and poured it on the Republic Street in the name of demonstrating against the contractor. Is the member in order, as a representative of the people of Mbale, to come and promise another demonstration to cause more chaos in Mbale municipality? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I did not know what was happening in Mbale so I cannot rule on that matter but please conclude.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. The Minister of Housing, whom I feel was wrongly placed - I think that this work should have been given to the Minister of Works or UNRA people who know about roads not the Minister of Lands and Housing. We call upon him to come up and rectify the situation otherwise as I said, the people of Mbale are going to come on the roads to demonstrate if the situation is not rectified very fast. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.04
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I rise on a matter of national importance to do with security. In Obongi, we have received some strangers with cows and guns. When people asked them why they were grazing their cows in people’s gardens especially in the villages in Liwa Parish, Lelo village and indeed the issue had been reported to Gimara sub county, the people said that they were from Tanzania and they speak the Kinyarwanda language.

Our concern is not the language they speak but the fact that they move with guns. We raised this issue here in the recent past when the Rt hon. Prime Minister then was hon. Amama Mbabazi and it is in the Hansard. He promised that he would investigate the issue of cattle herders moving with guns. This report has not come to pass in the House. 

I would like to put it to this House that we need the attention of Government. In Karamoja, guns are being removed from cattle keepers. Why should we have other cattle keepers moving with guns in our area? They come from Tanzania and speak Kinyarwanda. What are they looking for in Obongi? This problem is not only in Obongi but in my neighbourhood, in areas such as Kululu Sub-county in Yumbe and in Madi-Okollo. They are moving towards the border of Uganda with South Sudan. We have –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, you are now causing a debate. Please speak to your issues so that we finish.

MR FUNGAROO: Madam Speaker, my prayer here is given the information we received about the identity of those people, we are aware as Ugandans that they were some people who moved into the country from Tanzania. If they are refugees, we need to know such that they are settled in a refugee camp.

In Obongi, we have a refugee settlement formerly used by the Sudanese but the people who stay there are under the care of UNHCR. If those people were taken there by the government and they are supposed to stay in the refugee settlement of Kaali, come through the door - (Member timed out.)

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Mine is essentially a point of procedure pursuant to rule 69 of our Rules of Procedure (2012). Under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure, members of Parliament can present the people’s complaints through petitions, which is an avenue capable of bringing solutions to problems.

Seven months ago, I petitioned Parliament over KCCA’s irregular eviction of over 500 people from the railway corridor in open ignorance of an earlier petition I had presented. Up to now, the committee in charge of infrastructure has not heard the voices of the suffering population. The people yearning to be heard must be heard and their right to be heard is invaluable in law. 

When is the committee giving audience to my people? Are they aware that by delaying, they are going to cause more havoc in my constituency and people could demonstrate at any time in protest? 

THE SPEAKER: Information from the committee.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we have visited the area in question with hon. Lukyamuzi and members of the committee. He has taken us around the affected areas and what remains is to receive witnesses. However, we held meetings in the field with him. That is the information I wanted to give. Thank you.

3.09
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I rise on a matter of national importance concerning an affront on our natural forest reserves across the country. I have witnessed, right from my constituency, that the NFA undertook a campaign to evict people who had encroached on our national forest reserves. 

As they did so, it had taken enough time for these forest reserves to naturally regenerate but of late, one forest after another, not only in Butambala but also in Mukono, Amuru, Teso and Arua, are being given to private farmers who are cutting down so many hectares of forested land, clearing what has been regenerating as natural forest and giving way to quick growth of eucalyptus and pine trees.

Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, I was so amazed in my constituency when I realised that 400 hectares have been apportioned to 17 farmers who are even outside the constituency. They are coming from all over and descending on these forest reserves. 

I have interacted with hon. Lulume and Mukono has the biggest forest reserves in the central region; in Buganda here, many of those forests are under serious attack. I have interacted with an MP from Teso and a forest reserve there is under attack. These gentlemen from the Ministry of Defence come armed and escorted by the army and they have been terrorising citizens. In my area, they are overriding the authority of the local police and are arresting people and beating them up.

Madam Speaker, my humble prayer to this House is that we cannot be witnesses to our country descending into a semi desert while a few people are going to make quick money  growing eucalyptus trees at the expense of our people.

Secondly -(Member timed out.)

3.12
MS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I just came back last night from Kitgum District and last week, His Excellency the President launched the road construction work there. A Minister of Works was in the constituency in Kitgum and told the people who are affected by the construction work that they should not disturb the contractors doing their work but they should let them go on. 

However, the people whose properties are affected have not been compensated or talked to and the value of compensation has not been agreed upon. We are talking about the properties of people along the roadside; we are talking about the boreholes, which are serving the community. Some parts of the schools are being affected and even the only power station, which is supplying Kitgum District is affected. We are made to understand that once it is destroyed, due to this on-going work, it will take another nine months before Kitgum District can get back power.

Our prayer to this Parliament is that the Minister of Works comes and explains the circumstances to this House so that the colleagues appreciate how this -(Member timed out.)

3.14
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also rise on a matter of public importance with respect to health workers in this country. 

Towards the end of last year, the government through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs put an advertisement in the media requesting health workers, especially medical specialists, to apply and be given placements in Trinidad and Tobago. This advertisement wanted close to 300 medical experts and in the advert, there was also an indication that applicants who were serving officers in the Public Service must route their applications through their responsible officers or heads of department who should be informed of the closing dates to avoid delay. 

I have been informed that the shortlisting exercise has taken place and many medical workers from Government have been shortlisted including 93 from Mulago hospital and other hospitals.

My concern, Madam Speaker, is that I want Government to explain whether that is a very good policy position when this Parliament, time and again, has complained about the quality of health services in this country, which remain poor largely occasioned by lack of health personnel. Yet Trinidad and Tobago has a population of 1.3 million and 12 times more doctors per capita compared to Uganda.

It is ranked the 67th best country in terms of health systems while Uganda is number 149. I want Government to explain why it does not concentrate on equipping and staffing our own health facilities but rather, it is now concentrating on exporting doctors and other health professionals outside the country -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Speaker, I have seen hon. Kiyingi who is now the Minister of Foreign Affairs and I want him to listen to me. They put the human resource manager of Ministry of Foreign Affairs as the contact on 0414-340136. They also put another mobile number and this letter was written by Ben Kumumanya as the acting Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 

What kills me, Madam Speaker, are the incentives they were giving and I want the Prime Minister to listen to them. They are:

    1. Contract period of three years.
    2. They want people aged between 25 and 65 years only.
    3. They will give free electricity.
    4. Free water.
    5. Free furnished houses.
    6. Free primary and secondary health care without orthopaedics but they want to take 15 orthopaedic surgeons from this country.
    7. They want to give gratuity of 20 per cent of gross salary earned over a period of three years of employment.

Honestly, you cannot be a Minister of Foreign Affairs and want to export doctors when you know we do not have doctors in Uganda. You will never know where you will die from because you are going to get a heart attack in Kamuli and you will die from there. I want him to come here and tell us whether he has bothered to see in his constituency whether the doctors are there, whether 200 midwives are there and he tells us in front of the Prime Minister so that we can put things to rest. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to ask hon. Kiyingi to come here. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know this matter - can you please conclude?

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, it seems this is a popular subject; I do not know whether you will allow me to take more information. When you look at the categories of health workers being requested for, these are senior officers ranging from physicians, psychiatrists, radiologists, paediatricians, ENT surgeons, midwives, ophthalmologists and these are cadres that we do not have in our health facilities. 

Therefore, we would want Government to explain whether you think this is the right decision to take on behalf of Ugandans when actually we expect you to be filling these doctors and health workers in our own health facilities in Uganda. That is the concern we have, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the following ministers will be required to explain the issues raised: the Minister for Lands on the roads in the municipalities, the Minister for Works on the failure to compensate people, the Minister of Natural Resources on the issues of forests, the Ministers of Health and Foreign Affairs on the issue of the doctors. If you could answer next – 

Honourable members, I want us to quickly run through item 3 but then I will be moving up items 8 and 9. We had expected to have finished our other Bill by last week so we had notified the Ambassador of Saudi Arabia to come. We had also notified Ms Allen Kagina and her team to come so I want to move those up, we do them quickly and then we go back to our Bill. 

If we could use just one hour for both - 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REQUEST TO BORROW UP TO UNITED STATES DOLLARS 84.20 MILLION 
FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) FOR FINANCING PHASE II 
OF THE MARKETS AND AGRICULTURAL TRADE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMME (PROJECT – 2)

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay before Parliament a proposal to borrow up to $84.2 million from the African Development Bank for financing Phase II of the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Programme (Project 2). I beg to lay.

REQUEST TO BORROW UA 22.5 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (AFDB) GROUP FOR FINANCING THE EAST AFRICA’S CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE FOR SKILLS AND 
TERTIARY EDUCATION IN BIO-MEDICAL SCIENCES – PHASE I

3.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, in the same vein, I beg to lay before Parliament for consideration a proposal to borrow Unit of Accounts 22.5 million from the African Development Bank Fund of the African Development Bank Group for financing the East Africa’s Centres of Excellence for Skills and Tertiary Education in Biomedical Sciences – Phase I. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, both of those requests are sent to the Committee on National Economy for expeditious perusal and report back.

FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.23
MS ROSEMARY SENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following sub-counties: 

    i. Kikingo Sub-County, Lwengo District
    ii. Malongo Sub-County, Lwengo District
    iii. Ndagwe Sub-County, Lwengo District
    iv. Ruhumuro Sub-County, Sheema District
    v. Kagango Sub-County, Sheema District
    vi. Buwunga Sub-County, Bugiri District
    vii. Nankoma Sub-County, Bugiri District
    viii. Buluguyi Sub-County, Bugiri District
    ix. Nabigasa Sub-County, Rakai District
    x. Kiziba Sub-County, Rakai District
    xi. Lwanda Sub-County, Rakai District
    xii. Aloi Sub-County, Alebtong District
    xiii. Apala Sub-County, Alebtong District
    xiv. Abia Sub-County, Alebtong District
    xv. Omoro Sub-County, Alebtong District
    xvi. Busede Sub-County, Jinja District
    xvii. Buwenge Sub-County, Jinja District
    xviii. Buyengo Sub-County, Jinja District
    xix. Obalanga Sub-County, Amuria District
    xx. Abarilela Sub-County, Amuria District
    xxi. Asamuk Sub-County, Amuria District
    xxii. Bamunanika Sub-County, Luweero District
    xxiii. Kamira Sub-County, Luweero District
    xxiv. Bigasa Sub-County, Kalungu District
    xxv. Kalungu Sub-County, Kalungu District
    xxvi. Lwebange Sub-County, Kalungu District
    xxvii. Bupoto Sub-County, Manafwa District
    xxviii. Butiru Sub-County, Manafwa District
    xxix. Bubutu Sub-County, Manafwa District
    xxx. Bumwoni Sub-County, Manafwa District
    xxxi. Namabya Sub-County, Manafwa District

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. All those are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR RECONSIDERATION OF THE PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP BILL, 2014, WHICH WAS RETURNED TO PARLIAMENT BY H.E. THE PRESIDENT
 FOR THE SECOND TIME AS PROVIDED FOR UNDER RULE 132 
OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, in accordance with Rule 132 of our Rules of Procedure on Bills returned by the President, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Public Private Partnership Bill, 2014” be reconsidered by the House as requested by H.E the President. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance for report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE 
TO THE LATE KING ABDULLAH BIN ABDULAZIZ OF SAUDI ARABIA

3.28
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late King of Saudi Arabia, King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz. This is moved under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda (2012).

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received, with grief, the sad news of the demise of King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz of the kingdom of Saudi Arabia at the age of 90 years that occurred on 23 January 2015;

NOTING that the late king succeeded to the throne in 2005 and embarked on developing Saudi Arabia and supporting the global fight against hunger and extremism;

AWARE that the late king was a leader who was committed to peace and sought reconciliation among people of different faiths and cultures by advancing inter-faith dialogues;

COGNISANT of the fact that the late king pursued and promoted a peaceful and non-confrontational foreign policy;

APPRECIATING his efforts in advancing education in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia through the King Abdullah Foreign Scholarship Programme that has seen 87,000 Saudis studying in the United States and 33,000 elsewhere in the world, including support to Ugandan students in the field of Science, Technology and Islamic Studies;

FURTHER APPRECIATING that through the years, the kingdom of Saudi Arabia has generously supported Uganda in various development programmes and projects, especially through the Islamic Development Bank, Saudi Fund for Development, the Islamic Solidarity Fund, Muslim World League, the International Islamic Relief Organisation and other organisations;

MINDFUL that Uganda enjoys thriving  bilateral economic relations with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia, especially in the fields of agriculture, international co-operation through Organisations of Islamic Cooperation and the Parliamentary Union of Islamic States, which the late King Abdullah supported;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:

    1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the kingdom of Saudi Arabia upon the loss of this illustrious leader.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the remarkable contribution of a prominent, noble, courageous and generous global leader.
    3. That his soul rest in eternal peace.”

Madam Speaker, this motion is moved by the Prime Minister and is seconded by hon. Wafula-Oguttu, Leader of the Opposition in Parliament and hon. Samuel Otada, an Independent Member of Parliament. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by various members. Justification.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is indeed with sadness that Government has learnt of the demise of His Highness, the late King Abdullah of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which occurred on 23 January 2015. It is indeed with great sadness because just last week, this House paid tribute to another greatest man; the late hon. Jaffer Bandali. 

The late King Abdullah was born in 1924. He received his early education at the royal court. Influenced by his father the founder of the modern Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, King Abdulaziz Al Saud, and the late King Abdullah developed a profound respect for religion and history and this was specifically the history of the Arab heritage, which fuelled his desire to assist in the development of his people.

Madam Speaker, a mention about his work life. The late King has left a memorable working experience that should be envy for any great leader. In 1952, he was appointed as Commander of the National Guard, which duty he performed with diligence, honesty and commitment. In 1975, he was appointed Second Deputy Prime Minister. In 1982, he was named Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime Minister. Here, he performed massive roles; presiding over Cabinet meetings as well as governing the country and deputy to the custodian of the two holy mosques in addition to serving as Commander of the National Guard.

His service as king of the people of Saudi Arabia. Madam Speaker, the late King Abdullah ascended to the throne in 2005 and immediately embarked on initiating major economic, social and development projects that helped contribute to the transformation of the people of Saudi Arabia in particular and the world in general.

He initiated reforms in the education sector, which saw the creation of Princess Nora Bint University Abdulrahman for girls, which tremendously added value in the efforts to emancipate the girl-child and the creation of King Abdullah University of Science and Technology.

As a foresighted leader, King Abdulaziz oversaw the creation of four mega economic cities, expanded the two holy mosques, approved the historic organisations of Saudi Arabia’s judicial systems and enacted laws to formalise the royal succession. 

Global Peace and stability: Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, the late King Abdulaziz advocated for constructive global cooperation such as stabilisation of global oil markets, actively participated in the promotion of world peace, stability and security especially in the Arab world through dialogue of the world’s leading faith, which took place in Madrid, Spain in 2008. 

His efforts to resolve the conflicts in the Arab and Islamic world, Middle East and the plights of the Palestinian people bore fruit at the Beirut Summit of 2002 with the adoption of the League of Arab States.

Furthermore, he brokered agreements for a Palestinian national unity government and a reconciliation accord between Sudan and Chad on Darfur.

On terrorism, King Abdullah has been consistent and unwavering in his condemnation of the taking of innocent lives and his denunciation of deviant groups that falsely claim to be Islamic. At the Counter-Terrorism International Conference in Riyadh held in February 2005, he urged international cooperation to fight this scourge. 
With regard to the cooperation with Uganda, through the years, the kingdom of Saudi Arabia has generously supported various development programmes and projects especially through the Islamic Development Bank, Saudi Fund for Development, the Islamic Solidarity Fund, Muslim World League, the International Islamic Relief Organisation and other organisations. 

The historic visit of King Faisal to Uganda in 1972 was a landmark event in relations between the two countries. Saudi Arabia has supported programmes like the expansion of Kibuli Teacher Training College and others. Additionally, in 2008, Saudi Arabia donated $2 million to the Uganda Heart Institute at Mulago.

Madam Speaker, Ugandan students in the field of Science and Technology and Islamic studies benefit from Saudi Arabia scholarships. 

Furthermore, in September 2010, the Saudi Fund for Development provided an interest-free loan of $12 million for the construction, and renovation of vocational training institution. 

Saudi Arabia also provides humanitarian assistance such as $100,000 for the kingdom holdings donated for the people of Bududa following the landslides disaster. All these were possible due to the good relation Uganda has with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. This deepened the relationships between the two countries under his reign. 

Madam Speaker, these are not minor achievements to earn immortality like the late King Abdullah. They are the reason Government and Parliament of Uganda have spared time today to appreciate his service to humanity and also for the development of mankind. 

I take this opportunity to send my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Saudi Arabia, and the world fraternity for the loss of this gallant leader. May Allah rest his soul in eternal peace.

3.42
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITON (Mr Phillip Wafula-Oguttu): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the Rt. hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, I stand here on behalf of the Opposition of Parliament to pay tribute to the late King Abdullah. He will be remembered as a master politician who gained his reputation as a reformer without necessarily changing his power structure in the country. He maintained good relationships with the rest of the world, but at the same time, he maintained a very strong independent position in his country’s foreign policy.

King Abdullah pumped a lot of money in the Saudi Arabian system. He opened up the economy partially, in the country and in the World Trade Organisation where they had not been members for a while. He met with the Pope and espoused inter-faith tolerance. 

At the same time, he was very firm on discipline in the country. He made sure the country remained within the demand of its cultural and religious norms. He reached out to women and offered a plan to hurry this up.

King Abdullah carried out radical political reforms. He reinstated elections for municipal councils. He announced measures that allowed women to vote and also run in electoral offices. This is because women were not voting before.  

He also carried out major reforms in the education sector and allocated huge sums of money to the sector. He brought a lot of Saudi Arabian women into the education system. 

At the end of his reign, Saudi Arabia was a different country from the one which he found when he came to power. It was much receptive to public discussion. It was also very warm and attractive to tourists. 

King Abdullah supported the Arab peace initiative which was intended to solve the long standing conflict between Israel and Palestine. 

The late king Abdullah’s leadership extended a lot of support to Uganda. The Prime Minister has ably enumerated a lot of things, particularly in the field of education, health and infrastructure. For example, this Parliament had been pushing for the issue of technical education. They extended to our country several millions of dollars that set up a major technical college. They have also given us resources for construction of roads. 

Saudi Arabia was one of the countries that helped us in establishing the Islamic university and a lot of young people have been trained in that university. There could be graduates of the Islamic University in Uganda (IUIU) inside this House.  Saudi Arabia has also helped our country a great deal. Hundreds of Ugandans have trained in that country in various skills including religious matters.   

Although Ugandans in Saudi Arabia have continued to work closely and to operate on international issues, we should point out here that the economic relation between Uganda and Saudi Arabia is in balance. We are not getting as much as we would be getting by trading with Saudi Arabia. We have not taken advantage of what we have in agriculture. This has been a weakness of our own Government.

Since the death of King Abdullah, we have known that his brother Salman Al Saud Abdulaziz is becoming the new king. As the Opposition, we welcome the new king and we look forward to Uganda’s continued good relationship with the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 

We urge the government to consider borrowing a leaf from the late King Abdullah on how he used oil resources in developing his country, as we work towards becoming an oil country ourselves. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

3.49
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I also stand here to add to what has been said by the Rt. hon. Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition. I just want to chip in on what has probably been left out as details. 

I want to start with a brief story so that what I will say will be linked and understood better.  When Idi Amin came to power in 1971, he had very serious opposition from the neighbouring African countries. He had opposition in Tanzania, Sudan, and everywhere. He had nowhere to go. 

He instead paid a visit to Israel, Germany, and Britain where he had dinner with the Queen, but his request was turned down in all the three countries. He came back disappointed. On his way back to Uganda, he landed in without an appointment. However, the head of state would have definitely accepted. He landed and met President Gaddafi. After meeting President Gaddafi, he returned. From the result of his failure and we did not know what happened between him and Gaddafi. Shortly, he had a dream while he was in Moroto, on chasing the Israelites and the Asians from Uganda. 

Last time, we were paying tribute here and somebody said that I was a minister at that time. Yes, I want to confirm that I was a minister then. I am very happy to be the minister who witnessed the expulsion and the same person moving the motion -(Laughter) That member who referred to that is informed that I am blessed.

I have a reason why I am telling you this story on the landing of Amin in Tripoli; his having a dream and then the major action that followed of sending away the Asians. In that year 1972, the late King Faisal of Saudi Arabia paid a visit to Uganda. That visit was very important and also shaped the direction Uganda took under President Idi Amin. To Amin, he felt that he was accepted by the Middle East, he therefore turned against them - after all he was rejected.

The visit of King Faisal also led to Uganda being accepted to the membership of OAU of which she is a member to date. I am glad that every Government that has come has not changed that. It is good for us to continue with that membership.

From that year 1974, Uganda Islamic University was granted - two universities were given; one to Niger for French speaking people, and the Islamic University for English speaking, and was built in Uganda, specifically in Mbale. Up to now, you can see how we are benefitting. Many Ugandans have been benefitting as a result of the vision of leaders in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia –(Interruption) 

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, the General has made a very good revelation here. He has just told us that two universities have been established; one in Niger for the Francophone and the other for the Anglophone in Uganda, that is the Islamic University in Mbale. 

He is telling us that the University was established in Mbale. But as far as I know, this university was meant to be in Arua and the foundation stone was laid there and to date, it still exists. Would the General like to clarify to this august House and the nation where exactly the foundation stone of this university is?

GEN. ALI: Some of these details I just skipped due to the little time I have. The land in West Nile should have been for the Islamic University and I think the honourable member should help so that the Islamic University can go ahead and get that land. However, as I know, some people are causing problems. He is right, but I just skipped it due to the little time I have.

In 1975, you remember Uganda hosted OAU. I was sent with a letter by then president to King Faisal. Of course, I did not know the content of the letter. When I handed the letter over to him that morning - I was actually the second visitor that morning from outside - to the king, followed by a Palestinian delegation led by Arafat. 

After accomplishing my mission in the morning, I then returned to my hotel. At around 11 or midday, I heard funny news on the radio. When I asked the workers in the hotel what was happening, they said that the king has been killed; the king had died. That was a sad day; the king was assassinated and that day turned out very busy and sad. Many world leaders flocked into Saudi Arabia for burial, including Idi Amin. That same evening, before the king was buried, they brought me an envelope in the hotel, bearing $50 million. It was broken down as follows: $10 million for hosting the OAU, $10 million for Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, $30 million for completing the unfinished ranch, a project left by World Bank - it was Government to complete that project. You can now see that notwithstanding the death of the king, the programme still went on. I kept the envelop in my pocket and mourned with the others and then boarded with my envelop -(Laughter) When I arrived in Entebbe, I gave the money to –(Interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Gen. Ali. Madam Speaker, the General has pointed out a critical issue of the $50 million and he has actually not expounded upon it well. I would like him to relate it in regard to how the money was utilised and where that money is. Also how the major mosques in Kampala shared that money: that is, Kibuli and Old Kampala. I would like the Gen. Ali to clarify on that issue.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind Members that when we are paying tribute, there are no points of order, information nor clarification -(Applause)- please conclude.

GEN. ALI: Briefly, I would like to conclude by saying that, the $10 million for OAU, I gave it to the Minister of Finance at Entebbe Airport, the $10 million for the supreme council was also given to the Finance Minister and the $30 million, was also given to the Finance Minister. If my honourable colleague would like to get accountability, he should go to the minister of finance. May his soul rest in peace. “Inna lillahi wa inna ilaihi raji’un”. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to thank the senior member for the vital and historical information. Thank you so much. (Applause)

4.01
MR KATOTO HATWIB (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We just say “Inna lillahi wa inna ilaihi raji’un, Alahuma in-kaana Muhsina Fazis Fiihsani Hi. Ainakaana Musiia Fatajawaz Anhu”. Meaning “We are from God and to God is our destiny. Oh God! if that man was a good person, increase on his good deeds. If he was a bad person, forgive him.”

I remember him for his resilience and strong stand against terrorism.  He fought terrorism and to some extent believed in peace and religious tolerance. May God rest his soul in eternal peace?

4.02
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, Peaple with Disabilities, Reresentative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to pay tribute to the late King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz of Saudi Arabia. Saudi Arabia as a government has played a key role in promoting peace globally. The Saudi government has supported our country in financial and economic development particularly in agriculture, rural electrification, tertiary institutions and road construction. 

The predecessors of King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz and king Faisal promoted two universities on the Continent of Africa, One, in West Africa and another in East Africa. Uganda took the advantage and established the university that was honoured in Uganda and supported by the Government of Uganda and the Parliament of Uganda in its accreditation. I, therefore, thank the Parliament of Uganda for that good gesture and indeed to pay tribute to this great man who has supported development in the country. 

The Saudi government has been leading in the fight against international terrorism. Paradoxically, it is believed that Islam inflated terrorism. It is not true. Saudi Arabia has been at the forefront in fighting international terrorism. I thank Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz for the reforms he made.

4.05
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to pay tribute to the late king, Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz of Saudi Arabia, for his contribution not only in the Muslim world but the entire world at large. Much has been mentioned by the Prime Minister on his contribution towards the development of our country. 

I would like to be specific; it was during the reign of the late Prince Abdullah who was the custodian of the two holy mosques; Meccah and Madinah that we have seen expansion of those two mosques to accommodate a bigger number of Muslims who visit the place for pilgrimage. He also worked on sanitation. Those are the mosques that accommodate over four million people every year. When you go to those two holy mosques, the sanitation alone speaks for itself; you cannot be burdened by any kind of arrangement that can stop you from worshipping your creator in a very good atmosphere. He has done a lot to improve sanitation and hygiene in those two holy mosques. 

I remember we initiated a programme: The Saudi-Uganda Parliamentary friendship during his reign. However, unfortunately he died before we implemented it –(Member timed out.)

4.07
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): I would like to pay tribute to a great king. Something notable about him that we should not let go is that in 2008, when the world faced food crisis, the king in his capacity gave $500 million to the UN to show his good will to help the hungry in the world. For me, that does not go unnoticed and it is something for which we must remember the king and remember him as long as his soul lives. 

Above all, he sponsored over 120,000 people born in Saudi Arabia. He also established schools for many poor countries. It will take Uganda 30 years to give scholarship at the rate of 4,000 students every year to go to the university. I believe his death is a wakeup call to the Government of Uganda and the Minister of Education and Sports. You cannot have a budget of 4,000 students every year sponsored for A’level to the university and yet the population is increasing. 

Furthermore, we need to appreciate and remember the king for religious tolerance. He was one among very many world leaders who proposed the two state solutions in order to end the conflict between the Palestinians and the Israelites. I am Christian, we are taught to pray for the Israelites, so that we get blessings. Therefore, in praying for the Israelites and the kings, I honestly know that the Lord God Allah has blessed his soul. May his soul rest in peace.

4.09
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you see extra ordinary human beings living among the many God created with his own hands, you say, “Thank you God”. I used to watch that king and I saw an extraordinary man. A man with all the admiration any one can have of a king; he looked extra ordinarily simple and realized we were temporarily in the world. He chose to invest in humanity; that is all I could see in the king. 

Most importantly, the choice he made was very deliberate, in a part of the world where women are seen as second class citizens. The deliberate choice he made to ensure that women are educated and engage in political life is something that the world needs to celebrate. You cannot imagine a scenario where a young girl is shot at because she is craving for women to be educated. We pay tribute to him because he was an extraordinary man who looked at women as mothers to humanity.  

Secondly, when you look at the investment of the Saudi establishment to this country particularly in agriculture, you wonder why our own country has not thought about the existing 9.8 million hungry people as we speak now.

Therefore, to remember the good deeds of the king, this country needs to reflect on the investments in agriculture. The kingdom’s support to this country in agriculture should not go down in vain. He will be resting in peace having worked to ensure that all Ugandan children are fed –(Member timed out.)

4.11
MR MOSES KASIBANTE	(Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Several lessons can be learnt from the late King. I want to specifically bring out the issue of succession. Before King Abdullah passed on, his successor, Prince Salman was already named. Before he sat on the throne, the late King Fahd had already indicated him as the successor. That is how Saudi Arabia has survived; the temptations of Kyankwanzi where successors are blocked. 

Madam Speaker, the origin of any society can best be traced in kingdoms. The Bible and the Quran do not mention presidents, ministers and prime ministers; they talk about kings as the original owners of this world.

As the honourable Prime Minister was praising Saudi Arabia for economically contributing to Uganda and lamenting about the poverty in Uganda, I was tempted to remind him that kings are brothers across the world; we have been receiving very limited economic support from such societies because they do not see us appreciating their brothers here –(Member timed out.)

4.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL AFFAIRS) (Mr Asuman Kiyingi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion and associate fully with the remarks made by the honourable Prime Minister. As Ministry of Foreign Affairs, we confirm that during the reign of King Abdulaziz, the relationship between Uganda and Saudi Arabia has grown tremendously. We have registered a number of successes in terms of projects, support and co-operation at local, regional and international levels. The late King Abdullah was not only an advocate of reform within his country but also the Organisation of the Islamic Co-operation (OIC). 

The OIC, to which we are a member, has under taken reforms such as, restructuring the organisation’s charter to deepen economic co-operation among member states. Emphasis on education, science and technology has received additional funding. A lot of scholarships and bursaries have been supported all over the world through the OIC agencies.

These reforms have not only benefitted Saudi Arabia but Uganda too, especially in the OIC cotton growing project for African OIC member states and the establishment of the Islamic University in Uganda as already noted.

Madam Speaker, Ugandans travel to Mecca every year and have received tremendous support. Some of us within this House who have had the opportunity to perform Hajj have always been treated exceptionally.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that a lot can be said about King Abdulaziz and the contribution of Saudi Arabia. However, we have other business. I note that it has been fully supported by all shades of opinion in this House. I, therefore, put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE 
TO MS ALLEN KAGINA, FORMER COMMISSIONER-GENERAL 
OF UGANDA REVENUE AUTHROTIY


4.17
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to Ms Allen Kagina, former Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority.

THE SPEAKER: Ms Kagina, is here together with the URA team and the present Commissioner-General. (Applause) They are all welcome. I announce the presence of a delegation from Idudi, Bugweri, represented by hon. Katuntu and hon. Olivia Kwagala. 

MR LUBOGO: This motion is brought under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure (2012) of this Parliament. 

“WHEREAS Ms Allen Kagina, one of Uganda’s world acclaimed and accomplished public administrators undertook her “O” and “A” level studies at Gayaza High School and later joined Makerere University and the University of Liverpool in the United Kingdom, where she acquired a Bachelor’s Degree in Philosophy and a Master’s Degree in Public Administration respectively;

WHEREAS Ms Allen Kagina has diligently served in different capacities in the public service of Uganda, starting off as a teaching assistant at Makerere University, in 1985 to the office of the President and later joining Uganda Revenue Authority in 1992 as Principal Revenue Officer, rising through the ranks to Senior Principal Revenue Officer, Deputy Commissioner for Customs and ultimately in 2004, appointed Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority, in which capacity she dedicatedly served for 10 years until 2014;

CONSIDERING that Ms Allen Kagina succeeded Ms Annebrit Aslund, a Swedish expatriate after another gallant Ugandan, Mr Stephen Akabwai, had acted as Commissioner-General on the interim basis and preceeded by a Ghanaian tax expert, Larbi Siaw and our very own Mr Elly Rwakakoko;

RECOGNISING that Ms Allen Kagina, not only transformed the image of Ugandan Revenue Authority from a corrupt organisation to an open and more technologically advanced organisation, aimed at improving service delivery to Uganda but also among others: reduced departments and administrative layers from 10 to seven and reduced the bureaucratic tendencies and smoothened decision making; initiated structural reviews in 2005, 2007, 2012 and with the approval of the board, implemented 25 internal policies to harness operations within Uganda Revenue Authority; significantly increased the net revenue collections from Shs 1.92 trillion in 2004 to Shs 8.03 trillion in 2014, a percentage increment of 317.5 per cent; strengthened collaboration between Uganda Revenue Authority and other government and Non-Government Organisations, especially as far as tax policy is concerned; initiated activities and reforms aimed at increasing tax compliance including tax education, staff training and staff management which resulted in taxpayer registration rising from 3,347 in 2004 t0 679,000 in 2014; initiated and implemented the automation of the tax process including the implementation of the automated system, like the e-tax at courier world, e-procurement and electronic cargo packing system; implemented service centric initiatives which were aimed at reducing the cost of tax collection and administration such as self-help platforms to help to operate 24/7 such as the web-portal, mobile money payments and the 24 hour services at selected border stations such as Malaba, Busia, and Katuna; improved Uganda revenue authority corporate brand through various initiatives such as URA sports club, corporate social responsibility and open-mind forum among others; 

COGNISANT THAT all the above achievements and many more were attained under very hard working conditions including loss of highly trained staff to higher paying institutions, such as the World Bank, IMF, KCCA, Bank of Uganda and others; inadequate government funding due to competing priorities as well as lack of a central one-stop office;

APPRECIATING THAT Ms Allen Kagina is a humble, hardworking and diligent Ugandan citizen with a memorable and commendable career as evidenced by her performance at Uganda Revenue Authority and a role model for women, not only in Uganda but the world over;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves as follows:
    1. That it collectively pays tribute to Ms Allen Kagina for the contribution and distinguished service she has offered to the development of Uganda.
    2. That it takes cognisance of the services rendered and the contributions made by Ms Allen Kagina to Uganda Revenue Authority and Uganda as a nation during her 10 year term as Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority.”

This motion is moved by Kenneth Lubogo, Member of Parliament for Bulamogi County and is seconded by hon. Elijah Okupa, Member of Parliament for Kasilo and hon. Margaret Komuhangi, Member of Parliament for Nakasongola. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, is it seconded? It is seconded by various Members. Please justify. 

MR LUBOGO: Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank you for according me this opportunity to bring this motion. I am particularly delighted that I am speaking on a motion where the subject matter, Ms Allen Kagina, is alive and well, strong and young, and listening.

In this country, where virtue is scarce, integrity almost washed and morals destroyed, I feel it is important for us, as a country, to appreciate vigilant citizens who serve this country with diligence and dedication without compromising but committed to seeing Uganda being transformed into a self- sustaining economy.

Madam Speaker, Ms Allen Kagina, I must say, is fondly known in Uganda Revenue Authority as Allen. She is a humble servant of this country, lowly putting herself to the service of the nation and not seeing herself as a great boss but somebody who is available to build a winning team. I must say that Madam Allen Kagina, during her reign at Uganda Revenue Authority as Commissioner-General, was able to put in place a very strong team of Ugandans that has moved Uganda Revenue Authority from where it was to where it is today.

I must say she has not done it alone but with others who include, Jennifer Musisi, Doris Akol, among others. I believe that the ability to put this team in place and advance the calls for seeing Uganda become self-sustaining has to be applauded.

When Allen came to Uganda Revenue Authority, statistics show that Uganda was majorly depending on customs taxes. She was able, together with her team, to turn this around and as I speak today, Uganda Revenue Authority collects more of domestic taxes than taxes from imported goods. 

I believe this is a plug because depending on imported taxes would mean that we are promoting consumption of what others are manufacturing. Because she has been able to do this, a resilient and strong economy has been built and Uganda has been able to withstand a lot of pressures during the stormy times that the world economies have been suffering.

Madam speaker, we know that Uganda sees herself as a country that wants to depend or finance our budget 100 per cent. As I speak right now, or at the time she left office as Commissioner-General, Uganda was able to fund almost 75 per cent of our budget using internally generated revenue.

Madam Allen Kagina is a transformational leader. She has changed that organisation strongly; an organisation which was known to be a herd of thieves, a herd of corrupt people has now been transformed and is seen to be an organisation where people of integrity are able to collect revenues for this country and not for themselves.

The cost of collecting tax during the time when Allen Kagina was Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority dropped from 3.4 per cent to 2.5 per cent and this needs to be applauded. We know it is a tax principle that in administration of tax, the cost must be as low as possible and this was on a downward trend.

Revenue has been able to grow through her time at an average rate of 17.25 per cent. The regional average for East Africa is actually 6.4 per cent. I think, colleagues, we need to applaud this effort. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, she presided over the restructuring of Uganda Revenue Authority, an exercise, which was not easy but she was able to handle it and improve the image of this organisation. In 2006, she was able to win the Corporate Leadership Award for transforming that organisation.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that as the tax collectors seem to be doing their work, the taxpayers are also attempting to do their work. It is therefore incumbent upon the leadership of this country to see that the monies that are collected are put to appropriate use. Somebody recently made a comment that the problem we have is not the value of the money but the value for money. 

Therefore, I think we are collecting revenue which may not be funding 100 per cent of our budget but should be put to good use so that taxpayers can appreciate that the monies they are paying are being well applied. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to present this motion and I invite all Members to support this motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Lubogo. I do not see hon. Kasule. Let us have hon. Okupa –(Members rose_)- let us get the seconders first.

4.30	
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you. Madam Speaker, we want to thank you for giving us the opportunity to second this motion and I want to thank my colleague, hon. Lubogo, who moved the motion. It is very rare in the country for a tribute to be paid to someone who is still alive. I am happy madam Allen is here today to listen to this tribute.

The name Allen is a Celtic name meaning harmony, a stone or noble. It also means fair, handsome –(Laughter)- and originally, it was a name for a saint. Honourable members, you may laugh, but you have the iPads, you google it up, you will see what the name Allen means.

Madam Speaker, if you looked at the meaning of Allen in the Urban Dictionary, it means the most amazing person in the world –(Laughter)- someone who cares unconditionally – (Interjections)- it is not a surprise and the words that have been echoed here by the mover of the motion are not misplaced.

Madam Speaker, I am not a stranger to Madam Allen Kagina. I came to know Allen Kagina when I worked with the Uganda Revenue Authority. At that time, I was based at the airport and she was at that time a Senior Revenue Officer. Since 1996-1997, I knew her until the time I left Uganda Revenue Authority. Therefore, as somebody who knew her for over seven years, I can speak with authority about Madam Allen Kagina.

When Allen was appointed Commissioner-General, there were so many people who doubted her abilities, but some of us who knew her, knew it was not a misplaced appointment. She was the right person for that job. It is not a surprise that today we are paying tribute to her. She has contributed a lot to this country through helping us to collect taxes. So many people thought it can only be foreigners who can help us in that body, but she has proved them wrong -(Member timed out.)

4.33  
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Madam Speaker, I am happy we are appreciating people when they can listen to us in this Parliament. The routine usually has been to pay tribute to people who are dead, who will never know that we appreciated their work. I, therefore, want to put this House on notice that I will be bringing a motion to pay tribute to hon. Amama Mbabazi - (Laughter)- for the work he has done for this country. I will follow the procedures of Parliament so that the motion can also be debated. 

I want to thank Allen, as she is fondly called, for the services she rendered to this country. I think part of the problem in this country is appointment of people who are not sure of themselves. If you are not sure of yourself, then you cannot reassure those who are below you. I think she was a very confident woman; you may have your misgiving, but I want to give testimony to that and that is why she was able to secure Uganda Revenue Authority. 

It should also serve as a lesson; part of the problem bedevilling this country, especially with regard to human resource, is awarding appointments to people just as a reward. Those will never serve you because in the first place, they think you are just awarding them a gift. 

Allen worked in URA, rose through the ranks and understood the organisation and those who have worked with her will testify that she has been a very good leader -(Member timed out.)

4.36
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to first turn and say that I am proud that we are paying tribute to a great leader and woman leader.

Madam Speaker, many times we have asked the country to give equal opportunity to both men and women. We have argued that women can be good leaders just as men; this is a testimony. I am also glad that she has groomed others because the greatest test of leadership is mentorship. She has seriously given a good example to all of us seated here. As you sit now, who are you mentoring? If she had not mentored people in URA, I do not know whether today, we would be having the same person from URA; another woman taking on the mantle from her.

That is the type of leader that she is. That she could not just keep the leadership skills to herself, but she was able to mentor the people below her to build the institution, to take on the fight against corruption and transform URA. They are not only a national example, but throughout the world, URA is one of the examples of great public institutions in the developing world. It remains an example of how public management and institutions should be run in a developing country -(Member timed out.)

4.38
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion but let me say that behind every successful woman, there is a man - (Laughter)- I think it will be unfair for this Parliament just to recognise the presence of Ms Allen Kagina without recognising also Mr Kagina, who accompanied her.

I think the success she had is because she had a stable family, a strong man who was able to work from behind –(Laughter)- Allen Kagina -(Interjections)- has been a creation of URA. She worked in URA and I am sure very many people gave their hands and trained her to become what she became as a Commissioner-General. I think she also left some good marks behind.

The most important thing I see in this country is that any appointment in the country, with the confidence of the appointing authority and competence of the individual, will always succeed. Therefore, the appointing authority must always give the support that the appointed people need. 

There have been a lot of challenges in URA and when I was the Chairperson of COSASE, we had a lot of problems especially when we were looking at the Special Revenue Police – at one point, we were almost in tatters because there were some powerful people who continued to meddle in URA and others did not even want to pay taxes. This will always be a big challenge even to the new leadership. I hope that the appointing authority will continue to give full powers and support to the leadership of URA to deliver -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Can we do one minute? Okay, two minutes

4.41
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think Allen, as those who know her refer to her fondly, is an amazing lady. To head an institution like the Uganda Revenue Authority and at 54, you are saying that it is time to go and that you are passing on the baton is not easy. At 54, in a country where people want to die in their jobs; in a country where people would want to even falsify their age; Mrs Allen Kagina, congratulations.

When hon. Theodore Ssekikubo and I moved the famous oil and gas motion, I had the opportunity to pay tribute to Mrs Allen Kagina because at that time, we had investigated issues related to taxation, evasion and corruption. It came to our knowledge that it was the honest Allen Kagina who put her foot down and said that taxes must be paid. (Applause) At the time when ministers – and colleagues, I am sorry to say this but when many ministers’ names were riddled with corruption allegations, Allen Kagina came out of that smart. 

I was the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises in the last Parliament and in a country where –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use a minute to conclude.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. An institution like the Uganda Revenue Authority in some of our sister countries is sometimes used to witch-hunt people. Businesses have closed and especially for those people whose political opinions differ from the ruling government. I would like to thank Mrs Kagina for not walking that path. I also hope that your successor does not. You know that there are many of your associates that I would not speak the same of in such terms and some of them are closest to you because they have gone political. Mrs Allen Kagina, congratulations.

4.45
MS OLIVIA KABAALE (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): I would like to thank hon. Kenneth Lubogo for bringing us the motion to talk about the person when she is alive. We thank her for the work and thank the family members and the staff of URA for the support.
Paying taxes is one of the worst things people dislike even from the time of the Bible but given the fact that you have made Ugandans become accountable, transparent and willing to pay taxes is really commendable. We thank you, as women, for making people trust women and I feel that is why your second in command was chosen.

My last minute will be used to thank you for supporting Government because most economies have collapsed due to lack of funds. We have heard of Greece borrowing money several times. However, you have put Uganda on a good platform and we wish you the best wherever you are going. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.46
DR MEDARD BITEKYEREZO (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much. Mrs Allen Kagina has retired to Mbaguta Cell, Ruharo Ward, Kamukuzi Division, Mbarara Municipality -(Laughter)- and I am now speaking as somebody who is staying with this wonderful woman.

We, from Mbarara Municipality, are very proud of this gallant woman from our place and I would like to thank Mr Kagina for marrying this woman. (Laughter) She is here. Madam Speaker, you do know that my home is just 200 metres from Kagina’s home. Allen Kagina is beautiful in face and even in the heart. 

I am so glad to find that Mrs Kagina has given the mantle to Ms Doris Akol, who comes from eastern and not western Uganda. In other words, Mrs Kagina is not sectarian. I am so happy, once again to see Mrs Kagina retire honourably without stealing government money. There are so many people in very big offices like the one of Mrs Kagina who have numerous buildings; Mrs Kagina lives a very humble life.

I would like to thank the President of Uganda who saw this wonderful woman and appointed her to head the URA. Hon. Prime Minister, now that oil has been discovered and this lady is not a thief, put her in the oil sector because people are going to steal this oil and you know it. (Applause) Can she head the oil sector so that she can grab these fellows who want to start “eating” from oil? She saved us money on the Capital Gains Tax – you remember when she was struggling with these thieves who wanted to steal our oil money.

Last, but not least, Madam Speaker, I want to –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Point of order.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, this is a tribute.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Last but not least, I would like this Parliament to support Ms Doris Akol who has taken over from Mrs Kagina by accepting some of these taxes that she has placed on us including the tax on schools. I would like to tell hon. Muyingo, who has very good schools in Seeta that I own a clinic in Mbarara called Mbarara Medical Specialists Clinic and I pay tax and yet I am also offering services to Ugandans. Can the Ministry of Education support Ms Doris Akol to get taxes from these schools that are charging money so that we can have very good cash flows? If you want me to sing, I can sing. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MS CD LOWILA (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank Parliament for according us this time to pay tribute to Mrs Allen Kagina.

I would like to sincerely say that I am personally very proud of this true nationalist. It is not easy to transform a system that is corrupted but Mrs Kagina has proved it is possible. 

Being a God-fearing and God-loving woman, I believe that she committed the challenges into the arms of God and as we know with God, everything is possible. Mrs Allen Kagina, may God bless you abundantly.

Madam Speaker, some of us are very grateful that the URA has registered great achievements. Last Saturday was the ground breaking ceremony for the construction of the Olwiyo-Gulu Kitgum Road and this project will be fully financed by the Government of Uganda. I believe this is possible because of the great effort and the diligent work of these true nationalists. 

The challenge is how many Ugandans can emulate what this great lady has been able to achieve for this country? As we pay tribute to her, I appeal to all of us to have such level of commitment and contribute diligently towards the development of our country. Ms Allen Kagina, may God bless you abundantly.

4.52
MR EDDY KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker and colleagues, this is another special day when we pay tribute to someone who is alive, as hon. Ssemujju has said. I would like to thank Mrs Kagina for her performance, which was exemplary. Her performance was not in isolation; so, do not look at her and think that her performance started and ended with her. Kagina’s performance was because of the conducive environment. She would take a decision and the decision would not be challenged but there are some sectors in Government where decisions are taken and the following day, ministers challenge them. I thank her because she would take a decision and the decision would not be challenged. She was actually empowered. Can we, as Government, empower all the people we employ? 

Secondly, to a large extent, we who are managers, performance has a direct relationship with pay. How much was she being paid and how much are they paying other people? There was a conducive environment that was created for her to perform. If a minister is getting Shs 6 million and is supervising an officer who is getting Shs 30 or 40 million, what is the relationship? So let us be holistic. We know she has performed, she has done very well but she is an indicator and proof to Government that when you pay well, you get better services and better results. In her, we saw someone who was being paid well, she did better and there was better output but can we do the same?

Another issue is that we want the ministers to see that – Madam Speaker, is this selective? Is she the only one? Are we going to see many more people coming here? At 54, as she says that is enough, I want to see some ministers and MPs saying that at 50, they cannot go into politics or that as ministers they cannot perform. Let Kagina become a role model. Otherwise, if we talk about what we cannot do, honourable members, we shall just sound like the national anthem. I thank you very much.
4.54
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I want to thank my colleague for moving this motion to pay tribute to Ms Allen Kagina. I have my own observation and may disagree with hon. Kwizera. First of all, what is important is the fear of God; no matter what amount of money you are given, as long as you do not fear God, you will still mess up organisations. 

I do not want us to tie Allen’s performance to money. Allen’s family upbringing matters. Allen’s family matters. Her husband matters. Let us not go there; let us talk about how many people in this Government are paid a lot of money but they have messed up organisations of Government. I can give an example of the NSSF. How many directors are paid a lot of money in the NSSF? How come time and again, NSSF has issues here? Therefore, I would like to first answer that and say,  Mrs Kagina, you are an inspiration to the young people of this country and what the country lacks are the people of your calibre and what the country wants are people of your calibre.

How many Ugandans today can we say are of your calibre? The corruption we are talking about in this Government; how many Ugandans, like you, can say no to corruption? When we talk about corruption, we think it is Government to fight corruption. All of us and Mrs Kagina, I want to say this: wherever you are going, we want to pray to God the Almighty to give you a successful career. You are still young; you are just 54. We have people here who are still active in Government and they are above 54. I want to ask the appointing authority to place you somewhere because we still need your services. 

4.57
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to Ms Allen Kagina. Madam Allen is a person who never sat in her office for paper work only. She would go to the field to see her juniors out there. I travelled with her upcountry and we spent there a week. We had meetings with taxpayers and tax collectors and our main aim was to identify the problems, achievements and challenges. The challenges that we found are the ones that have been addressed and have led to an increase in the revenue of the country. 

Mrs Kagina used to mentor, counsel, guide and train her junior staff and it is the reason she was replaced by one of her staff members. This was because of the mentoring she did for her staff in the institution.

In my constituency, whenever I am talking about great women in this country, she is one of them. I have five women that I admire in this country and Allen is one of them and whenever she is trying to do something, she puts God first. She is a God-fearing person and that is why God has enabled her to achieve what she has achieved –(Member timed out)

5.00
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and to thank the movers. It is very important for us to thank people while they are still alive because it motivates those who are in service.

I am proud of a true Gayaza girl because Gayaza girls lead and others follow. Allen, we are proud of you; proud of a highly successful transformational leader who was not afraid to take difficult decisions and not afraid to take bold steps to implement those decisions.

Allen submitted herself to the will of God, listening to His voice of wisdom, voice of guidance and his voice of protection so she would receive that boldness and receive his favour and protection from all attacks including protection from corruption. We pay tribute to an excellent team leader who put up an excellent team to work with. 

I would also like to pay tribute to the man who sits even by her right now, who has stood by her and giving her all the support and encouragement that she needed to do this job. Let our people know that it is very important when you are a man to support your wife to excel. 

It also gives encouragement to parents to educate the girl child because girls work twice as hard and achieve 100 times better than men. Allen, you do us proud as the women folk of this nation. You do this nation truly proud. May God continue to bless you and use you as a channel of blessings to others. God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Baba Diri comes, I want to introduce Mr John Bosco Okello, a councillor from Serere. This is his first time to come to Parliament. He is welcome.

5.01
MS MARGARET BABADIRI (NRM, Woman representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to tell Allen Kagina that we are very proud of her. She did the impossible. Since the Uganda Revenue Authority was established, we never had a leader like her. We had leaders who were just milking money from Ugandans. She is the only one who has changed the course of corruption and she made sure that we keep our money. We are very proud of you as a woman because you have shown an example. 

I would like to thank His Excellency, Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, for identifying the potential and capacity of women. Mrs Kagina, after you, His Excellency has now turned his eyes towards women and turned his back to men. You can see now, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of Energy, the IGG are women. Therefore, we are very proud. The Speaker here in front of us is doing wonders and is a woman. Women are able; so please give us more jobs. 

Allen Kagina, I wish you well. May God bless you and your nice and handsome husband - (Laughter)- and the family. I wish all of you well. I have seen all of you up there.

5.03
LT. GEN. CHARLES ANGINA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion which is worthy of support because this lady, Allen Kagina, at whatever angle you want to argue this debate, you will be at fault if you are going to fault her. She is worthy of all our praise because she has done us proud. What we are hearing is normally heard on funerals when you cannot hear the praises yourself. But she is able to hear all these praises and all on very objective grounds of what she has done to this nation. 

However, it will certainly be very unfair to fail to know where this strength comes from. One of course is from God and the second strength is that gentleman, Paul Kagina. This gentleman is one of the proud Ugandans we shall always salute. He is among the 27 who sacrificed to bring peace and security to this nation. (Applause) So, it is not in vain that Allen Kagina has continued to excel. There is a strong man who had the heart to liberate this nation, who has made this happen. Therefore, we salute you, Paul Kagina. 

Besides that, Paul Kagina has worked with the Ministry of Defence for many years. I have even worked with him very closely and he is working in another area that would be very tempting but he has also worked with a lot of excellence. He is a clearing officer for the Ministry of Defence and for all these years, he has never been found in fault. 

We, therefore, salute him and it comes very clearly when the word of God says in Isaiah 34:16 that when God puts you together and pairs you properly, you will all be moving as one spirit and we see this in this family. I pray that we do not delay to lobby. In other nations, they lobby for people who have such traits not to leave them to rust but to give them another area where they can propel the nation to higher heights.

In the Forces, people like Allen Kagina would be taken to fix again another difficult area. But I do not know where the appointing authority is planning to take her. It is my prayer that she is put where we can get resources to make this nation move very far so that the spirit of corruption -(Member timed out.)

5.07
MS HUDA OLERU (NRM, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Mrs Kagina for the extra ordinary work she has performed for this country. I am aware in our culture and tradition that when a woman makes a mistake, it will be a mistake for all the women. Mrs Kagina, we are happy that you have saved us from that. I know that you have performed and they are saying that Mrs Kagina has performed but if you had been faulted, they would say all these women are useless; that even the educated are the worst. Therefore, we are very proud of you. You are making us walk with our heads high. Thank you for doing that. 

I also want to thank Mrs Allen Kagina for working in that difficult authority. I am aware that when you had challenges in the West Nile where there were killings, if you were not a strong hearted person, that would have been the time for you to resign. I am aware that in the West Nile, Yumbe and Koboko, we had even mobilised to kill all your staff but you were so strong. We had even forgotten that you were collecting revenue to pay some of us who are members of Parliament. Thank you for standing to make sure that you are raising revenue to pay for our allowances and salaries.

I also want to thank Mrs Kagina for having tried to reduce corruption in this country. If most of these civil servants emulated what you are doing, at least we would see light in our country. We have a lot of resources for revenue but because we do not look at our country first - we look at ourselves, we have a lot of mess. That is why we are not even taking off. Otherwise, we would have been a middle class country and even proceeding to first class. If Singapore can do it, it is because they had leaders who had -(Member timed out.)

5.09
MR GEORGE EKUMA (NRM, Bukedea County, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I really want to thank Mrs Allen Kagina for transforming the business community. When I had just joined the clearing and forwarding business in 1997, it was for anybody to just walk into. As we speak, Mrs Kagina developed a curriculum for training customs agents and she then moved to automating the customs operations. Today, we have systems that a taxpayer uses. Our traders have been trained to use the ASYCUDA systems. Customs work has now been done very well. People are having their businesses assessed at their own premises. Therefore, tax payment has become very simple for everyone.

Level of integrity; Madam Speaker, we used to talk of business people as thieves but because of the training and prayers, traders have now been brought on board to be Christians; the training for people to love their country. 

Whenn we talk about patriots, I think today we are paying tribute to a great patriot in this country. Allen is a true patriot. We used to have officers, clearing agents abetting smuggling. However, the way she handled that -(Member timed out.)

5.12
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This afternoon, the august House is paying tribute to a living hero. I pray that we pay tribute to more living heroes, including the scientists who discovered oil in this country – the Kashambuzis who are retiring without recognition.

We are celebrating a servant leader. We are celebrating a team worker. We are celebrating a transformational leader. My first job after Makerere in 1992 was clearing and forwarding among others. I would go to a place called a “wrong room”. However, I thank Allen for changing it to become the “right wrong room”. It is supposed to be called a “long room” but it needed more than two weeks to get an entry out.

The Government of Uganda was losing a lot of money. Even Government cargo could not be released from Trans Ocean. That was my daily reporting place – Good Shade, Long Room and Nakawa Trans Ocean. Government cargo, which was not supposed to pay tax, waiting for a government entry from the same government for three weeks! 

I would like to thank Mrs Allen Kagina for saving Government that expenditure by just allowing us to process C21, which releases government cargo. It was hell. I almost resigned to join Foreign Affairs because it was very difficult to do the job. However, because of her efforts, we were allowed, as clearing agents who were helping Government to collect taxes anyway, to start dumping cargo down in Trans Ocean. At least we paid for storage but trucks were able to go back to Mombasa because trucks are not meant to be stored. That is how bad we were. 

There was a time when the expatriates like Larbi Siaw, Aslund were the people doing this job. We are proud that even the experts in valuation – we had to get people from India but Allen has left a team of Ugandans to do the job. Therefore, it is important that a leader is a team worker and can build capacity and put in place other citizens who can run other departments without relying on expatriates. 

Most importantly, honourable colleagues, can we support tax Bills when they come because sometimes we have also shot some tax Bills, which are supposed to help this country raise the 85 percent of the budget we are now celebrating. Therefore, if we celebrate Allen and shoot down tax Bills, then we are also not helping the country. We cannot fight homosexuality and the arrogance of donors if we cannot be self-sufficient in terms of budget financing. 

Therefore, I really would like to celebrate this hero. I want to celebrate this servant leader and I agree entirely that it is possible in this country to have leaders who can build capacity for this country. 

As a parent of girls, I celebrate the girl power – that the ladies can do it where others had failed. You can also see, the Speaker is here and we are also seeing other potential leaders. I think we should be proud as parents of girls that girls can do a lot for our country and see the country moving on.

As we move towards more self-reliance, URA was known to be corrupt for the times that we were directly relating with them in the past. However, today you can talk of being part of URA without somebody suspecting you to be a thief. Those days, we would call them “thieves” because there were no systems, there were no valuations. However, right now, there are systems which work. You know that if you are importing silk, you pay a different tariff from the person importing polyester and that is the institutional building we need. It is strong individuals who can build strong institutions, which the country can depend on.

5.16
MS JACQUILINE  AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. There is a saying that the man is the head of the family but the woman is the brain of a family. That is why today, we are celebrating the transformation in URA in the names of Allen Kagina. This is because we know where she has brought URA from.

Madam Speaker, during her 10-year tenure, tax collection grew to Shs 8.03 trillion in 2013/2014 from Shs 1.92 trillion in 2004/2005 at a fraction of the cost. I was a very young girl when I started watching TV and started to admire particular women. However, I can assure you that in addition to you, I used to admire Allen Kagina. Immediately she got on TV, I would listen to her keenly.

Uganda has been very much celebrated in Africa in terms of moving forward the Millennium Development Goals. However, we cannot talk about the achievement being sung about Uganda without talking about the Rebecca Kadagas and the Allen Kaginas of this country. This is because those stand to be examples for the country and for the generation.

As we head towards the Sustainable Development Goals that are being debated now, I think it is very imperative to –(Member timed out.) 
 
5.19
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. Madam Allen Kagina took over the reins of supervising this important authority at a time when Uganda together with other member states of the East African Community were making tremendous steps towards integration. This required having a harmonious working relationship between the Uganda Revenue Authority and revenue authorities of the other member countries.

We would not easily achieve an East African Customs Union, East African Common Tariff and indeed moving towards this integration if we did not have a harmonious taxation system. Allen Kagina worked very hard with other member countries to achieve this.

Madam Speaker, we have been struggling as a developing country – like other African countries – to move out of the donor aid over-dependency syndrome. We are now aware that Uganda is moving towards that positive direction where we are financing our projects and programmes using our internally-generated revenues. It is not therefore surprising that some of our infrastructures including road construction have been undertaken by our Government using internally generated revenue which had been presided over by Mrs Allen Kagina. This is a positive step towards emancipating Uganda from the syndrome of over dependency - (Member timed out.)

5.21
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale): Madam Speaker, thank you very much for this opportunity that you have given Parliament to honour Allen Kagina. It is good to honour people especially when they do good to our society. I want to congratulate you, Allen and Paul, for this achievement.

Allen has done so much for this country than some of us might imagine. Think about it, in the 80s, people of Uganda would line up to pay taxes. The department of customs then was the best example of corruption in the country. Allen has turned that department into a centre of excellence in this country. She is an example of a transformational leader in our country and we want to thank her. However, we can only complete this honour if we have fiscal discipline and we work hard to reduce the per capita corruption in this country. 

While we congratulate Allen Kagina, we have a big challenge to carry on the work that she has done at URA and to carry on the fight against corruption and at the same time making sure that Government - when URA, Dorothy and the team now collect money, it is supplied to the right places so that we can develop our country. I congratulate you and God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

5.23
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two days ago, the President of this country told the nation that our revenue figure has tremendously improved from what we used to collect in 1986 -Shs 5 billion to now Shs 12 trillion.

For those of us who know what it means to go out there in the field and interface with the tax paying public which is most times hostile, I find it difficult to withhold my appreciation for Madam Kagina. But also, I appreciate her dedicated staff of management and the operations junior staff. This is because I know this was team work. 

Madam Speaker, all these were not achieved because of magic. There was no magic but a combination of factors namely: Allen, as she prefers to call herself, is a team builder. I remember onetime during situations of revenue deficits, she would mobilise us all and we would come and she would encourage us to push harder and never to fail in our mission to deliver this country from the dependency syndrome. 

I remember vividly her statement, she would say, “Let us put all options on the table but there must be no options of failure” and that statement was a driving force for me when I was standing in the by-election. This is because I always used to assure myself that there was no option of failing and indeed I did not fail.

I also want to briefly comment on some of the negative sentiments that are deeply rooted in our society. For example, during the 2005 restructuring process in the Uganda Revenue Authority, you know there are people who would always want to belittle -(Member timed out.)

5.25
MR RWAKAJARA ARINAITWE (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. Until recently when Allen retired from her job, I have been representing her as a worker and I want to thank her for being a good worker. I congratulate her.

Madam Speaker, in my early age in 1996 when I joined the university, I tried to do business. I started doing business as a clearing agent and it is unfortunate that I joined an institute of thieves because URA was an institute of corruption at the time. This is because you would not move an entry from one table to another one without parting with money and I believe those who were in URA and all those who were doing business know it very well. That is how I gave up business and went back to concentrate on my books.

Madam Speaker, I want to thank Allen Kagina for transforming that institute into a reputable one in this country now. I thank you so much. I also want to thank her for being a team leader and a mentor. That is why today, we have another Commissioner -(Member timed out.)

5.27
MR JOHN BAGOLE (Independent, Luuka County, Luuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker for this opportunity. I want to ably say that I support the motion 200 percent. Madam Speaker, to some of us who worked with URA for some time, I believe it can take us a minimum of two weeks or two months if we are to gather enough words to describe who Allen is.

Before I joined URA, URA was always referred to as “a den of thieves” and that was before Allen became the Commissioner General. However, after a short while, when she became the Commissioner General of URA, the institution was transformed to the level of all the words my colleagues have been using and we want to thank her for that.

Allen was not only good at collecting taxes but she was a good mentor. I want to assure you that Allen laid a very serious foundation in some of us on which we are building the wall. Before I joined politics, I used to hear her say that Gayaza girls always lead and others follow. Madam Allen laid and mentored a good number of leaders in this country. Today, we are proud of Kampala Capital City Authority because some of the leaders at the Authority are a product of Madam Allen and we want to thank her for that. 

Madam Speaker, I believe with the experience some of the leaders of Kampala Capital City Authority have, within a minimum of five years, Kampala may look -(Member timed out.)

5.30
MR BENSON OBUA-OGWAL (UPC, Moroto County, Alebtong): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. I am so happy that today the country, through Parliament, is honouring Allen Kagina. However, I would like to submit that as we are doing it today, the world recognised this a long time ago. Allen Kagina has become a global phenomenon. 
I would like to cite an example; last year, Allen Kagina was invited to speak at the Global Leadership Summit, which I am involved with. The best people in their fields globally are the ones invited to speak at this summit and Allen, to the best of my knowledge, is the third African to speak at that forum. She is now sharing a podium with people like Condoleezza Rice, Colin Powell and Jim Collins the famous inspirational writer. Allen has not disappointed us. 

Madam Speaker, if I knew, I would have come and laid on Table the DVD of her presentation at the Global Leadership Summit which made me so proud to be a Ugandan. Even then, I can still avail that DVD. 

Above all, the phenomenon that we are celebrating today in the person of Allen did not just happen. It was a process of self-engineering to the extent that even today, Allen Kagina does not hesitate to go and take courses. I have shared many courses with her. I now teach with her at the Institute for National Transformation which I encourage every Member of Parliament to join. It is transforming the lives of our civil servants and high ranking -(Member Timed out.) 

5.33
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. I rise to pay tribute to Mrs Allen Kagina. I want to first associate myself with the submission of hon. Nganda and hon. Kwizera.

I have no doubt in my mind that Madam Kagina’s capacity has been underutilised because when we talk about performance - when you look at the tax collection in this country, you will agree with me that 85 percent of it comes from the central business area. That shows you that if the government, which is in power, did mind about the lives of people and power of people outside there, their capacity would have been more in terms of contributing to paying taxes to this country. 

Mrs Kagina has been working in the central business area where she collects 85 percent of the tax and from the biggest part of the country is the 15 percent. This means that she has been doing a lot of work as far as collection of tax is concerned in the smallest part of the country. If there had been a favourable Government policy to support the would-be tax base of the country, she would have done more than what we are appreciating her for now. 

The other issue is the limitation of the network in the Uganda Revenue Authority (URA). I am given to understand that she made plans on how to improve the network system in URA. I was trying to inquire about this. If today you are a business man and you brought a container, it can even take you two weeks to deliver when you are being told that the network is off. This shows that whereas she had good intentions to perform more than what she did, there were those limitations. 

This is a challenge to Government that as we are celebrating paying tribute to Madam Kagina, the traders down there are wondering what is taking place in this country. They will even show if this tribute is not properly reported -(Member timed out.)

5.35
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I stand to associate myself with the motion. I would like to congratulate Mrs Allen Kagina for her distinguished service to the people of Uganda through her exemplary leadership of the Uganda Revenue Authority. 

When you take Mrs Allen Kagina at face value, you might see an arrogant person and somebody who is not prepared to push. I want to assure you, colleagues, that my close interaction with Allen when I was the chairman of COSASE proved me wrong. I found a woman who is God-fearing, simple in nature but also firm. I believe in her firmness we have realised the turnaround of the Uganda Revenue Authority from what it used to be to what it is today. 

Therefore, the new managers of the Uganda Revenue Authority have received a healthy baby, alive and kicking. I would like to encourage them to grow this little child into a big human being. 

I found a committed woman in Allen Kagina. One day we had serious business between the Uganda Revenue Authority and COSASE and we needed straight answers quickly. I sat in my office up to 10 O’clock communicating with her. She said, “…we are not ready but I am still in office.” The information was passed over to me by email at midnight -(Member timed out.)

5.37
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this chance. Much of what I wanted to say has been said. Since I have got this chance, I am very grateful. Please allow me pay tribute to Mrs Kagina and her husband. 

Lady Kagina, you are very lucky. When a woman is appointed to any post, men will cast doubt. The same goes for our fellow women. The mere fact that this evening we are paying tribute to you, Allen, you have done us proud especially as the women folk. Thank you so much. 

I want to congratulate you, Mrs Kagina, for having gone through thick and thin, through the turbulence of tax collection and managed to win the hearts of Ugandans and Parliamentarians. I also want to congratulate you for having got this tribute this evening. 

I would like to refute what members are saying that it is because she is God loving and that she went to Gayaza. It is the heart. How many people have talked about praising God and yet behind there they are very dirty? Kagina, it is your heart. 

Mr Kagina, I would like to thank you for standing by her. He is as humble, as diligent and as hardworking as the wife. That is why, Allen Kagina has become successful. 

I would also like to thank you, Mr Kagina, for having become my consultant when I was in Tanzania. I could not get through her line so I would go through the husband and I would help the traders when I was in Tanzania. I thank -(Member timed out.)

5.39
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (NRM, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for according us this moment when we are paying tribute to Madam Allen Kagina. The job she was doing was a tempting one. Having billions of money before you and not hearing allegations of embezzlement or corruption is really such a very big challenge. 

I would like to thank God for having kept her from being tempted into dipping her hands into those resources. This shows that she was concerned about her fellow brothers and sisters whom she wanted to benefit from those collections. I thank her for having been harmless to our resources while at URA. 

I would also like to request Madam Kagina to continue mentoring Akol Doris in that tough task so that our legacy can continue. We do not want URA to go back to those years when there was corruption. 

I also call upon members to support the new team of Akol because she needs our help. We need to sensitise our people so that they do not evade paying taxes. As for Madam Kagina, when duty calls, I request you to be ready so that you can continue serving your fellow brothers and sisters in whatever capacity and in any part of the world. I thank you.

5.41
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a saying that in life, one should aspire to inspire before you expire. I think Allen Kagina has been a big inspiration to many of us and Ugandans at large.

We want to thank and congratulate her, for that wonderful appointment. We had wanted to sing for her a song but I think our rules do not allow. In any case, the language may not be parliamentary. However, the question now is up to the Prime Minster. How are you going to use lessons from Allen Kagina to transform our Public Service in Uganda?

Ms Kagina’s achievements show that Ugandans can actually deliver. How are you going to use the lessons learnt from her work in URA to transform our Public Service?

I also think that her achievement is also a very strong commentary on the fact that women can lead just as men or even better in some instances. As thus, the Movement started to ensure that also women who get opportunity in Public Service and other spheres of life must be applauded. This is a vivid example that women can deliver.

We also want to congratulate Doris, who has succeeded her. As Parliament, we should support her in order to take URA to greater heights. Your work is well cut out. You must increase the revenue base, particularly by looking at the informal sector so that you can streamline it in order to increase the tax base in this country. We thank you very much, Allen and may God reward you abundantly in your retirement.

5.44
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, to rely on me to speak on this motion. I would like to say that I have no option but to support the motion. There is no way you can oppose it. One is that I have not known the person I am talking about for a long time. However, the short time I have known her, the commitment to the Lord and to Christ leaves me with no option but to praise and thank her. 

You have talked about many things that Ms Allen Kagina has done but I just want to point out two things   that I have learnt from her. One, she is not shy about her origin. There are many people who celebrate their presence but do not want their past to be known. As for Allen, she has risen from a very humble beginning. The first time I met her, she was working as a personal secretary to H.E in Nile Mansions in the Nile Conference Centre. That humble beginning.

Today, we are hearing that she can share a platform with top international leaders. This is something we need to celebrate. There are some people who think that I am just a secretary; I am just a clerk but hard work can take you to any height and particularly if you believe in the Lord, hard work can take you to any heights. That is why Ms Kagina, I do not care how many degrees you have but I know that the first time I saw you, you were just a mere secretary to His Excellency the President. That humbles me.

The second point I would like to share – you know colleagues, you do not know how people humble women. They think that the job of the secretary is for women. When people came to our school to talk to us about career guidance, I refused to listen to them. They were telling me that girls are supposed to do nothing other than becoming secretaries. I said no –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude because of seniority. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I just would like to say that she defied the definition that she should fit in that jacket. She has opted out because of her hard work and she is what we are celebrating today.

I am particularly proud of her. When you read the Bible, there is this story of a tax collector who was always a despised personality. When you read the Bible, you do not even want to associate with them. To hear Uganda today celebrating a tax collector, I wish Jesus could come back and -(Laughter)- However, I would like to pass one message. Before she retired, I had wanted to go and see her in person and share one experience with her. That experience is that I did not seem to like the way taxes were being paid in selected banks.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that many members would like to contribute to this motion but we need to move on. Therefore, I would like to put the question that this House do adopt the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Clerk, for the first motion, please, extract the text of the Hansard and the motion and transmit to the Saudi Mission in Uganda, to be transmitted to the Government of Saudi Arabia. For the second one, extract the Hansard and the text and send it to Mr and Mrs Kagina, her family and Doris Akol for their record.



BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

Clause 33

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, as you recall, we were looking at the new insertions to the text. Let us continue from there. Honourable members, clause 33, it was a new proposal by the minister. I trust the text has been distributed. I put the question that clause 33 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

 GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: I have some amendments on clause 34.  I propose the following- in order to align the proposal of the committee with the provision of the Constitution, an amendment in head note to this clause to read: “birth registration of foundlings as referred to the Constitution.” 

Then (b); “where  clause 34(1) makes reference to the phrase under section 13 of the Uganda’s Citizenship and Immigration Control Act caps 66, I propose that the clause should instead refer to Article 11 (1) of the Constitution. Further, I propose to delete the words “maintain (a) in respect of every person who has been presumed a citizen.”

Then re-draft 34(1) to read as follows: “The Authority shall register presumed births as provided for under Article 11(1) of the Constitution.”

Then (c) I propose to delete the following words from sub clause (2)  “live, new born, lying exposed, chief of birth and death, the district” and replace the word “hospital” with the word “health centre”. Then redraft clause 34(2) to read: “Any person who finds the child whose parents are unknown or any person who is given the chance to take care of such a child shall report immediately to the nearest police station or health centre and thereafter, in charge of the police station or health centre as the case may be, shall cause to register such particulars concerning the birth of the child to registration officer in the registration area, in which the child was found.” I beg to move

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 34 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.




Clause 35

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 35 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, agreed to.

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Honourable members, the underlying principle of this clause can be best achieved if we redrafted. It appears as in above because under common law, the presumption  is that when a woman gives birth during the subsistence of the marriage, the husband is presumed to be the father of the child, hence the need to legislate for cases where parents have a child out of wedlock. 

I propose to amend as follows, amend the head note of the clause to read. “Entry of father in register in contested cases.” The draft of clause 36 is as follows: ‘A person shall not be entered in the register as the father of any child except –

a) At the joint request of the father and mother of the child appearing physically before the registration officer.
b) Upon the production to the registration officer of DNA tests results.
c)Upon the production to the registration officer of a Court Order establishing paternity or; 
d)where the father or the mother or both of a child are dead upon production of an order of a court of competent jurisdiction to the effect that the person to be registered has a father.
In case of sub clause 1(b) the person contesting parentage of the child shall be responsible for meeting the costs of carrying out the DNA test.  I beg to move.
 
MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson. I support the wording as it is because it is blanket cover. However, the one proposed by the minister means that there is already contestation. For example, on the parentage of the child, which need not be the case, even if there is contestation, it can be covered by the non-disclosure of information.  I beg to submit.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I do not agree with my sister hon. Kamateeka. But I go with the minister’s proposal because as it is in the original Bill, there are parents who have children but are not married by law and they are the majority. There are some who produce secretly; the father comes in the evening and visits and this woman conceives by nature. You are subjecting this woman to appear for registration and indicate the father. If not, then the registration should not take place.  . 

There are some people with disabilities, who commonly have this problem. While there are some who cannot declare their husbands. There are also some who have husbands but the husbands do not want to be disclosed; there are those scenarios. There are women who are raped and do not know the father of the child. It could be your immediate relative that raped you. You cannot reveal this. Yet, you want this person to appear before a registration officer with the name and details of the father and if not, the registration must not take place? 

I do not agree with my colleague; as women of this country and as the vice chairperson of UWOPA, as women of this Parliament, we may not support that. I beg to support the position of the minister, in case there is a contention somewhere, that maybe there is a problem and they want to know the father, this person in contest must meet the charges of DNA tests; moving all those costs to that person because he is the one struggling to get  proof of the father. I beg to submit that we take the proposal by the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 36 be amended as proposed by the minister.

	(Question put and agreed to.)	

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose as follows in clause 37, Change of name and sex should be made an independent part under this Act. This is because change of name or sex is applicable to any registration under this Act. Reference to 21 years under clause 37(1) should instead make reference to 18 years, which is the majority age under the Constitution.

Then (c) while the head note to clause 37 makes reference to change of name and sex, the details of the clause does not provide for change of sex but only change of name.
 (d) Since the head note to clause 37 provides for change of name of a child, I propose that head note to clause 37 reads “change of name of an adult” instead of “change of name or sex” as it is in the committee report. I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 37, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 38

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I propose as follows: Reference to 21 years under clause 37(1) should instead make reference to 18 years, which is the majority age under our Constitution. Delete the following words; “who is not married, divorced or widowed”. The redraft shall read as follows: “The parents or guardian of any child under the age of 18 years may apply in the prescribed form to the registration officer at the registration centre in which the birth of the child is registered to change the name of the child.”  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39

GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, on clause 39, I propose that the numbering of sub clause (1) is not necessary since there are no other sub clauses. Instead of using the term “alter”, we redraft using the term “update” and reference to the words “birth register” be redrafted to refer to the “register”.

“(c) Amend by deleting “reference to register of births and deaths registration district” and replace it “with registration officer”. Change the headnote of clause 39 to read, “Registration of a child born a hermaphrodite.”

The redraft of this clause 39 shall therefore read as follows: “If a child born a hermaphrodite, after being registered, through an operation, changes from a female to a male or from a male to a female and the change is certified by a medical doctor, the registration officer shall, with the approval of the executive director of the Authority to be created and upon application of the parents or guardian of that child update the particulars of the child, which appear on the register.”  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I would like to amend the minister’s clause by saying: “The sex of a child born a hermaphrodite shall be certified by a medical doctor before registration.” 

A hermaphrodite is a child born with some bit of a sex ambiguity. You find a rudimentary sexual organ of a woman and a rudimentary sexual organ of a man. As time goes, the dominant sex will precisely come out. This means you can only determine the real sex of this person by genotyping, done by a doctor Genotyping, will reveal either you are XY or XX, which are sex determinants. This will come out very precisely when done by a doctor. Even if they reconstituted someone to be a woman when that person was going to be a man, it will not work. That person will remain a man, that is, the hermaphrodite will have male organs that will predominate at 80 per cent.

Supposing you operate and try to make him a woman, the hormones inside remain masculine.  That is why I would like us to say that, “The sex of a child born a hermaphrodite shall be certified by a medical doctor before registration.” This will stop trans-genders from coming here. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, I seek clarification from Dr Bitekyerezo. He says that with time, there will be a dominant sex that –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am trying to rise on a point of procedure. I have been trying to access the report; the hard copy that I have is quite different from what I am seeing with colleagues. For the last one hour, I have been trying to access the soft copy but it is not on the Ipad- 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: It is there.

MR MULONGO:  How come mine is not opening.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask one of the Members to assist a friend. Okay, the minister is donating his hard copy to you.

MR MULONGO: Madam Chairperson, I just want to seek clarification from hon. Bitekyerezo; if with time, the dominant sex comes to be known, what if the registration is done at the time when the ambiguity is at this apex and it is still early? You do not need a doctor to tell you that this is an hermaphrodite because at the early stages, as you said, the ambiguity will be clearly marked. Supposing the registration is at that stage?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the determination may not come until about 10 years. During that time, the child has gone to school.

How do you register? The child may have to go to school and so, you may have to classify even before that operation.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, if somebody is born a hermaphrodite- if you wait for things to take place naturally, dominant characteristics start showing up at puberty. When a qualified doctor does genotyping, he will find that- for example, if a person is XX that is a woman; XY, that is a man. 

XO is still termed as syndrome but that is still a woman because there is no Y. The femaleness or the maleness of this child will be determined by someone who has done genetics and this is a medical doctor; they can do it even in Mulago.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is, when is that determination done? Is it a one month or five years?

MS BABADIRI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson., To me, this issue of taking the child to a doctor to determine the dominant gene is a bit difficult especially if you produce a child in the village. Where will you get the doctor to do all these tests?
These dominant genes always appear during adolescence, during puberty, where you can determine female or male.

I go with the amendment of the Chairperson, except where he says “updating should be changing the names.” Otherwise, few people can access genotype tests. We know Biology but this one cannot be applicable to the people in the rural areas. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In the animal kingdom, there is what we call sequential hermaphroditism, which usually occurs in fish and other organisms, where an organism maybe born a male but progressively changes to a female. This does not happen in human beings.  In human beings, we have simultaneous hermaphroditism, which is largely pseudo in a sense that one type of sex is usually more developed than the other. 

In the earliest stages of earthly life, the medical expert can take a decision to classify you by even doing a surgical reconstruction of your sexual organs and make you a male or a female.

However, the formulation by the doctor may be misleading and may bring us problems; if you say somebody later on turns into a male or a female. I think the formulation by hon. Bitekyerezo suffices that the medical expert can, at the earliest possible time, give a sex to that child who is born a hermaphrodite. They usually assess; if the male organs look more pronounced then they try to surgically close the female one and vice versa. It is possible that we can give authority to the medical expert to determine at the earliest time.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that hon. Bitekyerezo’s amendment in lieu of what the minister has proposed or in lieu of this? Is it an addition?

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, I have very well thought about it. It is a replacement of what the minister- and I said “The sex of a child born a hermaphrodite” - that is with sex ambiguity – “shall be certified by a qualified medical expert or doctor before registration.” It can even be done at birth. I am talking honestly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, suppose the child is born using a traditional birth attendants, who is not a doctor, in the village in Koboko? 

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I thought the minister had harmonised it. The head note is registration of a child born hermaphrodite. So, the child born hermaphrodite should be registered as that because that is a hermaphrodite. Then certifying the sex will come after a medical doctor has certified. I think that is harmonisation. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, when they are born, you write hermaphrodite, then later -  

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Chairperson, it is very difficult for Ugandans to register their child as hermaphrodite. They will not.  So, we should let the parents  just choose the sex of the child and then later, when the child is able to choose what sex they want or when they can go to the medical doctor, then they can certify. However, for you to say that at birth a child should not be registered before you take them to the doctor; how many of our people can take their babies to the doctor for certification of the sex. They can hardly afford the medical care; how about for certification of sex?

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, the clarity we would like to make in this law is the registration of a hermaphrodite. The ambiguity we should not do as the Ninth Parliament is to create an impression where a transgender person, people who call themselves transgender will take advantage of this law, creating an impression that a human being can change from sex to another. We will be wrong.

In the 1970s when this law was made, a pregnant woman, would not tell the sex of a child in the womb. Today, it is very easy to tell it. That time, they would not determine the kind of sex it was because the genetics technology was still low. However, as we have said, a certified medical doctor can tell at birth that the dominant sex will be this male or female. You as a parent you cannot go ahead and say, yes, the doctor is telling me that the dominant sex will be male but for me, I want the person to be female.

A formulation like this- now there have been people who are arguing that if I am born in the village, what will I do? There are health centres in the villages. If we are saying that we are working to fix our health centres, there are health centres IVs. This is not rocket science; a medical officer at health centre IV will be able to tell this.

We should understand that it is a unique situation; if you are a parent and you have found yourself in that, you have got to take extra care to go to a health centre IV and sort out this. I think we should not allow anything that includes change of sex. You cannot change sex; it will be very vague that someone has changed sex from one point to another.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then you propose.

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson, I still would like to support hon. Bahati and Dr Bitekyerezo reminding ourselves of the reason why we are in the Ninth Parliament. We were elected to make sure the voices of our people are heard here. Our voices are not the most important but the voices of our people are very important.

What is important right now and urgent is to eliminate any doubt that is being created that there is change of sex; the change of sex is possible. We would like the terms to be as clear as possible, as Dr Bitekyerezo said that “the ambiguity in the sex should be certified by a qualified medical doctor.” If possible, we can even put it that a health practitioner at the health centres. We can reduce it to that if the problem is with the reach of the hospitals. 

The question of raising change of sex is not going down well with our people. This is what I would like to raise and I beg honourable members we should concede on this that we should go by hon. Bitekyerezo’s amendment so that we make our work move forward because right now, we are going forward and backward, which is not good.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to remind Members that the headnote is saying “registration of a child born a hermaphrodite” and not change of sex.

MR OBOTH:  Madam Chairperson, where as I appreciate the sentiments in the House and the homophobia being displayed, we have also to be careful that this is a mixture of legal and medical aspects. I do not support homosexuality. However, the proposal by the minister, I thought covered - unless we want a selective application of this that where we shall have children born and immediately a doctor comes to certify that this- and also we are tagging that it should be certified doctor.

What the minister was saying here is where a child is born a hermaphrodite and is registered to be of a particular sex where, here, the instance is that, this is a child born but a doctor, has to- look at a doctor in Mulago who cannot tell which is predominant and would say, this one is a male; the parents give the name “Oboth”. However, reaching home after few years, the other one of Annette or Ruth comes up - this is the opportunity for this parent to go back and say, “You know what doctor this is what is happening.”

We see this other “Oboth” thing is being diminished and the other one growing. I thought this is what the minister was providing for, especially that Dr Bitekyerezo is the - he has actually clearly said that some of this may not grow at the same pace, it may take some time. Therefore, at birth- and we are taking about registration, we passed a clause Registration immediately this child is born.  Whereas, I do not support my neighbour on the left, we agree with him on this one especially the headnote which was changed. This child here has to be a hermaphrodite not a transgender. Not somebody out of the way, who want to say, “I feel like my child should be a woman or a man.” This is a medical problem –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, suppose we just modify that where a child is born hermaphrodite and is registered of a particular sex by “omission” - because here we are talking as if there is an omission because the particular genetic XX has not matured. 
We need to add by “omission” because by then maybe a traditional birth attendant or scientific complete medical examination has not been done. So we need to add that word.

MR OBOTH: That was a proposal. Again that is complicating it. Don’t we know that hermaphrodites live with us? It is unfortunate that we cannot tell in this House how many people were born –(Interjections)- the medical information -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chairperson, in my village, we had such a case. This person was born a hermaphrodite. At 18 years, this person later on died. I cannot mention the name because people are there watching. This person later on - the voice turned into that of a man.

The person developed some hair on the legs and predominantly became a man but because he had a rudimentary female sexual organ, he could not accept anybody to access. I think you understand what I am talking about -(Laughter) 

Honestly, speaking, genetically and phenotypically the person became a man but with a rudimentary female sexual organ even though we called him a man. That one can be determined; first, genetically by a medical doctor when you study genetics or even if you constitute and remove that thing and kill it, that person is a male. 

That is why I am saying let the medical doctors who have done Medicine who can even do some genetic studies not hon. Fox Odoi who has done only Law, say this one is either predominately a female or a male; but to say that through operation you cannot change sex.  I thank you.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you my brother, for accepting my information. I would like to inform you my brother that, first of all, the issue of people who are born hermaphrodite is not very common, it is rare.

Secondly, I will inform you in form of an example about somebody I grew up with in Atiri village in Tororo who we knew was a girl. This boy was called Caleb, we grew up with him thinking he was a girl; he looked like a girl very beautiful.  When he made 15 years because we were of the same age, he began turning into a boy - but it reached an extent where a certain NGO decided to give the mother help to go and change this girl’s sex into a boy. This could not augur well because of the stereotypes. In the village, the mother was forced to relocate from the village and we do not know where she is up to today. They say she is in Kampala but nobody knows.

I would like to support hon. Bitekyerezo that we should not take these issues for granted. I support hon. Bitekyerezo and not the minister’s position. Thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, as I conclude I am not denying. I read of a story in the newspaper of a young man in Jinja, up to Senior two he considered himself as a girl. Everyone considered him as a girl but he started developing and I know that some foreign NGO in Jinja just less than two years, they helped him to undergo a surgery. I thought this law is providing for such people who once were somebody else and now, they are something else. 

This is about having two sexual organs not even just sex; we are talking about change of sex. Changing two sexual organs, the genitals; we are not talking about changing sex where anybody would come here and has the liberty to change from Othieno to Athieno. No.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am constrained to join this debate because of my well-known position on some of these matters. The point here is very different from the old debate about homosexuality.

The only problem is that we are allowing homophobia to shroud our otherwise very good judgement. What does the minister propose and what have we proposed in this law? We provided for registration of children at birth. We stated a timeframe within which they must be registered.

We are now dealing with exceptional circumstances, people born hermaphrodite. What does the minister propose? He says they could be registered any; along the way, if they turn out to be female other than male, there must be a clause that allows the registrar to alter the register to capture that fact. That is the only argument here.

He even goes ahead and says that it must be done –(Interjections)- Hon. Bitekyerezo I listened to you very attentively for a very long time, I am still prepared to listen to you, but not at this moment.

The minister also proposes that that registration must be done after certification by a medical officer. There is no lacuna he has left in his proposal but then we come up with genotyping. 

You certainly expect a woman of 34 years in my village who gives birth in a banana plantation to hermaphrodite to go and look for a doctor for purposes of genotyping when in the first place, they cannot access a doctor for purposes of delivery.

This is placing an inordinate obligation on the very poor people in our society. Colleagues, I am making a very passionate plea let not our homophobic position shroud our judgement over this matter.  I support the minister.

DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. There are very many conversations –(Interjections)- There are very many conversations. [The Chairperson: “Members, Order”] - I would like to be associated with the minister’s proposals as well as the arguments given by hon. Fox Odoi. I would also want to propose a cure because I do not know why we should not even register at birth “hermaphrodite.” 

THE CHAIRPERSON: “Stigma”

DR BAYIGGA: Madam Chairperson, that is the only way we can establish how many hermaphrodites we have - and the state should intervene because this addresses it if at all people want to change –(Interjections)- excuse me, I will be informed later. Let me develop this argument because I have been keeping quiet for some time and therefore I am trying to develop it.

As I said, this one cures the problem that were are anticipating – that transgender will come in the future because it can be traced that at birth, there was sex ambiguity and that is why a midwife, clinical officer or doctor at that side registered that person as ambiguous by putting “H” for Hermaphrodite. As they continue developing, we can look at those changes.

I would like to differ from Dr Bitekyerezo for reasons which have been proposed by hon. Fox Odoi. As we continue to search for a midwife, it will very difficult in the short, mid and long term, if we continue this way, to have specialists who can certify this. 

Therefore, the ambiguity can be registered. Government can find out how many Hermaphrodites that we have who need help in the immediate, short term or even in the future. So, I would like to propose that we register those ambiguous sexes as so and then we find a cure. 
I thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that solves our problem. Despite the stigma, we should say it as it is. 

I now put the question that Clause 39 be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 39, as amended, agreed to.


MR SSEGGONA: There is a problem. You cannot change from Hermaphrodite and then you say you are changing from male to female –

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. When you reach puberty and you are dominantly now a woman, you will be registered as a woman. They will cancel the other one and say “female”. (Applause)

Clause 40

GEN. ARONDA: I propose to amend as follows clause 40:

“(a) That where reference is made to “Executive Director” under Clause 40(1) should be substituted with the word, “authority”.
(b)Where Clause 40(2)(e)  makes reference to “identity card number or passport number or” should be amended and redrafted to refer to “National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number of Uganda and alien parents respectively as the case maybe.” 

I further propose that in addition to the particulars of the child on the birth certificate, the National Identification Number to a child who is identified as a citizen of Uganda and Alien Identification Number to a child who is identified as an alien should be added on that list of information to be contained on the birth certificate.

The redraft will read as follows:
(1) “Upon receipt of the application in the prescribed form and upon payment of the prescribed fee, the authority shall issue a certificate in the prescribed form of the birth of any person compiled in the prescribed manner from the records and register in the authority’s custody.

(2) A certificate of birth issued under sub-section (1) shall contain the:
(a) Information concerning the child which shall include:
    i. name;
    ii. place of birth;
    iii. date of birth;
    iv. sex;
    v. nationality;
    vi. National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number of a child who is a citizen and alien respectively.
(b) Information concerning the parents of the child, which shall include the name, nationality, National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number for citizens and Aliens parents respectively; and
(c) Any other information as may be prescribed by the minister.

(3) The information contained in a certificate of birth issued under this Act is presumed to be correct and it may be received as evidence in any judicial proceedings.
a) A child who has been entered in the register and has been issued with a certificate of birth shall be issued with another certificate of birth upon adoption.

The justification of this is that reference to only “Executive Director” may stifle operations hence better to refer to “authority”. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I agree with the underlying principle of the clause. However, I wish to propose an amendment as follows: 

    a) Where in Clause 41(2), reference is made to the term “authority”, it should be replaced with the term “service” to give the sub-clause its intended meaning. Clause 41(2) should  be redrafted to read as follows:

“Any ministry, department, agency or institution under subsection (1) may, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law for the time being, defer consideration of the service until the certificate of birth of the said person has been produced or other proof that the birth of the person has been registered as prescribed.”

The justification is that replacing the word “authority” with the word “service” puts proper context and achieves the purpose the clause is intended to achieve.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I think that this clause is dangerous because when you use the words, “Any ministry, department, agency or institution under subsection (1) may, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law for the time being, defer consideration of the service….” And the service you are talking about is not qualified and yet, some of the services that we are talking about may be essential. For example, in my district today, a person who is not registered will not be recommended for a passport and the claim is that it is a ministerial directive.

I would seek clarification from the minister on the kind of service that can be deferred until there is proof of this birth. Otherwise, we are going to deny Ugandans services until they are registered. There are procedural aspects for registration and when someone has not gone through those procedures then you say that they will not access a service and yet you are not qualifying the service. Supposing the service is medical   because you are talking about ministry, department or agency?

MR EBIL: The Minister of Finance also recently issued some statement that gave mixed signals to our people that they will not access UPE schools and other services if they are not registered, well knowing the problems that we are still facing with this registration process.

I, therefore, beg to support hon. Sseggona that we need to consider this clearly. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the context of your proposal? What type of service do we envisage here?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Here, the import of it is that at some point, upon this law coming into force, the service you are talking about is - say you turned up at a health centre or even an education centre or any other service that you are entitled to as a citizen or a legally protected resident person. We are saying that time will come when this ID will be necessary for accessing government services. That is the principle behind this clause.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. This is part of the importation we made into this Bill and while considering it, we looked at the law of the Government of Kenya. It is explicit that any ministry, department, agency or government institution - this means that at some time A, a Ugandan without an identity card or identification number will not be able to access any service in this country. 

This is premised on the fact that today many Ugandans are complaining that non Ugandans are accessing government sponsorship in public universities yet Ugandans are missing out. So we want to close all these loopholes to make sure that if somebody cannot be identified as a Ugandan, you don’t access these services.

However, when you look at this Bill, there are provisions which will not come into force until such a time the minister will decide and that such time will be when majority of Ugandans have registered.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you differing from the minister?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I am totally in support of the minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Then I put the question that clause 41 be amended as proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But hon. Ssegona, the clause says “Differ” it does not say “Stop”. It says differ until you produce your certificate. 

MR SSEGONA: That is why I want us to qualify it. There are some services which are so essential and urgent in character  –(Interjections)-  I thought I had the floor and decorum calls for colleagues to listen to me first and then respond.

You see in principle, I support registration and for registration to be effective, there should be some functions. But when you make a blanket clause that is not qualified knowing the Uganda we are talking about, knowing the process of registration the minister said would end on 28th February and he closed it in December, somebody has not registered be it a child or somebody is undergoing the process or he has not started and you are saying that an attendant at a health centre - 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: My colleague, hon. Ssegona, the point is that people who are 16 years and above since the exercise began they will be registered. The registration will continue. For now, we are processing data for those who registered but those who did not register after processing data, which we are already doing and issuing cards for those, there will be an opening. This will be made clear to the country that registration will commence at some point when we have processed data of those who registered.

MR SSEGONA: I want to thank my colleague –(Interruption) 

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, I think the provision as crafted is not absolutely mandatory because of the expressions used, “may differ” in other words, in my opinion, it encourages registration but at the same time, it does not give the necessary discretion being applied by the officer responsible.

MR SSEGONA: Madam Chair, the reason we guard discretion –(Interruption) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chair, the minister has said that as soon as the data is captured, the registration process will start but the minister is on record as having stated that registration will start again in July 2016 - has the timeline changed? 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chair, we have not changed. There are two phases and from July, we will begin registering zero age and then foreigners who are legally residing in Uganda.

MR SSEGONA: Madam Chair, that strengthens and fortifies my fear and especially hearing it from the same minister who told Parliament about the dates I talked about earlier and in December while we were away on recess, he changed what he told the country through Parliament.

I have also tried to look at the transitional provisions in this Bill and it has nothing to do with the implementation of this Act. I do not want us to legislate in vain. We have been told that this Bill is so urgent. We have stated before - because some of us wanted to suspend registration until the Bill is out. My simple question is; you are giving this unguided and unguarded discretion and I want to restrict myself to an attendant at a health centre III, IV or even Mulago to have discretion in order to make this Bill or the law effective.

I have given you an example of a person who went to the district in Wakiso to have a recommendation for a passport and the information of this person who is below 16 years gets from the district is that you do not have a registration and therefore we cannot recommend you for a passport. Therefore, this person cannot obtain a passport and go abroad.

Now you are here legislating giving unguarded and unguided discretion to somebody that he or she can differ a service including an essential service until someone has produced a birth certificate. Is it not the responsibility of Government on the other hand to have all the records that once I move in to any ministry or agency of Government it has the data and I simply put in my name? Assuming I am registered, you will get the data.

If the Government cannot move to that level what makes the same Government think;

    a) That a citizen who is registered must at all times have his credentials by way of a birth certificate.
    b) That somebody must at all times be perfect to go through the registration process before requiring any service from Government.

Madam Chair and colleagues, I do not think that this Parliament of Uganda can legislate and imagine that we are in such an ideal situation that Ugandans shall at all times be as effective. Unless the minister can convince me that they are going to make some schedule to provide for services that are essential and can never be deferred, under any circumstances, and that the service providers will always be aware of such a situation, I will not consent to that.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, whereas I appreciate hon. Sseggona’s concern, I was kind of comforted when the Attorney-General read out, the usage of the words “may” and “deferment”. I know hon. Sseggona is a very good lawyer, unless if he is going to say otherwise. However, could he clarify further, what is making him very uncomfortable with the citizens of this country to enjoy their rights visa-a-vis the responsibilities that they have to? Why must you demand a service from Government when you are not even known? Isn’t it a duty to register? Should this 16-year old or under 16-year - of course, I believe that the minister should inform hon. Sseggona that it was wrong for anybody to stop that person, because there is no law as of now stopping anybody from accessing services. Is your concern based on the 16-year old experience or generally you think this is injustice going to apply?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I wanted also to draw  your attention that if you read the provision as a whole, it talks about, “Before consideration of the service, until certificate of birth of the said person has been produced or other proof that birth of that person has been registered as provided.” So, as I bring a certificate or LC letter or something and if they bring LC letter –

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we are in a situation where we want to encourage our citizens to register. That is very important because there is no other way that we can do it. We can only do it under a legal framework. But I think what hon. Sseggona is asking is: assuming there is an emergency and somebody is not registered, how can we handle such? I do not imagine that somebody who goes to a hospital, after they have been involved in an accident, will be asked for an identity card before they access services. But minister, should that situation arise, how is it going to be handled?  The moment we sort that out, we will be able to move forward. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I also want to remind the House that this part 4 or part 5 is about the registration of births. It is not talking about health, accidents or sugar; that is what it is dealing with.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, there is something that is cropping up. I do not know what is wrong with members. I have been to Israel and noticed that one cannot enter that country unless they have paid medical insurance. We were told that that is a big requirement because if anything happens to that person, they will be finished. This is a sophisticated requirement and so we had to pay for it. 

There is a very simple country in our neighbourhood, when you go there and you are hon. Sseggona, no matter whether you carry a DP or FDC card, the moment they discover you aren’t registered there, you are not theirs because you are not contributing to their tax base. I do not know why people want to turn our country into a small beehive.

One time, I went to England in 2004. When I arrived at the checking point at Heathrow International Airport, one of the women said to me, “welcome to England.” I said, “thank you.” She later asked when I would be coming back. That is when I detected that I was not English but a pure Ugandan. That is when I realised that running out of the country is not a good thing. I said to myself that I would work, die, be buried and rot here to contribute to the humus in Uganda. So, why are we not ensuring people register?

There is a service which, hon. Sseggona talked about. If you have not registered, why would you want to hold a Ugandan passport? Madam Chairperson, I support the minister 100 per cent on this point. Let us all register in order to access services. When you are an outsider and in Uganda, face what we face when we go out of here. Our country is not a beehive, please.

MR KIWANDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I will get some clarification from hon. Sseggona later. For now let me first talk about the biometric machines that were recently installed in Parliament to detect people’s movements both within the building and into the Chamber. This project cost the country huge sums of money. 

But what would be the use of this installation, if at the end of the day we allow whoever comes from the taxi park or anywhere to just access all corners of the Parliament Building? 

So now that we have incurred a cost to do this registration, there must be restrictions. Really, if we leave it open, then why did we incur all this cost? So whatever we have put in this law is actually due to the reason that we have already incurred a cost; we need this service. 

The restrictions that we have - like sometimes one may forget their card where upon the police will warn you to come with it the following day - we may not have all these regulations everywhere including the hospitals but we must have them catered for under our law so that our people should take them very serious. Otherwise the cost that we paid for the machines being used in the registration exercise will be wastage. 

I thank you, Madam Chair.

MS NANTUME: Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a few words but I want to support hon. Sseggona’s submission. We know in the registration exercise, there are things that targeted: voting for 2016 and service delivery because that is the only way Government of Uganda can know the population to plan for.

Therefore, when I read a clause that says that a non-registered citizen will not access any services from any ministry - we have people in Uganda who have not registered, not because of their wish but because of the misinterpretation of the law by the people who sensitised them. In most villages of Uganda, registration officials first demanded for birth certificates. In other villages, the officials asked for money from some LCs and the people being registered. So people who were demotivated to that level did not register, not because they did not want but due to those circumstances. 

Just at the end of January this year - and I want to get this from the honourable minister – in Buvuma District, we received people from the Ministry of Internal Affairs to sensitise the registrars about what to do with non-Ugandans who had overstayed in Uganda, for instance, Kenyan some of which even sat their senior six from here. 

Such people were not allowed to register for national cards -(Interruptions)– yes. But let me inform the House that there is registration - I am just forgetting the time one requires to have spent in this country, but there is something to do with being a Ugandan by naturalisation in the Constitution of Uganda. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, this is the clarification that I would like to get - some people from the Ministry of Internal Affairs came to my district and said they wanted to help people who had failed to reach the ministry to register - clarification from the minister on whether this has taken place in other parts of Uganda as well? 

In these circumstances, we might get to a level where we shall pass a budget for those people who are not known legally but living in Uganda. Do you want to tell us that those people will not get the services? In addition, would we be good planners of this country? I thank you.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I think this amendment by the minister is a bit dangerous and could disadvantage some of our citizens. We do not know why the minister suspended registration for one year. As the honourable member from Buvuma is saying, there are many people who never got registered yet you are saying that a Government agency will only give people a service if they don’t produce their registration cards. Supposing one goes to a hospital and they are not register, and not because of your own faults but because a Government agency failed to be efficient, what happens then? Whose fault will that be? Therefore, this amendment would be operative and useful later, maybe after five years from now.

GEN. ARONDA: Madam Chair, in the Bill, we are coming to a commencement clause that details which part will come into force and at what time. That commencement clause, Madam Chair, is provided for.

However, for now, there is no one at a hospital, a school or passport issuance office that is being turned away on account of being registered or not. The status-quo is maintained –(Interjections)- yes, after passing the law, the provisions of the law will be there – offences and all that and when the commencement clause is debated -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to advise that we wait for the commencement clause. If we have fears, we should build the provision that we are worried about at the commencement stage.

MR WAFULA-OGUTTU: I agree with you on that one, Madam Chairperson. However, at the same time we would like the minister to tell the House why the registration cannot be a continuous exercise as he promised. He has sort of changed his position here. He had told the House that he was suspending registration up to June/July 2016. Why can’t this registration be a continuous process? What is the problem? Otherwise, we would not have a lot of these fears. This is a fear because if I am challenged in a hospital or school, I could opt to go and register and bring a certificate, but if the exercise is suspended, what do I do?

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. To supplement on what you have just said, I want to give an example of URA. We used to have the TIN registration in the system as well as the manual assessment, if one were going to pay any tax. But they have now phased out the manual system. 

Similarly, if we are to take the clause the way the minister wants us to do, subject to the operationalization clause, then the other one would be that the registration must be continuous so that, in case someone fails to get a service as a result of the need for that registration, that registration can actually be achieved. That will close the gap so that if someone has missed a service because there is need for registration, they can access registration either the following day or at any other place very fast. 

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Chair, I think the point has already been made to the effect that this particular provision only creates discretion on the service provider on whether or not to deliver a particular service at a particular time. 

On what hon. Sseggona calls “critical services,” I am looking at the situation where you turn up at the hospital with a sick child. By operation of common sense, there is absolutely no way a doctor will turn you away, whether you are registered or not. The service will have to be delivered. 

Hon. Sseggona probably also knows that the doctors even swear an oath to save lives. They are duty-bound, at all times to save lives. However, if we provide as a policy that we only deliver free medical services to Ugandans, we must have them registered. We must know who Ugandans are for them to access those free medical services.

We have free primary education and free secondary education for Ugandans. These services are certainly not meant for aliens and/or any other persons living in Uganda. So, the only way you can categorise these people is by having them registered. There is no other way. 

If you apply for the Students’ Loan Scheme, you must be a Ugandan. That service, certainly can be deferred if there is no evidence that you are registered. 

Therefore, Madam Chair, I think this law is good and we should support the minister.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chair, we need to be real. Let us take the example of the Electoral Commission. Some registered voters appear in the Voters’ Register. However, since the exercise of registration of voters started, some voters do not have voters’ cards though their photos appear in the Voters’ Register - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, we are dealing with the registration of births. Don’t mix things.

MR OZOGHU: The issue I am raising, Madam Chair, is that when we take what hon. Sseggona talked about – service delivery – we are putting ourselves in a tricky situation. From his presentation, the assumption will be that every facility of Government must have a database so that when one comes and they do not have a card but they are registered, such people can still access services. But is that possible in Uganda’s situation?

The honourable minister communicated at first that the registration exercise would continue at the sub-county level, but which stopped. Right now, people cannot register. 

Madam Chair, I would like us to be real as we legislate. We should not really have issues that will be difficult for Government agencies and ministries to handle. We should know that the population we are serving is diverse; we should respond to their needs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think let us wait for the commencement clause. If you have fears, you will build them there and tie the loose ends.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, may I suggest, therefore, that we equally stand over this? It is very important. I have heard my colleagues talk about it and I am happy with all the proposals. Can I say one thing that my colleagues have answered questions that I never raised? I am not against registration. I am not against sanctions. I am only envisaging a situation where you confer a discretion that is going to be abused. I am looking at where you confer discretion when you are not sure that our own processes, as a Government, are going to be so smooth and perfect and therefore that at any one point, somebody will be able to access the services talked about. Take an example, the process of registration has been made lengthy. It is all about the authority. We have had the registrar of birth certificates before and people have been using them before they got to the registrar of births and deaths.

I am only envisaging a situation that is not smooth and perfect and you are telling a Ugandan that he or she will not access the services until they bring a birth certificate issued in accordance with this law?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No! Why are you not reading the last part that says, “or as approved….”

MR SSEGGONA: I am reading - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, look at the phrase: “…or as approved that the birth of a person has been registered as provided.” You may have the short one and come with it even if you do not have the long one.

MR SSEGGONA: Short one? But you do not have -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I did not intend to interrupt my good friend. I just wanted to raise this procedural issue on whether we are proceeding rightly by going back to what we had already taken a vote on?

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on Clause 42; we are dealing with deaths now.

MR OBOTH: We are generating debate on this yet we already decided on it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, we had decided on what to do. So, any fears? I thought that safeguards will be built in in the commencement clause. Let us go to the deaths now - part 6 on deaths.

GEN. ARONDA: Madam Chairperson, we have an insertion, Part Five on registration of deaths. I agree with the insertion of Part Six above. However, I propose that before providing for Clause 42, the following new clauses should be inserted as is the case with the birth registration under Clause 30 of the committee’s report.

Before Clause 42 below, I propose to insert the following new clause will be Clause 42 and its headnote shall read as follows: “Compulsory registration of deaths. Subject to this Act, registration of every death is free and compulsory.” 

I propose an insertion of a new clause to immediately follow the one I have proposed above and whose headnote shall be death registration and reads as follows: “Death Registration: a registration officer in charge of a registration area shall register deaths and shall enter in the register or cause to be entered the prescribed particulars of every death notified.”

The justification is to provide for similar provisions that have been made for births registration in Part Five above and in the same spirit, align it with the proposals I made above to redraft Clause 30. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, there is a proposal in regard to those two new clauses.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I need clarification from the minister. The headnote above is about compulsory registration of deaths but below, it says that subject to this Act, registration of every births within Uganda -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is death. 

MR KABAJO: Has he corrected it?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question –

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, we are talking about the registration officer who has a duty to register deaths. But who has the obligation to take the information to the registration officer? It is because you do not presume, you must impose an obligation? If this person is seated in his or her office -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is under Clause 42. I put the question that the two new clauses be introduced as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

(Two new clauses introduced.)

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, on Clause 42, I agree with the provisions above. However, I suggest that the headnote to Clause 42 proposed by the committee should be amended to read, “Mode of notification and registration of deaths.”

I further propose to the deletion of the words “of death” in sub-clause (1) and redraft it to read, “A person giving notice over death shall, to the best of the person’s knowledge and ability, give the prescribed particulars, which shall be entered forthwith by the registration officer in the register.” The justification is to align the drafting style of the clause to a similar clause under 33 proposed by the committee. 

I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, I want to ask the same question. I have read Clause 42 and I do not want to respond especially where the majority think everything is okay but I have a duty here to ask. In Clause 42 - may I ask the minister to show me who takes on that duty? Nobody! Is it in Clause 44?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 42 be amended as proposed.
(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 42, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.
Clause 44

GEN. ARONDA: Madam Chairperson, I agree with the content of Clause 44 substantially but I propose a new order in this case. Clause 44 that creates the duty should be followed by the committee’s Clause 42 and then Clause 43 to come last. 
I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Just the rearrangement? I put the question that Clause 44 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 44, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 45

GEN. ARONDA: The title to Clause 45 that reads, “Certificate of cause of Death,” is misleading. Sub-clause (3) of the same clause provides for issuance of the disposal permit. There are two distinct documents through this process of death registration that merit their own mention. I propose to amend as follows: to delete the words “disposal permit” and replace them with the words, “burial permit.” So, I propose that the headnote of Clause 45 reads thus: “Certificate of Cause of Death and Burial Permit by Medical Officer.”

Since it is not clear from Clause 45(2) why medical officers forward a certificate of cause of death to a registration officer, I propose to amend Clause 45(2) to add after the words, “registration officer” the words “who shall cause the particulars of such a death to be entered into the register in the prescribed manner.” 

The redrafted clause should read as follows: “A certificate of cause of death signed in accordance with Sub-section (1) shall be forwarded forthwith by the medical officers to the registration officer, who shall cause the particulars of such a death to be entered in the register in the prescribed manner.”

I also propose to amend Clause 45(4) as a different clause and should come immediately after Clause 45. The proposed new clause should also provide for the issuance of a burial permit by a magistrate and forwarding report to the registration officer to register that death as in the case above. 

The proposed clause should read thus: “Inquest and Burial Permit by a Magistrate: Where an inquest is held on the body of the deceased person, the magistrate holding the inquest shall forward to the registration officer, a certified copy of such findings and upon receipt of such information, shall cause the particulars of such a death to be entered in the register in the prescribed manner. The magistrate shall on signing a certificate of death, issue a burial permit to the person taking charge of the body of the deceased.” I beg to move, Madam Chair.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Listening to the minister, I am wondering how practical this provision shall be. At what stage will the people who have a dead body wait for the magistrate to conduct an inquest? It usually takes a bit of time. It takes things such as testimonies, and many others. How available shall these magistrates be at the disposal of the bereaved family?

I want through you, Madam Chair, to ask the minister to reconsider this as impractical in the current circumstances. For example, how long shall it take for a burial permit to be issued before a body can be buried? I propose that the minister reconsiders this and withdraws it in the circumstances.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the request require the body to be present? 

MR SSEKIKUBO: Then how shall the burial permit be issued and for what purpose in the circumstances, Madam Chair?

MR OBUA-OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Chair. In addition to what my colleague is saying, when the framers talked about disposable certificates or permits for that matter, they had in mind certain situations. We assume that everybody is buried in this country, but there are people who prefer cremation. That is one way of disposal. Then there are people who, in their will, may say that their body be given to a medical facility for study purposes. How do you classify that in regard to burial permits?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Actually, let us solve the problem by taking away the word, “disposal.”
MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would like the minister to clarify on death which is caused by calamities such as Ebola, and also Cholera where the bodies must be buried immediately. Madam Chair, if that one is not provided for, then it would cause more crises in the community if a burial permit has to be secured. In principle, the burial cannot occur unless a permit has been secured.  

So, how is the minister prepared to cater for such emergencies and those deaths which are caused by calamities like Ebola where the deceased have to be buried immediately?

DR BITEKYEREZO: I do not know but when we talk about inquest, I think we are talking about a situation where there is a contention about somebody’s death and so their bodies must be exhumed.

I have personally done serious post mortems in places like Bukanga. I can tell you in Uganda here where we do not have very good cold rooms to keep dead bodies for some time will be to put lives of doctors at stake.

When you go to Swaziland, every district has got a very strong cold room, and they do not even bury on some specific days. They keep bodies for some time. You find bodies are kept in the cold rooms to enable them review many things. In this country, magistrates are very complicated people. Sometimes you cannot get them in office for some time. 

Recently I heard the Principal Judge say that we do not have people to take up these jobs which means we do not have enough magistrates. I do not know why they are talking about certified copies of such findings and that upon receipt of such information - they do not want the doctor to give them out, but they want the magistrate to start giving and signing certificates of cause of death as well as issue burial permits. That is not practical at all. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, the inquest is held to establish the cause of death.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes.

THE CHAIRPESRON: That means in the first place no one knows the cause of death. An inquest is not for everybody. It is only in those situations where you are not sure or where the cause of death is being contested.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Can’t the doctor issue it to enable burial to take place? 

MR SSEGGONA: The inquest is a process, and it is a long one. There is a law governing inquests in this country. That long process may be conducted before or after death. There is no standby magistrate for purposes of conducting an inquest. Somebody is appointed in accordance with the procedure and the lengthy procedure laid in the statute. 

Now, someone has died and you have a certificate of cause of death issued by a medical officer. For how long are you going to wait for the process of appointing a particular magistrate to conduct the inquest, investigate, and then come up with a report before the magistrate issues a burial permit? The spirit may be good but it requires somebody to go back and read the Inquest Act to see the processes and see if it is practical. 

I want to agree, for the first time in today’s proceeding, with Dr Bitekyerezo that this is not practical. Whatever the intentions and however good they may be, you will never succeed in this. 
Unless you are going to cause and force people to carry the body to their homes and leave them there to rot and in the normal circumstances, will this ever be practical?

MR KAKOOZA: I would like to also add to what hon. Dr Bitekyerezo just said. In Kenya when you die on Monday, the law is clear, you are buried on Sunday. The situation is different in Uganda. For example, if somebody died and there is no magistrate, what do you do with that body? Muslims have a culture that immediately one dies, they are buried immediately. So, what happens in that situation? 
Secondly, why don’t we think about the sub-county chiefs to be part of this process?  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you talking about sub-county chiefs conducting an inquest? 

MR KAKOOZA: No, what I am saying during the process of the medical certificate being issued in regard to somebody who has died and the cause of death is known - what is important is the burial permit. That clause says, “The magistrate shall on signing a certificate of death issue a burial permit to the person taking charge of the body of the deceased….” 

In whatever situations, this is practically impossible because the cultures and religious affiliations are different in Uganda. A Muslim will state in their Will that when they die, they are buried immediately or taken -

THE CHAIRPESRON: Honourable members, an inquest occurs where the cause of death is not known. It is not for every death, and it is by appointment.
 
MR KAKOOZA: Yes, but, Madam Chairperson, when you look at the inquest and burial permit by -

THE CHAIRPERSON: If you have died and made your will, they bury you. If they find you lying on your bed, and you did not fall sick, probably you were laughing with someone drinking - that is when they conduct an inquest because many people will not know what caused your death. It is only when the cause of your death is not clear. An inquest is not for everybody. How many inquests have you heard of in this country since you have been in this House? We asked for one and it was not done.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, can I be of help? I did move and talk to my colleague, the Attorney-General. We were trying to remind ourselves of the procedure for an inquest. It would seem that this one came by way of an insertion.

I want us to give a fair debate to the country. Without refreshing our minds on the law of inquest, we may not be able to conclude this. However, I would like to agree with the chairperson that not all deaths will attract an inquest. That is number one.

The practical reality in our country - as shadow Minister for Justice, I know and I have traversed several parts of this country. You will find some areas with only grade two magistrates, and may not even be qualified to conduct an inquest. He is seen in a particular area once in a week or even in a month.

Two, the law on inquest is not being repealed and is in place. We are dealing with a law on Registration of Births and Deaths, in this particular case. 

A death has been registered, that is number one. Number two, we have placed the requirement for the death to be registered and a certificate of cause of death to be issued. An inquest can be conducted even after burial. A body can be exhumed to establish the cause of death that was never or could never be established immediately after death. 

Why would we venture into turbulent waters, especially where we know that practically what we are talking about – unless the minister clarifies that this is practically possible in Uganda. To conduct an inquest which may take - I do not know for how long? It could take even a month. 

In addition, where we do not have facilities for keeping this dead body in a country, and you still think that it is practically possible, especially to issue this certificate after! The magistrate does not have the discretion to issue this burial permit before the inquest is concluded. In an investigation, unless we are saying that one magistrate must be appointed within a particular period to conclude the investigations within two days. Without that, I think we are wasting time.

MR KIWANDA: Madam Chair, we should think about the other side of the coin. Even the facilities to maintain these dead bodies when something has happened - you look at the status of our health sector throughout the country and the availability of the magistrates.

You can take practical examples; how many cases await the availability magistrates for long time? I think, we should think of the practical other than just the theoretical part of it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But, honourable member, are you suggesting that because we do not have enough magistrates in a very district, we should never provide for an inquest? Is that what you are suggesting?

MR KIWANDA: No –(Interruption)
          
GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Let me provide some information, Madam Chair. This is a new approach to the way we have been doing business. There are things that have been impossible; they are going to be possible, because of this new innovation and transformation of the way we have been doing business.

Today, we have JLOS centres that have taken justice closer to the people. You have a court, a magistrate in place, a prison, and a police station placed nearer to the people. You have even a forensic laboratory in the same area.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chairperson, you have a country, which has for the last two years run without a Chief Justice. No Deputy Chief Justice and you are telling me that you are taking justice closer to the people? Is he in order?

CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, justice is not only to the Chief Justice. There are other judicial officers. I know there is a problem, but there is some functioning part.

MR SSEGOONA: Where, Madam Chairperson?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Did you not go to court this morning? (Laughter)

MR SSEGGONA: No, I did not go the Supreme Court. I could not even go to the Constitutional Court. Anyway, to help my brother, are you talking about a transformation that is going to come with this law? Is that the promise you are making to this country? That one, once we pass it, the Ministry of Internal Affairs, which is not in charge of the judicial sector, is going to influence the appointment of more magistrates to be in every single part of this country, for purposes of putting this law in practice?

MR KIWANDA: Give me some clarifications; is it this law that will provide for the inquest or there is the inquest law, as he has informed us?

There must be procedures even within that. This one is not coming for the first time. Actually this law is trying to bring the inquest law to be practical. Even if we pass this law, the inquest law exists. What we really need to do –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Let me clarify to him. Madam Chairperson, I had occasion to teach for ten years. One of the reasons I quit teaching is because of people who do not want to listen. The point I am making is: I have said that the law is in place but that it has procedures that cannot be practically achieved the way we are putting it here -(Interjections) – no, he is not one of them. The point we are making is –(Interruption)

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The hon. Godfrey Kiwanda is the Chairman of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. Hon. Sseggona is a commoner in the Kingdom of Buganda. Is he in order, in a very derogatory manner, to address the Chair of the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus in that form? (Laughter) 

CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we need to treat each other with respect.

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, we know that there is a law on inquest, which lays down the procedures, but looking closely at these provisions, we are talking about a magistrate issuing a certificate of a cause of death. He gives that information, meaning that you have gone through an inquest and have certified the cause of the death and, therefore, burial should go on. Sometimes, one may not be talking about a dead body because sometimes they get parts of the body, and do the inquest on those ones.

Then secondly, hon. Minister, we need to also include signing a certificate of cause of death, not a certificate of death, in the second part. Only when we need to make it more specific that the body is exhumed. That is where number two becomes a little difficult.

Where a body is exhumed, is a person going to stay with this body until an inquest is done before he gets a burial permit? We need to clarify on that.

We may also create a provision to talk about a situation where a body is exhumed; that can solve the problem. Or if you have more information, Chairperson, you can go ahead to give it to us.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. I also would like to refer colleagues to Clause 50, where there is an exception created, for burying without a disposal permit. 

I think we can improve that to cater for all our concerns regarding the lack of facilities for keeping bodies and things of that sort.
								
Clause 50 (2) cures some bit of it because it creates an exception. I would like to request colleagues to broaden this and improve it such that we create more exceptions, where bodies can be buried without permit.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Yes, that works better.

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Chair, with your permission, I would like to point out that why we are taking a lot of time on this particular clause is because of two reasons: First, it is not as simple as some people may take it. The second reason is that members are tired; I am one of them. So, may I move that you allow members to discuss this clause when they are fresh in mind?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, before I call the minister, I want to inform the House that we have checked in the Inquest Act and the Magistrates Act and noticed that they both provide for this under Cap 11.  We can continue from there tomorrow. 

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME
7.41
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
7.42
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” and has passed clauses 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43 and 44 with amendments. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM 
THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
7.42
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.
 
(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, honourable members. The House is adjourned to tomorrow. The main activities will be the Prime Minister’s Question Time after which we will go straight to this Bill. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.44 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.)








