
Tuesday, 17 February 2015

Parliament met at 2.55 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

 (The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Your Excellency, the Vice President and Members of Parliament, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. Today, we have a number of guests in the Gallery. As you recall, on 3 February 2015, I informed you that we shall be paying tribute to the late hon. Bandali Jaffer. Consequently, in the Gallery, we have several members of his family and his friends including his daughter, Senator Mobina Jaffer, of the Senate of Canada together with the following family members and a huge delegation. I will just give the highlights; we have Senator Mobina Jaffer and her husband, Anees Jaffer, (Applause) Azhar Jaffer, Nuralla Jeraj, Nimet Dossa, Umeshafi Manji, Mobuya S.B. Jaffer, Ashar Jaffer, Aneez Jaffer, Nuralla Jeraj, Umeshafi Manji, and Nimmet Dossa. 

We also welcome, Prince Kassim Nakibinge, our high commissioner, Ambassador Alintuma Nsambu, Mrs Miria Obote, hon. Kintu Musoke, hon. Kirunda  Kivejinja, hon. Bidandi Ssali, hon. Prof. Mondo Kagonyera, Mr Joram Mugume, Mr Mohammed Kasule; altogether they are 90. I cannot give all their names but they are a huge delegation and we welcome them. (Applause)

We also have in our midst the delegation from the district of Sironko led by Mr Nabende. When he comes, we shall let you know where he is seated but they are represented by hon. Ssasagah and hon. Nandala-Mafabi. When they come, we shall indicate where they are seated.

Honourable members, last week, we communicated the need for you to register for the integrated security system. We have not yet completed the motor vehicle registration because very few Members have actually registered. I would like to appeal to Members to register so that we can access the underground parking. There is registration in the lobby and also within the Chamber.

Secondly, you will note from our televisions that we have installed the electronic system of voting in the Chamber. It will record the total number of Members present, those who are voting “yes” and “no” and those abstaining. There will also be an open system and also a secret system. As we move along, we shall show you how it is going to work.

Honourable members, I am inviting you on 23 February 2015 at 9.30 a.m. when we shall commission the integrated security system for this Parliament at the South Wing of this House so that you can start using all the facilities. 

We have received credible terror threats directed at Parliament but I will not give you the details. I really request honourable members and staff to cooperate with security in view of the need to enhance security here. Consequently, from today, the motor vehicles parked in the yard for a long time are going to be removed. There are members of staff and MPs who have a number of cars which they park here and leave for several months. Honourable members, with effect from today, you must register your car and hand over the keys to the security of Parliament. If you do not do that by this evening, the cars will be towed to the central police station because we do not know their owners and it is a source of insecurity for us. I want to appeal to you to do the needful. If they are here, register them and give the keys to security so that we know how to account for the vehicles which are here. 

Otherwise, I welcome you and I know that you have been out doing work in the constituencies. Those who have important matters, we shall handle them tomorrow and Thursday. For today, let us stick to the items on the order paper. Thank you very much.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2012 TOGETHER 
WITH THE REPORT AND OPINION THEREON BY THE AUDITOR-GENERAL

3.02
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay financial statements for the following sub-counties for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor-General:

    i. Bubare Sub-County, Kabale District
    ii. Hamurwa Sub-County, Kabale District
    iii. Ikumba Sub-County, Kabale District
    iv. Muhanga Sub-County, Kasese District
    v. Karambi Sub-County, Kasese District
    vi. Kitholhu Sub-County, Kasese District
    vii. Muhokya Sub-County, Kasese District
    viii. Munkunyu Sub-County, Kasese District
    ix. Kisinga Sub-County, Kasese District
    x. Kyondo Sub-County, Kasese District
    xi. Kashari Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xii. Ndaija Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xiii. Rwanyamahembe Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xiv. Kagongi Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xv. Kisozi Sub-County, Kamuli District
    xvi. Buyaga Sub-County, Buyende District
    xvii. Nabukalu Sub-County, Bugiri District
    xviii. Butuntumula Sub-County, Luweero District
    xix. Katikamu Sub-County, Luweero District
    xx. Kihuura Sub-County, Kyenjojo District
    xxi. Kakindo Sub-County, Kibaale District
    xxii. Bitsya Sub-County, Buhweju District
    xxiii. Bihanga Sub-County, Buhweju District
    xxiv. Wanale Sub-County, Mbale District
    xxv. Mafubira Sub-County, Jinja District
    xxvi. Kibaale Sub-County, Namutumba District
    xxvii. Muhorro Sub-County, Kibaale District

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay, thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Commissioner. All those reports are committed to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for expeditious perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. SHERALI BANDALI JAFFER

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, from the Order Paper, the Prime Minister will be moving the motion seconded by the Leader of the Opposition and instead of hon. Otada, hon. Gen. Elly Tumwine will come in to second the motion.

3.06
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer, moved under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament (2012).

“WHEREAS the Parliament of Uganda received with grief, the sad news of the demise of hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer, former Member of Parliament representing Kampala West and founder of Fairway Hotel, who passed away on 27 December 2014 at the age of 90 at West Vancouver, Canada;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer was born at Nsambya Hospital in April 1924, studied at Aga Khan Primary and Secondary Schools and completed A’level in India and was one of the few surviving members of Uganda’s First Parliament, representing the Kabaka Yekka Party in 1962;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer, upon expulsion from Uganda by the former President Idi Amin in 1972, together with thousands of Asians, settled in Canada where he later became a prosperous poultry farmer;

NOTING THAT the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer was an enterprising Ugandan investor, who provided employment opportunities for Ugandans and participated in the building of schools like Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School and Kibuli Secondary School;

APPRECIATING THAT the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer believed in freedom of faith and interacted freely with people from all religions and on the basis of that, the Government of Uganda entrusted him to host at his residence, Pope Paul VI and Pope John Paul II during the papal visits made to Uganda in 1969 and 1993 respectively;

NOW, THEREFORE, this Parliament resolves that:

    1.  An expression of its heartfelt sympathy be conveyed to the bereaved family, friends, people of Uganda and particularly the Ismaili community in Uganda and East Africa upon the loss of hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer.
    2. It takes cognisance of the services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer to Uganda and humanity elsewhere.
    3. The Almighty God sustains the bereaved and grants the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer eternal peace.”

The mover is Gen. Moses Ali, Second Deputy Prime Minister and Deputy Leader of Government Business, for the Prime Minister. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by several members of both sides of the House. May I announce that Mr Lalani, the Head of the Ismaili community in Uganda, is present here today? 

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Justification of the motion. Madam Speaker and honourable members, it is with great sadness that Government has learnt of the demise of the late Mzee Sherali Bandali Jaffer, which occurred on 27 December 2014 at his home in West Vancouver, Canada. He was aged 90 years.

The late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer was born in April 1924 at Nsambya Hospital, Kampala. He was the youngest of the six children. The late Bandali attended Aga Khan Primary and Secondary Schools in Kampala and completed his A‘level Education in India.

The late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer began his work experience as a businessman in the family business, which helped him to grow in business. He also served as a board member of Kibuli Secondary School, Governor of Butabika Mental Hospital, founding member of the Board of Governors of Nabisunsa Girls Secondary School and Director, Jubilee Insurance Company, Nairobi Kenya. In a nutshell, he was basically an accomplished businessman. Working for government or other organisations was more or less charity. 

He built his business empire in the hotel business, for example, Fairway Hotel and poultry farming, which business empire will live for generations and generations for his children, grandchildren and great grandchildren, an example worth emulating.

The late Bandali Jaffer helped a lot in the transformation of the real estate business in Uganda. He was one of the pioneers of real estate developers in Kampala that helped to grow Uganda’s housing industry. He groomed his children as well as his grandchildren in business management. He bequeathed a lifelong gift which they will never forget, generation after generation.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer was elected first as member of Kampala City Council in 1956 to 1962 and as a Member of Parliament representing Kampala West, on Kabaka Yekka ticket in 1962 to 1971.

He served Uganda in KCC now KCCA, and Parliament with diligence and commitment; serving all people irrespective of political affiliations, religion or social background. It is this historic service and as a pioneer legislator that earned him an independence medal.

The late hon. Bandali Jaffer was a Ugandan patriot despite his colour. Between 1972 and 1974, despite the fact that Bandali was himself a refugee in England and he needed assistance while in London, he volunteered to serve as a member of the coordinating committee of the welfare of evacuees from Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, as soon as the Government of Uganda okayed the return of the expelled Ugandans of Asian descent in the mid-1980s, the late Bandali Jaffer never took offence for earlier expulsion until 1972. He rushed back to Uganda. He helped to rebuild his business which was instrumental in increasing Uganda’s tax revenue. In addition, he worked hard to provide computers to schools and supported many Ugandans to acquire education. For example, hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja, hon. Bidandi Ssali and the Rt Hon. Kintu Musoke, former Prime Minister of Uganda.

In his own words, the late Bandali Jaffer is quoted to have said, “I want the children of Uganda to have the same opportunities that my grandchildren are getting in Canada; Ugandan children should also get the best.” Although at a later date, he relocated to Canada - while his body lived in Canada, his heart rested in Uganda. This is why in his Will he said that he should be buried in Uganda beside his wife who passed on three years ago.

On charity, the late hon. Bandali Jaffer had a big heart for humanity and prosperity of mankind. He lived almost three quarters of his adult life doing charity work. For example, he served as Vice-President of the East African Muslim Society, President of the Muslim Sports Club, member of the Girl Guides Uganda’s building fundraising committee, member of the Kibuli Mosque building committee, member of the Wandegeya Mosque building committee, Chairman of the Deaf and Dumb School Kampala, member of Makerere University building committee, treasurer of the Aga Khan Sher Imam Ismaili Association Uganda, Secretary of the Aga Khan Health Centre, secretary of the Aga Khan Welfare Society, Secretary of the Aga Khan Education Board, Secretary of the Ismaili Association, Secretary of the Ismaili Provincial Council of Mengo, Secretary of the Aga Khan Imams Ismaili Association Uganda, to mention but a few.

On the two occasions when the holy Catholic Popes – Pope Paul VI in 1968 and Pope John Paul II visited Uganda in 1993, the late hon. Bandali Jaffer offered his Fairway Hotel, to accommodate the pontiffs. As Government, we are very grateful and immensely indebted.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, at the time of his death, the late hon. Bandali Jaffer was an accomplished poultry farmer in West Vancouver, Canada. Ugandans and the entire world have indeed lost a very resourceful person who invested a lot in business, education and farming.

The late Sherali Bandali Jaffer is survived by all his six children - one boy and five girls, of whom Ms Mobina Jaffer is a senator in Canada, 13 grandchildren and three great grandchildren.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I take this opportunity to send my heartfelt condolences to the bereaved family, the people of Canada and Uganda at large for the loss of this gallant son of Uganda. May Allah rest his soul in eternal peace? Ina lilah wa ina ilayhi raji’un. I beg to move and thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Before I invite the Leader of the Opposition, I would like to recognise the delegation from Sironko led by Mr Nabende, Chairman for Sironko District. They are represented by hon. Femiar Wadada, hon. Ssasaga and hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

Honourable members, I know that you eat biscuits. The husband of Senator Jaffer is from the House of Manji of Kenya and Uganda. He is also here. Those biscuits you eat come from the Manji family. We welcome him. May I now invite the Leader of the Opposition to second the motion? (Laughter)

3.22
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyandodo County East, Wakiso): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I rise to second the motion paying tribute to the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer on behalf of the Leader of the Opposition, hon. Wafula Oguttu, who is still in Kitgum. 

I do not intend to repeat what the Leader of Government Business has said about the late but the most monumental feature of his life is Fairway Hotel, at least, in Uganda to or to the Ugandan audience. Many young people may not know that this enterprise, as we have been told, started as a residence of the late Jaffer. A story is told that when he learnt of the impending visit of Pope Paul in 1969, he upgraded his residence to a hotel so that he can host the important visitor. Consequently, as the Leader of Government Business noted, he hosted the second Pope, Pope John Paul II, in 1993.

There are lessons about the transformation of this residence into a hotel – (Interjections) - for those of us who are still living. This country is about to host another pope. Madam Speaker and honourable members, Popes are known for their modesty. We hope the impending visit will not be crowned with probes of billions stolen in the name of the holy visit as this country witnessed during CHOGM. We should therefore emulate our forefathers, the Jaffers –(Interruption)- it can be very painful but it must be said. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, when hon. Jaffer wanted to run a hotel, he constructed one. Many politicians and military generals took advantage of privatisation in this country to become hotel owners. This House should remember the controversies the sale of hotels generated -(Applause)- the sale of Apollo Hotel, Lake Victoria, Margherita, Masindi, Mweya, the list is very long. We, the politicians, took advantage when we wanted to own hotels. When Jaffer wanted to own one, he constructed one. It is befitting to pay tribute to Jaffer.

The Jaffers in the first Parliament did not suffer from the culture of grabbing, especially of public property that has rocked this country. They worked and honestly earned their property. Those of us in leadership, especially in Parliament, should emulate these people. Their wealth can be easily traced. There is wealth of politicians and Ugandans which you cannot trace, honourable members. 

Around 2004, Madam Speaker and honourable members, when I was working with The Observer, hon. Jaffer learnt through his sources that I was helping the late Abu Mayanja to write his biography. I think he must have learnt through an article I published in The Observer about the biography that Abu Mayanja never lived to read. He rang me and I met at him at Fairway Hotel - I think he had just arrived from Canada. He told me that since I was the one authoring the biography of the late Abu Mayanja who was his friend, it was befitting also for me to do his biography as well. Unfortunately, Abu Mayanja died before I completed his biography. We were to discuss the details with one of the daughters but unfortunately that did not happen.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, if hon. Jaffer died without profiling his life into a book, I want to encourage the family to follow up on his wish. I also to encourage senior legislators in this Parliament and senior leaders in this country; those who have not profiled their escapades, that it is time to do so for those who are living, for yourself and also for the future. Many politicians and businessmen with a life worth emulating have died without affording us the opportunity to read about them. 

Madam Speaker, this Parliament has pioneered many things under your leadership. We should reduce the history of this House into a book. A book in which we will profile former - especially the very active members of Parliament.

The late Jaffer was a friend to the late Sir Edward Muteesa, the Kabaka of Buganda and I think that is how he became a Member of Parliament on the Kabaka Yekka ticket. He, therefore, represents the cosmopolitan nature of Buganda although some people who are ignorant of history have variously accused Buganda of sectarianism.

In 1961, Buganda refused to participate in voter registration - we are about to handle the Registration of Persons Bill - and the subsequent elections won by the Democratic Party’s Ben Kiwanuka.

During the London Uganda Constitutional Conference in 1961, UPC maintained contact with Buganda through Balaki Kirya and Grace Ibingira. The people of Buganda back home had vowed that the Kabaka Yekka which means “only the Kabaka” would govern the Kingdom of Buganda and not political parties. Although ironically the Kabaka Yekka, which started as a slogan eventually, evolved into a political party.

The late Abu Mayanja told me in one of the very many meetings I had with him that he was one of those who went to the London Conference in the team of the Buganda Kingdom led by Katikkiro Michael Kintu that included Eddie Lubowa and Nkalubo Ssebugwawo. Of course you remember that Buganda was granted a federal status, Busoga a territory and other kingdoms semi-federal status.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the contribution of the late Jaffer towards education, especially Muslim education in Uganda has been highlighted by the Leader of Government Business and I do not want to repeat it. 

In a nutshell, therefore, I invite this House to join me in conveying a message from the Leader of the Opposition and the entire Opposition to the family, to the people of Uganda and to the people of Canada for the loss of hon. Jaffer. As hon. Moses Ali, who served in the government that expelled the Ugandans of Asian origin said –(Laughter)- to God we belong and to Him is our return. I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Leader of the Opposition. May I invite Gen. Elly Tumwine to second the motion?

3.32
GEN. ELLY TUMWINE (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to second the motion and I always like the motions which are supported by both sides. The late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer was one of the old leaders of this country but unfortunately because we do not read our own history, much of these heroes do not get known and noticed and our children and grandchildren are denied the information. At my age I did not know him very well but when we were analysing the history of Uganda and identifying the people to give medals, I had the opportunity to do more study on the history of the people of Uganda and among them was hon. Jaffer Bandali. I also had met the family before and I knew the children. 

Every generation normally has its own challenges and people who meet those challenges are the ones who become heroes. The late hon. Bandali Jaffer became of age at the apex of colonialism and the biggest challenge he had to face was what was happening in the society at that time. The society was divided into three colonial structures. 

First, there were the administrators who were Europeans, right from the Governor up to those who were governing by pitching at every parish in the villages. The second group was the Indian community who were brought in to do a middleman’s role of collecting the produce from the peasants and selling it to the colonialists. The third category was the transformed African traditional leaders and chiefs and their subordinates whose main role was to ensure that the roads were made, taxes collected and the produce was delivered to the centres for the colonial leaders. 

The fourth was the peasants. The peasants’ role of course was to produce and while they were struggling for even their own survival, they were further divided into groups based on religion; the Protestants or Catholics and Muslims. It is at this time that the education at the time was mainly being managed by two NGOs – the Roman Catholic Missionaries and the Church Missionary Society. They were given grants every year to establish missions and to educate their new converts but the Muslims were left to fend for themselves. It is at this time that the role and impact of hon. Bandali Jaffer came into play. 

The Muslim community led by their leader at the time, the late Aga Khan, made a deal with Prince Kakungulu at the time and they agreed to find ways in which they should ensure that Muslim children are also educated. They started collecting some funds and hon. Bandali played the leading role in championing that effort.

The deal consisted of setting up Muslim schools and building mosques so as to prepare the children. They had a vision that the only way the Muslims will have a role to play in the economy and in the leadership of the country was through education and this made it necessary to find ways of establishing schools. His Highness, the Aga Khan, started to work with hon. Bandali and they were responsible for establishing the first three primary schools at Kibuli, Kabasanda and Bukoyo which became the nurseries of the present Muslim elites.

Hon. Bandali also spearheaded the efforts towards the building of the grand mosques at Kibuli and Wandegeya and the schools there. In 1947, the products from those schools and infant Muslim founded schools regained a Muslim Junior Secondary School at Kibuli where the efforts of hon. Bandali could not fail to be noticed as he was deeply involved in the setting up of Kibuli Senior Secondary School.

In 1961 and 1962, hon. Bandali opted to join – and on this, I would like to make a correction for the Rt. Hon. Prime Minister that it was actually not Kabaka Yekka; he joined UPC and got directly elected as an MP for Kampala West. He influenced the UPC Government to allow the Muslims to start the first Muslim Secondary School for girls at Nabisunsa. Products from these schools were the life occupation of hon. Bandali who continued to empower them even when they left those secondary schools. 

Even when some of them were able to make it to Budo, he continued to support them and among them was Dr Kasasa Mohammed whom he almost adopted and always supported whenever he had problems at Budo with his school fees. There was also the late Engineer Mpagi who was also at Budo. He groomed him and later helped him travel to the United States and when he returned, he headed UEB for a long time. Later on, Bandali initiated scholarships with the Pakistan Government for Ugandan students and many benefited. Among them was hon. Bidandi Ssali, whom you know very well.

The late Bandali has another important aspect to his life, which was the partnership with the African community. At the time, the central bank was controlled by the Governor himself and because money was being collected from the Muslims who were going to perform the last pillar of Islam or the pilgrimage to Mecca, one African by the name of Kasule and one of the most trusted people, was appointed by his friends to go and bank the money. The Governor was amused to see that there was this account that was accumulating money and of all things, being run by an African and Muslim at that. 

The Governor invited Mr Kasule and to his surprise, to State House, to find out whom the account holder was. When he got there, the Governor asked who he was and Mr Kasule told him who he was. The Governor decided to put him on the board of the bank to help give credit to thef Indian community that was trading.

The late hon. Bandali recognised the honesty of Mr Kasule and invited him saying that he could not just be only collecting money and yet they could do business together. Mr Kasule said he was not very good at business but hon. Bandali insisted and they started a company to buy coffee. They acquired a loan from the bank and within one year, hon. Bandali called Mr Kasule and accounted because he was the one more or less running the business, for all the money including the profit. The money was shared equally and since that time, the Kasule family has never been the same and that is why they own the whole of Wandegeya. The friendship between the Kasule family and the Bandali family is to date unquestionable and even the members of the Kasule family are present here. 

Since that time, the relationship between the family of the late Prince Kakungulu has remained and since that time, the hon. Jaffer Bandali family has had many relationships with very many Ugandans and some are still working closely with them; one of the daughters is Mary Kakonge among others. 

That was an inclusive way of looking at life. As a result and for purposes of time, the hon. Jaffer Bandali was recognised for his contribution to this country and on 9 October 2011, when we were celebrating our Independence in Lira, His Excellence the President awarded him the National Independence Medal in recognition of that contribution. On 9 October 2012, during the Golden Jubilee Anniversary, he was awarded a Gold Jubilee Medal. He was one of the few people we were lucky to see a few months before he passed on and while some of you have not got your medals, he was given his. 

When I met him at the time, he told me that his greatest concern - and he told it to his family and everybody - that for him his reward was when somebody smiled. I thought that was very important; that his whole life was dedicated to making others smile. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, with those few remarks, I join others in saying, may his soul rest in eternal peace. His contribution was not only in the political sphere but also in the business and social spheres, there is a mark that will remain and we honour him for that. People like hon. Kirunda Kivejinja who is here and many others pay their tribute and they asked me to say that such people should be remembered and we better start writing our history as a project.  I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. I thank the movers and the seconders.  The next few people who will contribute will just use three minutes each so that we use only the next 15 minutes. However, I want to recognise the presence of hon. Hajji Ntege Ssebagala who has come to witness the proceedings. (Applause) I recognise Elizabeth Roscoe, Juliana Bezuidenhout of the Girl Guides Movement, friends to Mr Jaffer and many others. They are really very many.

3.48
MR TANNA SANJAY (Independent, Tororo Municipality, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I rise to support the motion. I would like to thank the Parliament of the Republic of Uganda, under your leadership, for giving us this opportunity to pay tribute to such a great man. A lot has been said about him and as I have three minutes, I would like to reiterate two or three issues.

One, is that he loved Uganda and he loved Ugandans. When I met him immediately after my first election, he kept asking a question that came up in our conversation at least three times. The deepest shock and scar that I believe remained in his heart was his expulsion from Uganda. The reason he maintained a home in Canada and in United Kingdom was one, because of the children who had been settled there over a period of time and like the Rt Hon. Prime Minister said, his body was in Canada but his heart and soul were in Uganda. 

He kept asking me, “What do you think? Do you think such a scenario can ever happen again in Uganda?” He was asking me, probably one third of his age that question. I really found it difficult but in my own wisdom, I tried to answer him. He seemed to still harbour the concern that many other people have. My own election is manifestation that that is probably way behind. We still have a long way to go in bridging this gap from both communities. However, he insisted that he wanted to be buried in Uganda. His love for Uganda despite all the hardships as enumerated and his service to the people of Uganda did not flinch an inch because of the wrongs done upon him by the government at that time. He actually left a few months before the expulsion and it was because he had received reliable information from his contacts in government that he was supposed to be killed. 

This says a lot and as somebody who I personally found an inspiration and tried to emulate, he is a phenomenal figure. Hon. Elly Tumwine, the representative of the Leader of Government Business said something about the Kingdom of Buganda. I want to agree entirely with hon. Ssemujju Nganda. Buganda Kingdom has acted in a manner that is all encompassing. Whereas some elements may portray a different picture, the kingdom itself has been consistent in its position. The appointment of the late hon. Jaffer Bandali says that. In the last government, we had Owekitibwa Rajin Tailor, Omar Mandela, and Mahamood Thoban, who were part of the Buganda government administration. Madam Speaker, I find - (Member timed out.)

3.53
MR REAGAN OKUMU (FDC, Aswa County, Gulu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to bring a different angle to this motion. First of all, Uganda is a collection of very many people from different areas. Everybody came here looking for opportunities. My own people came all the way from Egypt; they saw the Nile and thought there was opportunity down. My colleague, hon. Tumwine, his people came from Ethiopia, they were looking for grazing land. (Laughter) All these are opportunities. What we call -(Interjections)- yes, that is a fact. (Laughter) So, all of us -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: This is a tribute. 

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, the history of the world was written according to whoever wanted to propagate what he wanted to propagate. The honourable member holding the Floor has not mentioned the authority and the history of the world is being revealed to us afresh, that human beings started from here and went Northwards and Southwards away from the Equator. The authority is that the oldest person to live is along the Equator. 

Is it in order for an honourable Member of Parliament to live in the history of the past and start to make Africans feel that they came from the North rather than from the centre; and quote no authority and confuse the public? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is citing the history, which he studied. Please, proceed.

MR OKUMU: Madam Speaker, thank you. You know, I studied history. My colleague here studied Fine Art. We specialised in different areas and we are authorities in our different areas. I would not dare him in Fine Art.

The point I was making is that we are all Ugandans; others are called Indians but we are all Ugandans. We came here for opportunities. It is very painful for Ugandans to die in exile. We should take this opportunity to look at what are the reasons why Ugandans continue to die in exile? What are the reasons? We are all Ugandans. The Indian community should be part and parcel of our national reconciliation. I always hear people talking about reconciliation but nobody wants to point a finger and say, “What about these communities who were expelled from this country?” Were they not Ugandans? Are we not going to make them part and parcel of the national reconciliation? 

I was extremely happy that this motion was moved by hon. Gen. Moses Ali, the Deputy Leader of Government Business. We must face our past whether we like it or not. We may have been there as individuals but we were part of the collectivity. Today, we are here as individuals but part of different collectivities. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I would like us to recognise our Indian community as part of our history; as part of our national formation and as part of our national integration in all we are doing. We should also take keen interest in identifying them. 

Sometimes, I do not get satisfied just to look at them and call them Indians. We have the Acholi; they have their own culture. We have the Baganda; the Bagisu and the Basoga. The Indians too have different cultures within their different communities. It is high time we also recognised them, not collectively but individually according to their different cultures. They practice different cultures but they are part and parcel of this country.

It is high time we rose to that level because if we do not, we are just going to deceive ourselves and think that there are other true Ugandans and there are other Ugandans who came here as immigrants. All of us came here for opportunities. Although others came here earlier to look for grazing land, others came for business and other things. That is why the British employed the tactics of divide-and-rule policy. They tried to say, “You are good in business; you are good in this…” Nevertheless, the fact remains that they knew these were Ugandans. (Member timed out.)

3.59
MR MATHIAS BIREKERAAWO (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. Sherali Jaffer Bandali. Indeed, hon. Jaffer Sherali Bandali was a true Ugandan, born in Nsambya Hospital in 1924, the very year that the late Ssekabaka Mutesa was also born. No wonder that they grew up as contemporaries.

You have all heard that in 1962, he was directly elected on a UPC ticket. He was not among the 21 MPs who came from the Kabaka Yekka party to this House. In 1962, there were only two parties in this House, the Uganda People’s Congress and the Democratic Party.

Therefore, on behalf of the Democratic Party, I would also like to pay tribute. This is because when he was on the government side, he was a real legislator who debated for the country and not for the ruling party. That is why he remained a true friend even to Buganda Kingdom despite the fact that he was a UPC member.

They were expelled from Uganda in 1972. For some of us who have travelled all over the world, to London, America and Canada; there are very many Asians of Ugandan origin, who do not think about coming to Uganda. They say the act that President Idi Amin did to expel them from Uganda was disturbing. However, the late hon. Jaffer Bandali was very unique in a way that when the country stabilised, he came back to invest in this country.

Secondly, as a Catholic, you have heard that we hosted a Pope in 1969 and another in 1993. It is not easy to host a Pope. That is why as Catholics, we are very proud of the late hon. Jaffer Bandali. We are very proud that in 1969 he prepared his residence so that the Pope could be hosted in his house. That was a great action he did. (Applause) We thank him. As Catholics, we shall have also to urge the authorities that when Pope Francis is coming, he should also visit Fairway Hotel as a sign of tribute.

He left a challenge to the Asian community. You have heard that in 1962, we had three Asians in this House. There was an Asian lady called Namubiru, who came on a UPC ticket. We had Patel, who was on DP ticket and Jaffer Bandali on UPC ticket.

Unlike these days, the Asian community shy away from our politics. We would like them to join our local politics. I am very proud that hon. Sanjay Tanna is an MP although he is Independent. One of these days, he is going to join a political party. We want the Asian community to participate fully. Hon. Jaffer Bandali’s daughter is in Canada and she is a Senator. If you involve yourselves in local politics, we shall have a stable country and economy. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.03
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on behalf of the people of West Budama South to join the Government, the Opposition and Members of this House to pay tribute to a leader that we are yet to emulate. 

I have had an opportunity to read about this leader, hon. Jaffer Bandali, whose father came in 1890 at the age of 15, before the construction of the railway. He moved from Mombasa to Kampala on foot. He crossed the Nile on a canoe. Jaffer’s father died when he was at the age of 17 but that did not stop him from being what we are now talking about.

This is a gentleman that even when there was a dream communicated in the Lions Club of Tororo; a dream that one leader of this country had to expel the Asians. I am glad that Tororo – the very municipality where this communication was made – has a Member of Parliament who is a Ugandan with an Indian origin. 

Madam Speaker, when he left this country, I am told he went to Canada. He became a poultry farmer but one time he lost over 200,000 birds over power failure. This is the man we are paying tribute to; no obstacle, colour, religion or politics stood in his way. 

What can anybody write about us? Hon. Ssemujju was challenging us that when some of us pass on you will scratch your heads and it will not be half a page of what can be written of us. It is a challenge for us to continue writing our own tribute. 

A gentleman, who is a Muslim convinced Hajji Musa Kasule to give land for the Mosque in Wandegeya. He also convinced the Kakungulu family to give land for the construction of the Mosque in Kibuli. A man who hosted the Pope; there would be no better leader to portray neutrality than he was.

Madam Speaker, we have people that were driven by petty ideas in this country such as religion and party politics. It is a surprise you are being branded Independent and so many other things. What matters - I believe that hon. Jaffer Bandali -(Member timed out.)

4.07
MR ABDU-LATIF SSEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. As we pay tribute to the late hon. Jaffer Bandali, what should ring a bell in our mind is the life the Almighty God allowed him to stay on this planet earth. Having lived for over 90 years and his contribution towards the development of this country, I do not think it can be exhausted in the two or three hours here. 

Madam Speaker, we are very grateful that you have given us this opportunity to pay tribute to him because of his contribution towards humanity in our country. 

The late hon. Jaffer Bandali had the rotary motto, “Service above self.” He cared a lot about the underprivileged, orphans and everybody.

When it comes to education, historical facts are very clear that indeed Muslims are lagging behind because of those historical facts. They were blocked from accessing education by that time as hon. Elly Tumwine stated clearly. 

Madam Speaker, the Muslim community in Uganda cannot forget the three families: the family of the late hon. Jaffer Bandali, Prince Badru Kakungulu and Hajji Musa Kasule of Wandegeya for their contribution towards education of Muslims in this country. Jaffer Bandali was always the flag bearer in as far as that direction was concerned. Therefore, we are extremely grateful for that. (Applause)

Many colleagues have talked about his gesture when he allowed his house to be used for the preparations and hosting of the Pope. This greatly shows that Jaffer Bandali was cutting across all our religious divides. Indeed, that is a great message to all of us that we should be seen living together as people of God. (Member timed out.)

4.10
MR KENNETH KIYINGI (Independent, Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Sherali Jaffer Bandali on behalf of the people of Mawokota South and the youth generation. Indeed, the late hon. Sherali Jaffer Bandali stands as a true patriot here in Uganda. He is one, who so dearly loved this country in service and in good works. 

One thing that has truly inspired me is the fact that one has to be prepared even for the opportunities that are yet to come. What an opportunity to host the Pope. Soon, to be named a saint, I believe he is already a saint- St John Paul II. 

It is very unfortunate that the late President Iddi Amin Dada did not spare him considering the fact that the late hon. Sherali Bandali Jaffer was a Ugandan of Asian origin. What is so ironic and interesting is the fact that even the late President Iddi Amin Dada was a Ugandan, I believe of Congolese origin. Guess who would have been the first to run away. Now, that is written in history.

Let me take this opportunity, Madam Speaker, to call upon all Ugandans in the diaspora to come back home and invest here. You do not have to be born in Canada to come and invest here in Uganda. By virtue of you being a Ugandan, it is high time that you come and invest back here. I call upon Government to create an atmosphere to encourage all the Ugandans in the diaspora to come and invest back home.  

Allow me to thank God for the life and legacy of the late hon. Sherali Jaffer Bandali. I would also like to salute all his family members especially those that have managed to come here in this August House for making the legacy live on, generation after generation. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, do not forget to also pay tribute to his wife Gulbanu. He had a good wife, who supported him to do the things he was doing. (Laughter)
 
4.13
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice and pay tribute to the wife who looked after this gallant hero. (Laughter)

When you go to Fort Portal, we have a beautiful tea scenery. As a young child, I grew up asking who could have been behind this very great enterprise that has made us the people of Toro earn a living. I was told that the late hon. Jaffer Bandali is one of the pioneers, who started the tea industry in Tooro.

By that time, he was also a great friend of Kiyingi Rukidi III. He was the economic adviser to King Rukidi. That is the time when kingdoms had power, not like now. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, as the economic adviser to the king, many economic prudent policies were put in place by the kingdom that has seen Tooro emerge as an economic bloc. We have got quite a big enterprise such as the coffee and the tea. He also participated very greatly in the tourism industry by establishing Ruwenzori Hotel. 

Both the tea and the Ruwenzori Hotel, he sold to Mukwano who is the owner now. I have seen some other people go to classes to study patriotism; I would like to find out who can be a better patriot than the gentleman we are talking about right now?  To me, Bandali is the true patriotic person; we are talking about that Uganda needs.

We do not need these tribal characters, who steal money and it is their tribes to go behind them to support their traitorous nature. We need Ugandans who have got that entrepreneur heart, that are there to build the country irrespective of whichever tribe. So, anyone who is here, just go into your heart and soul-search. Do not just talk about Bandali and you just continue with your crookedness of tribal and other unbecoming practices. (Laughter)

With this, I pay tribute to the late Bandali. May God rest his soul in eternal peace.

4.16
MS PAULA TURYAHIKAYO (NRM, Rubabo County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Jaffer Bandali. I first interacted with the late hon. Jaffer Bandali, when we hosted the IPU in 2012 through his daughter, Senator Jaffer Mobina, who is here with us here today.

During my interaction with him, I found the late hon. Jaffer Bandali a very humble person and one who loved development of this country very much, even at his old age.

I have three very important contributions that I would like to recognise in my remarks. That is his contribution towards the promotion of ITC in education. He is one person who made an effort to provide computers in schools. This is a programme which the government has continued to support up to this day.

I would also like to recognise and remember the late hon. Bandali for the promotion and support of the girl-child education. As you realise, he contributed towards the construction of Nabisunsa Girls’ School and Kibuli Secondary School which also provides education for the girl-child.

Not only was he a champion of the girl-child education but also a role model. It is, therefore, no wonder that he has managed to educate all his daughters and the son. And right now, we have a product in the names of Senator Jaffer Mobina, who is serving in the Canadian Parliament. This clearly shows that the girl-child education on this country is really important. 

He has also contributed towards the provision of employment in this country and the market for our agricultural products. We have many Ugandans who are employed in his enterprise, which is Fairway Hotel and also provides market for our agricultural products. I, therefore -(Member timed out.)

4.18
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to a highly illustrious son of Uganda, a man who was a true Ugandan, an epitome of true nationalism and patriotism.

He was a Ugandan, no matter where he was or what happened to him, he remained Ugandan. He had every reason to be bitter but he let the love for country conquer the bitterness. Indeed, love will conquer a multitude of ills.

To me, it is a lesson that we should pick because he has fought a good fight and he has finished his race. And so, what is it that we learn from him? How much love do you and I have for the country?

Before our children here castigate the government in power, have they heard of the heap of praises on the beautiful nation that Uganda is? Or is it all blank?

Madam Speaker, it is high time that this nation invested heavily in early childhood education and introduced patriotism at this stage, with an intention of having it as an examinable subject at primary seven. (Interjections) Of course, we will argue that the curriculum is full, but full of what? European History and then say that patriotism cannot be taught because we want to introduce it at secondary school level when the minds are already corrupted. Let us bend the tree while it is still young. I know that we can nurture patriotism in this nation.

Hon. Jaffer Bandali was truly compassionate and he used his wealth to benefit those who were less privileged. He gave them the most valuable investment in this world, which is education, most especially for the girl child.

Most of us are interested in amassing wealth for ourselves but we need to re-think and benefit those who have less. To me, hon. Jaffer Bandali has lived a full life and he leaves a big challenge and lessons for us to emulate. 

May the almighty God indeed grant his family fortitude; may He prosper them and may he give his soul eternal rest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.22
MR HOOD KATURAMU (NRM, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to this great man. I wish to pass my condolences to the family of late hon. Jaffer Bandali. I assure you that Hajji Jaffer did not die in vain.

I am not so close to know facts of his life but I only knew the life of late hon. Jaffer Bandali, through my brother, who used to sit with him in this Parliament and they were close.

What I learnt from my brother about hon. Jaffer Bandali is that he was a man of great humility and a man who loved his country. And indeed, as it has been said by the Members that have contributed, the late hon. Jaffer Bandali has contributed to the promotion of education in this country, promoted the economy and also promoted spiritual guidance in this country.

Hajji Musa Kasule has been mentioned as one of the close allies and friends of the late hon. Jaffer Bandali. As Chairman of the Muslim Parliament caucus in this Parliament, I would like to thank him for promoting spiritual guidance among the Muslim community, particularly, the women of Uganda. 

Throughout the 1960s and 1970s, Hajji Bandali, together with Hajji Musa Kasule in Wandageya, conducted workshops, seminars and income generating activities among the Muslim women communities in Uganda. They still exist and I wish to pay tribute to the late for that.

Madam Speaker, death is a natural phenomenon but what do we learn from it? What is the aftermath, which we can derive from the death of late hon. Jaffer Bandali? What we should learn as a nation is patriotism. We should learn to love our country, by contributing to its prosperity, just as the late hon. Jaffer Bandali has done. We should learn to be God fearing. As Members have contributed, the late hon. Jaffer Bandali has contributed a lot in promoting infrastructure, loving all Ugandans regardless of their religious or political affiliation. I wish to thank, hon. Mathias Nsubuga, to have mentioned that His Holiness, the Pope had a meow for the late Jaffer. It is not a new achievement; it is Uganda like; and it is what Ugandans want. Regardless of our tribal, political oblivious differences, we should work together and devise a mechanism for peaceful co-existence. Hon. Jaffer Bandali had achieved that. I wish him a peaceful rest and may Allah offer him Janah. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for tabling this motion. I thank the Prime Minister for his presentation. Further, I would like to thank all Members of this House who have contributed to this motion. I would like to say that goodness has no colour. Goodness has no geographical boundary, and it has no limit; it comes from infinity. 

Therefore, what we have in Bandali Jaffer is the goodness of God manifested in the action that he was enabled to do. Since goodness has no limitation and manifested itself in Bandali Jaffer, he was able to have no colour in education. He supported everybody; he had no limitation in supporting schools whether they were for girls or boys. He had no limitations in doing business. Even when he was chased out of here, he still did business in Canada because goodness could not restrain him and so his goodness could not be stopped. In the same vein, while evil has no laws, goodness has laws. Evil is absence of good and when there are good, evil runs away. 

We, in this House, must record that time 1972 - those of us who were around - when Ugandans of Asian origin were chased out of this country overnight and properties allocated by the feared leaders, without regard of the investment that these people had put in. I was here, I remember the pain that we witnessed and soon after, in 1973 I also left Uganda. The issue was not that Asians were the one being chased; we were also chased. Ugandans ran away in large numbers.

So, Members of this House, should record in the Hansard of today, as Ugandans we should never have an occasion of this nature, where leaders forget that we are human beings; forget that goodness has no colour; and interfere with the life of well reserved Ugandans like this man, born 1924, older than some of those who chased him, having done so much and so good for Uganda. We should never have a situation like this. 
I would like to request Members of this House who have this opportunity, which is not that old, of recognizing the greatness of our people, that we should check ourselves to see how much of Bandali Jaffer we can admire; how much of ourselves, we can cultivate to be a Bandali Jaffer; to be somebody who is so versatile; who was not limited in any way. 

I have had the occasion to meet him and you could see a man who was simple.  There are some of us who normally boast about being Members of Parliament or about being ministers and so forth. This man was so simple –(Interjections)- hon. Ssemuju Nganda, I do not think you would have a meteoric remark from a man like the late, like you would get from a man like you. (Laughter)

How many of us would admire him only here and not admire him in his actions and/or even to see him as a model. The late Bandali Jaffer, was a model for us. He was a man without a tribe. I do not think one wants to say, so and so came from where –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please conclude your remark.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: There are many Ugandans elsewhere who have left this country even voluntarily and lived there. We do not want them to be identified as Ugandans even when they have become citizens of the world. Let us all be citizens of the world and let us be admirers of goodness, from whoever has it, irrespective of colour and tribe.

4.31
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Rubaga Division South): Thank you very much, Madam speaker. I rise to pay tribute to late hon. Bandali Jaffer, in my capacity as the President of the Conservative Party, which commands traditional linkages with Kabaka Yekka, a party that the late represented in Parliament. 

I also happen to be friend to the Jaffer family and I am a great admirer of the format of the Jaffer family. A lot has been said with some minimal distortion of the facts of history. The late hon. Bandali Jaffer was a committed supporter of Kabaka Yekka and he served its interest with dignity and honour. He was also a dedicated servant of the kingdom of Buganda. 

Madam Speaker, the history of Kabaka Yekka is such that people need to know why Buganda generated it. There was a problem at one time in the 1960s, especially 1961, following the historical Lancaster Conference in London, which pronounced that Uganda would have its independence in October, on the 9th  while general elections were to take place in April. Kabaka Yekka had to be formed by Buganda on an emergency basis to rescue the situation because Buganda did not want the people of Buganda to go to UPC or to the predominant DP. They were not well decided. So they chose to form Kabaka Yekka catch stone, so that in the minimum of time, they would withdraw the attention of the people of Buganda to call a spade a spade and go to Parliament by representation.

The late hon. Bandali Jaffer must be praised. During the expulsion of Asians in Uganda, there was a scuffle. Many Asians lost their property and he was one of those people that left Fairway Hotel with anger and went to Canada. 

We praised Bandali Jaffer for the attention he drew before the Canadian Society. He was able to generate a daughter who caught the eyes of the Canadian people to the extent of voting her a Senator in the Canadian Parliament. (Applause) We would like to inform the Senator Jaffer that she is a daughter of Uganda and she is our ambassador in Canada. 

We further would like to inform her that her establishment and success has modelled us in to a frame work of fraternity, which is not fightable from now onwards, between Canada and Ugandan nation. And because of that, we congratulate her for having successfully portrayed success on behalf of her father. If it were not for her father, she probably would not have been generated to this extent. (Laughter)

In conclusion, I would be unfair if I don’t say anything, in character sketch, over the greatness of her father. The father I knew in the late hon. Bandali Jaffer was a man of joy; was a man of initiative; was a man of charisma; was a man of conviction; and was a strategic father. God rest him in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that a lot can be said about the late Bandali Jaffer but we had planned only 45 minutes; we have spent almost two hours on this tribute. I now would like to put the question that this House do pay tribute to the late Bandali Jaffer as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the clerk to extract the Hansard and the text of the tribute and send it, one, to His Highness, the Aga Khan; the second to the Jaffer family; the third to the Ismaili Community in Uganda; the fourth to the family of Prince Badru Kakungulu, represented by Prince Kassim Nakibinge; and the fifth to the family of Hajji Kasule. Thank you very much. (Applause)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as we proceed with that business, I want to introduce in the Public Gallery, Members of the National Ideology Club. I am told their patron is Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye, the MP for Nyabushozi. They are here to observe our proceedings. (Applause)

Honourable members, as you will recall, this Bill was given a second reading. On the 3 February 2015, there were issues raised on this Floor, the same which were raised at the end of the year. So, let us just have a few contributions before we go to the committee stage.

Those who have objections or matters to raise should concentrate on the committee stage, when we get to handle the Bill, clause by clause. Are there any members who want to contribute to the debate?

4.38
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, very much. I recall that day you gave the other side of the House to make their contribution and you had made a promise to this side of the House -

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable members, that side, through hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Muwanga Kivumbi - made their first contribution on the 19 December 2014. On 3 of December, they repeated the same argument. They have said it twice. There was nothing more to say for this side, except at the committee stage.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I thought hon. Muwanga Kivumbi was presenting the minority report and therefore, you would give us the opportunity. May I make my submission? 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, go on please.

MS ALASO: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I have a lot of reservations with the proposal that, in the Bill, the Electoral Commission uses the information collected in the ID Registration process. 

As we speak, it is important to remind this country that the process of ID registration has concluded. And if you want to read that situation together with the provisions of our Constitution, which provide for the independence of the Electoral Commission, it ultimately means that we have already dictated on the road map of the Electoral Commission. Somebody who concluded the compilation of the data has also, by inference, concluded the process of voter registration in this country. 

If the independence of the Electoral Commission that was envisaged in the Constitution, under Article 61, has to do with the Electoral Commission doing their own roadmap; compiling their own data; and determining their own processes and given the fact that the present programme for compiling the voter/ID registration has concluded, if anyone has any matters of complaint for arbitration, we have not told this country, one would make that proposal. 

We, in the Opposition, have been asking the Minister of Internal Affairs to extend this exercise. At least if it were to be the Electoral Commission doing it, we would be able to benefit from the provisions that allow for arbitration, complains or any remedial actions. As it were now, Ugandans cannot implore anybody to act on their behalf in regard to that. 

In a way, we are creating a situation, where the performance of the Electoral Commission will be subjected to direction and control by some authority, rather than on its own. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we also need to uphold the Constitution, which gives that mandate of citizenship and immigration to a board. 

Now we, the very people who swore to uphold and defend the Constitution, confronted with a situation where it is not a constitutional amendment but by another Act of Parliament, we are being told to shift the role of the Citizenship and Immigration Board to another entity.

I would like to imagine that this would be improper. It would help us, if we stuck to what we promised to do. If we, at the end of the day, find ourselves submitting to a situation where an Act of Parliament shifts what is constitutional, it would be very problematic, Madam Speaker. Then what else can’t we talk, if we can take away the powers of the Electoral Commission that are embedded in the Constitution? If we can take away the powers of the Citizenship Immigration Board, what else can’t we do?

I would like to implore my colleagues, who particularly have vested interest in the electoral processes in this country, to be extremely careful, how much power you give to a person without a say. At least when you give it to Electoral Commission, you know there is a say. This registration exercise, for most parts of the country, was done by functionaries. In fact, most registrars who should have been the face of this exercise did not have powers. They had to contact some other known people. So, is that the power we want to vest in another person? If you are going to participate in an election, like I intend to, be careful who you are going to allow to run the voters’ register. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.43
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by saying that time is a very good thing. I was on the Floor of this House before this exercise and raised the need on this law. I remember my good friend, the hon. Gen. Aronda Nyakairima was in this House but it looked like a casual matter.

Madam Speaker, in making these laws, in other jurisdictions where people take the execution very serious, they start with a policy. After the policy the cabinet memoranda drives us to a point of making the law.

What we are dealing in, Madam Speaker, given the situation as it is now, personally I would have no problem with other provisions of the Bill, save for clause 40 and particular reference is the one, which hon. Alice Alaso has alluded to. 

Madam Speaker, when we are in this House, an issue to do with constitutionality was raised, that by taking away the function of the Electoral Commission, we are amending the Constitution by infection. We are indirectly amending the Constitution by taking away the powers of the Electoral Commission. 

When the Electoral Commission is doing its work and it is updating the voters register - Article 61(1) (e) of the Constitution says that the function of the Electoral Commission is to “compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register.” That is the function of the commission. However, when you go to the Bill, you realise that it shows that that function is going to be taken away, in my understanding, by the Authority. When you read particularly clause 40(2), it says, “The Electoral Commission may use the information contained in the register to compile, maintain, revise and update the voters register.”

Madam Speaker, for the benefit of my colleagues, this is discretionary the way it looks, but with the Uganda we are dealing with today, this is susceptible to abuse. Why I am I saying this? In order to delete a voter from a national voters register today, there is a process where there must be a display and after they have displayed the names of the people proposed to be deleted – (Interjections) - No, the information is not relevant to me. 

THE SPEAKER: But he has not said anything.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I would like my colleagues to understand; I know you have been to Kyankwanzi -(Laughter)- but it is also important that you listen to our considered opinion about what we think about this Bill. 

As I was saying, under the Electoral Commission Act, if one intends to delete someone from the voters’ register, there is a process. After the list has been displayed, a tribunal is set up and all political parties are represented. A magistrate appoints members of the tribunal to come and agree on the list before it is put up. However, in this circumstance, when you say that you are going to update a voters’ register using a process, which has been done by another entity, and the same authority has even the powers to delete people from the register, it creates a very big problem.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, what I would like to say is that since we are agreeable to almost all other clauses in the Bill and there is only a problem with a few clauses, we are better off harmonising and arriving at a decision. This is because the same people who are supporting this same law today will be victims tomorrow.

As I conclude, allow me to mention that during the elections, which brought me to Parliament, over 2000 voters had been deleted from the voters’ register. It took vigorous effort for me to get the old register, compare it with the new one and these people were reinstated in the register. 

When we raise suspicion over this - The resultant effect of this is violence. Whenever you talk about an electoral process, you should know that it is the basis of the security of a country. Today, it may look like a choir where people are towing a position, which has been set, but the future of this country hinges on how transparent the electoral process can be. 

Having said that, Madam Speaker, I call upon my colleagues - You have listened to us and to other people, reflect, process and take the right decision for this country. Thank you.

4.49
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. 

I also have an opinion about preserving the independence of the Electoral Commission. All of us know what it means when the Electoral Commission fails to be as independent as expected. We may want to merge some of its mandate but I would like to assure you that in 2016, even those who are going for primaries, you may have your own electoral commission but we shall suffer individually. It is real; there is no pretence in this.

Madam Speaker, this issue was raised in the committee and the response they gave is: “The committee further observed that this argument does not hold since clause 40(2) does not mandatorily require the Electoral Commission’s usage of the information in the national register by way of obligation, but rather by way of recourse and according to its own discretion”. This is a clear indication that you feel, deep in your hearts, that there was need to leave the Electoral Commission as an independent entity. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I am of the view that as we propose and second the merger of some of these units, we leave the Electoral Commission with its independence.

Madam Speaker, at page 22 – I need clarification on this - there is a recommendation made by the committee that a portion of the funds generated by the Authority to be approved should be retained. I need clarification on what the criteria will be for retaining money that will be generated by the Authority. Won’t it generate a lot of risks because there are challenges we face when we use money not appropriated by Parliament?

There was also an issue raised that the National Registration Secretariat was not operationalized and now we are thinking about a new authority. Can we get assurance on this, because the service that we intend to benefit from this Bill is urgently needed? What magic is going to be done for this Authority to be operationalized? 

Lastly, -(Member timed out.)

4.52
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This Bill has been debated over and over again. It appears that what is said is not considered. We are only allowed to talk and talk but at the end of the day the same thing is brought back. I am saying this because I have been part of the discussions from the beginning, even at the level of Member of Parliament, Shadow Minister, and we have done this. 

Let me, however, say this for the record: why do you talk of the Electoral Commission? -

THE SPEAKER: By the way, are you still part of the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: Please, take your seat.

4.53
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Freddie Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, this is a very important legislation in our history. It is important in the sense that we have to look at the common good, but I would like to address one or two issues.

The first issue, which seems to be very sensitive, and I respect the views of my brother, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, is the issue of independence. We must understand it not only from a logical point of view but also from a legal perspective. It is not a question of who is right and who is wrong; it is a question of the purpose of the concept of independence.

My understanding is that when you say a body is independent in its functions, it means that this body must be availed the capacity to make a decision independently. Are you making your decisions independently without any interference?

Secondly, independence, in any context used, is not a shield against accountability. It is never a shield against accountability. I have heard it being said that the Bank of Uganda is independent and it cannot come to Parliament to answer how it uses the public resources that we give to it; that is a fallacy! Does the Governor of Bank of Uganda or a judge have the capacity to make a decision independently? 

In terms of accountability – Article 1 of the Constitution says that the power belongs to the people. By the way, when we say that, it is not mere power; it means that those people that we serve must be availed the service they deserve by us, the leaders, and we must work together. What this means is that agencies of Government are there to provide the needed services to our people. Parliament must work with the Judiciary and the Executive. 

Independence does not mean isolation, that we must be isolated from each other. The thrust of independence is that we must independently make our decisions but coalesce in achieving the common objectives of society. That is the reason we are in power. When you look at Article 61, and I must commend those who sat in the Constituent Assembly, they did not say, “Electoral Commission, register”; they said “compile”. This is because when you are compiling or registering- assuming that you are now the Electoral Commission - you want to register a person to vote, you want to register a person who is a citizen of Uganda and you must ask him if he has the identification card. That is the essence of this. We are further saying that where there is doubt, then you go to clause 42 where we have provided that you may or may not use it. What is the big deal? 

Let me now talk about the Immigration Board. Hon. Alaso, before the amendment of the Constitution in 2005, functions of that Immigration Board were clearly spelt out in the Constitution. In other words, Parliament cannot enact a law to vary those functions without first amending the Constitution. In 2005, we gave the powers to Parliament to prescribe the functions of the Board, which means that Parliament can vary, add and delete as it deems fit. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.58 
MS ROSE AKOL (NRM, District Woman Representative, Bukedea): Thank you, Madam Speaker. My contribution is going to be centred on clause 40 - the use of information in the register. 

Clause 40(1) (d), (f) and (g) refer to national security purposes as one of the uses of this information, monitoring money laundering and human trafficking, and taxation purposes respectively. I just want to put the House on notice that I will have an amendment with relation to information use under Schedule 3. 

Information required for monitoring money laundering and human trafficking and for taxation purposes will not be complete if we do not have tax identification numbers as a requirement during registration. I am saying this because with tax identification numbers, one will be able to follow business transactions that a person may have been dealing with in terms of the returns filed, business data, volume of business and properties owned. This is especially useful for money laundering and taxation purposes. 

Madam Speaker, I want to move to clause 40 (2) – (Interjection)- No, I am not taking any clarifications because I have limited time. Clause 40(2) says, “The Electoral Commission may use the information contained in the Register to compile…” The words used are, “may use” and not “shall use”. 

Madam Speaker, on the independence of the Electoral Commission, I do not know how far we should push this issue. Parliament, for example, is supposed to be an independent arm of Government, but Parliament also utilises the services of the Police and yet they are not recruited by Parliament. The same applies to Electoral Commission; during elections, they utilise the services of the Police. So, if we cling to the independence of the Electoral Commission, are we going to say that the Electoral Commission should recruit its own police? Is that what we are trying to imply here? Is that the level of independence that we are pushing for the Electoral Commission?

Madam Speaker, I think the issue of independence should be understood in the context of – (Interruptions)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I do not desire to do this, but I want to raise a point of order that will also help inform the House. Is the honourable member in order to insinuate that a 16-year-old person, who was registered in the last national identification card registration exercise, will be liable to paying taxes? How will they get a tax identification number when they are not eligible to paying taxes? Is she in order?

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable member, it is a proposal that she wants the minister to consider. Hon. Lugoloobi.

5.03
MR AMOS LUGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on clause 40(2) regarding the use of information from the national register by the Electoral Commission. My presentation will come from a statistics dimension. 

I beg to submit that there are two sources, which are widely accepted in statistics when you are compiling data. The first could be the primary data sources and the second could be the secondary data sources, if they are credible. In statistics, we allow users to choose between the two depending on the money that they have and also to avoid duplication. 

In this particular case, we are talking about two institutions of Government - the Electoral Commission and Registration of Persons Authority. These two institutions belong to the same Government and they have similar goals, so there is no reason, whatsoever, if the information on persons has been professionally collected, for the Electoral Commission not to use such data. (Applause) Statistically, this is allowed; it is professional and acceptable, unless you have established that there is evidence that the data collected under this exercise was fake and not credible. However, if it is done professionally, really - unless you are saying that you are not going to accept the IDs arising from the exercise, but for as long as you accept that this is going to be a national identification system, it follows that we can use data from this database. Different users can use the data from this database and not only the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, I want to submit that we accept –(Interruptions) 

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you so much for giving way. I would like to allay the fears of the members on the opposite side. Actually, in Kyankwanzi we are very scientific and we discuss very serious matters for nation building. (Laughter) I did not see anything which the people in the press are saying. We are very serious while there because this country has to move forward.

In that light, you should know that we have been grappling as a country to plan for our citizens. This has been going on because even the private sector is suffering greatly. You find individuals who get jobs and steal but you cannot trace them. They go to another company and they do the same over and over. 

Now, if we have a centralised system that is going to track every individual within the country and people will have numbers, it means even when they go to a polling station twice, they cannot vote again. A person will use their ID because all the information about them is reflected in there. Why should we really waste time running away from the modernity of doing things and just chip into this kind of talk? I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, ever since we started this debate on 18th December, focus has only been on the Authority and information use by the Electoral Commission. Even now, I can see that members are going straight to those provisions. Why don’t we go to the committee stage so we can deal with them one by one, because everybody is focussing on clauses 40 and 61? 

Honourable members, I put the put the question that this Bill be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill – 

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chair, the reading of clause 1, in my view, particularly clause 1 (1) on the application of the Bill, tends to conflict with Article 10 of the Constitution.

In my considered opinion, there is one form of citizenship that is non-derogable. When you look at the Constitution, the citizenship you acquire by birth cannot be derogated from, in terms of subjecting it to registration. The registration of citizens is governed under Article 12 of the Constitution and the only forms under which a citizen can lose citizenship are those citizens who have acquired citizenship either by registration or naturalisation. 

Therefore, I beg to move that Clause 1 (1) be amended to say, “The Act applies to persons in Uganda who have acquired citizenship by registration or naturalisation.”

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chair, I think what clause 1 says on the application is that it applies to registration of all persons in Uganda. To me, if you are a Ugandan, or you want to acquire citizenship, you must apply and register. (Laughter) This Act applies to the registration of all persons in Uganda. This is the clause that we are talking about. When this clause is passed, all persons in Uganda must apply for registration. Maybe the Attorney-General can clarify, but to me, this applies to all Ugandans.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much for giving way. Registration can be registration of anything. However, if you are registering persons in Uganda, there must be a definition. That is why I want to concur with my brother, hon. Niwagaba, that to register as a Ugandan, it either must be by birth or naturalisation. 

So, when you say that this applies to registration of all persons in Uganda, it is dangerous and just too wide. What do you mean? If I cross the border into Uganda and I register, do I automatically become a Ugandan? If you present a passport on entering a country and they stamp “entry” –

THE CHAIRPERSON: I do not know whether the Attorney-General is ready but what I quickly think is that for anyone going to be registered in Uganda, it is only this law that will apply and not any other. This is the law for registration. That is what it is saying.

MR NIWAGABA: I beg to first make clarification. In my view, conceiving this law was not properly digested in accordance with the Constitution. We have two forms of registration under the Constitution - you have the registration as a citizen if you are not a citizen by birth or naturalisation and then you also have Article 18 that mandates the state to register.

The state registers three things in sequence: birth, and after birth you are presumed to marry, and after marriage you are presumed to die. Under Article 18 of the Constitution, the state registers births, marriages and deaths. This Parliament made the law that allows the Uganda Registration Services Bureau to operationalise Article 18 of the Constitution. Therefore, if you are talking of registration that is outside the Constitution, then I am afraid we are going to amend the Constitution by introducing something strange. 

In my view, Madam Chairperson, if you are talking of registering persons, the Constitutional Court also provides for persons who apply to be registered as citizens or those who become citizens by naturalisation. However, if it is in respect of births, deaths and marriages, Article 18 covers that and there is already a law that provides for that mode of registration.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the principles of the Bill and the objectives, which have been adopted, what do they say? The objectives of the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014 are to harmonise and consolidate the law on registration of persons and to provide for registration of individuals. What does clause 1 say? You have already accepted the principle and this is what is carried in clause 1. 

This is the drafting of the Bill. The principles have been accepted, you are putting them in the body. This is what it says. In principle No. 1, you are saying this is a registration of - (Interjection) Can I finish my point? Let me finish my point. 

If you are accepting the principle that you are going to register as the objective of the Bill says - I will read it verbatim: “the objective of this Bill is to harmonise and consolidate the law on the registration of persons”. What does clause 1 say? You are putting it in principle that once this law comes into place, all persons must be registered. It is as simple as that.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you look at Article 18 of the Constitution, there is registration of births, marriages and deaths: “The State shall register every birth, marriage and death occurring in Uganda.” When I see what the state is trying to do, to respond to the efficiency of operationalisation of this Article, I do not see any violation of the Constitution or the introduction of something new. Actually, the state wants to be more effective by harmonising and putting all these laws together such that we can be able to know our own people and have a proper registration process in the country.

MR NIWAGABA: The clarification I would like to get from my honourable colleague is: if you read clause 1, sub clause (1) and clause 29 (1)(a) that makes it compulsory for citizens, even those by birth, plus clause 32 on cancellation of registration, how do you marry that with Articles 18 and 12 on citizenship by birth? In other words, can you subject a cancellation of a registration under this Bill to a citizen who is so by birth?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, but you are mixing up the argument.

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, this law is based on its memorandum and I wish to draw the attention of members to clauses 3 and 7 of the memorandum of this Bill. Clause 3 says, “Registration may also be required if a person wishes to access certain services from Government, including a driving permit, medical services, education services, payment of taxes” and in clause 7, due to the passage of time, some aspects of the laws -(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Chairperson, I am at pains to put my good friend to order when he is submitting on the Floor of the House and he chooses to mislead the House by quoting the memorandum. I have not seen, unless it is through your guidance, Madam Chairperson, that for once this memorandum is going to be part of the law. Is he, therefore, in order to use the memorandum as a clause to submit and mislead the House?

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, the memorandum is part of the Bill. They were published and gazetted together.

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson, for that wise ruling. It is also noteworthy that the honourable member does not have a copy of the Bill and is only exposing his – 

Madam Chairperson, regarding objective No. 7 of this Bill, it has also been noted that due to passage of time, some aspects of the laws dealing with registration of persons have become out-dated especially in light of the present-day policies, international obligations, globalisation and technological development. Therefore, this law is not only about registration of deaths, births and citizenship; it goes beyond that to cover all these aspects.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to declare that I am a member of the committee and therefore, I am not supposed to contribute. However, I just want to give information to a colleague who is quoting the Constitution that only -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the members of the committee have had time with this Bill. Let them give us the information.

MR MUWUMA: Madam Chairperson, I am just giving information. Whereas hon. Niwagaba is quoting the Constitution that talks about registering marriages, births and deaths, the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act in clause 27 talks of registration of citizens and issuance of national identity cards. 

Clause 27(1) is clear that every citizen of Uganda shall be registered. Therefore, although he is stating that we are conflicting with the Constitution by asking Ugandans to register, it is already in the Immigration Act of Uganda. Whereas he was trying to intimidate members that there is an unconstitutionality, there is none of any kind. I thank you.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I want to call upon our colleagues. I do not know whether the timing of the Bill is causing us any problems because we are near elections. Hon. Niwagaba is a senior lawyer whom I respect very much, I do not know why he is having a problem with this clause. Actually, we would be on clause 10 by now. By trying to classify persons at this stage, we shall miss out on the principle and the objective of the Bill. 

This is registration of persons. We shall come back to the title later on but the objectives give you the dilemma Government has been having. We are all here, if you are not registered, you are not better than a piece of wood in your own country. Now, if there is any law that would facilitate that with identification, and I am given Oboth, a Japadhola from Tororo, why should we- 

Madam Speaker, I was just thinking and inviting my brother and my very good friend - and he knows for a fact that we fly together – to allow this to continue. Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We shall skip clause 3; we will do it later.

Clause 4

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, in clause 4 we are trying to establish the National Identification and Registration Authority. At this rate, we are going to kill all the MDAs. We already have the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Board, we have the Uganda Registration Services Bureau and we want to create an Authority to undertake the function of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Board. 

If the issue is capacity or that the current individuals are not doing a good job or that the law they are applying is not good, we would rather strengthen that law than create an Authority, which is going to do the same functions like the one, which is in place. Therefore, under clause 4, I am saying that we do not create another Authority to carry out the functions, which are already being done – (Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Thank you very much. This has also been an issue that was troubling me. However, I would like to invite my friend, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to take a close look at the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act. If you look at the functions of the Board vis-à-vis the functions of the Authority that we are proposing in this Bill, they are actually different. Save for one function, the Board concentrates on different functions. 

The Board concentrates on people coming in and going out, issuing passports, cancellation of passports and issuing of permits. This Bill is talking about registration and updating the data of citizens. This is very important and it is not only unique to Uganda. We have had other countries go this way; Kenya, Belgium and Malaysia have gone this way. It is quite important, given the intensity of the functions of this Authority, that we understand the difference. 

Therefore, I would wish to invite my colleague, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, to read the Immigration Act vis-à-vis the Bill. They are quite different. That is the information I want to give you.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, hon. Bahati, for the information. If you agree that they have been having little work to do, why then don’t we add them this function instead of creating an Authority? In fact, this can be a department in the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Those are the arguments we are trying to raise.

Therefore, Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose that instead of establishing a National Identification and Regulation Authority, and agreeing with what hon. Bahati has raised, let us have these functions pushed to the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Board – (Interruption)

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. Madam Chairperson, the information I want to give is that when we were discussing the Plant Protection and Health Act, we proposed that there must be an Authority established for the purpose of that law. However, the House had a common agreement that establishing an Authority would have cost implications that would be unbearable for this country. This is because we have very many authorities, which are not performing to their best. We, therefore, did away with that. 

I am also thinking that when you look at some of the functions of the Authority – I am sorry for going a little bit ahead – under clause 5, it deals with registering citizens of Uganda, registering births and deaths. I would think that if we have even just a department that is empowered to do this work, it would be bearable for this country in terms of cost implications. Alternatively, the Citizenship and Immigration Board could be empowered with all these functions other than creating another Authority. Thank you very much. This is the information I wanted to give.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Mwesigye.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I thought I was on the Floor. I am just receiving information. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I am giving him information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, you cannot stand there and invite people to give you information. Hon. Mwesigye.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to conclude my point.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, please take your seat for now. We will get back to you.

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If we read what is provided for in this Bill together with Article 189, which provides for the functions of Government in the Sixth Schedule, you see that we are trying to harmonise and consolidate what is already provided for in the Constitution - the functions and services for which Government is responsible. It is not in contradiction with what we are trying to create to consolidate and harmonise the law. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon members to be ideologically clear and support this Bill because we should allow Government to do its functions. Anybody who is trying to challenge or cause a roadblock to the government’s functioning or ability to make an enabling law is not fair. I call upon members who are trying to cause a stampede to blockade this - It is not fair for members to try and cause –(Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the spirit under which we are here is to make laws for Uganda. From the contribution by my good friend, hon. Mwesigye, it is like he is bashing us in the Opposition. He alluded to the fact that we are causing stampedes. Is he in order to use such a word to depict the Opposition as if we were elected by the people of our constituencies to cause stampedes in Parliament and fail the Government to operate? Is he in order?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are just sharing ideas.

COL. (RTD) MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. What I am trying to say is that there are some functions, programmes and policies, which should unite all of us as Ugandans. We can agree to differ on some points, but on the registration of persons, which is the purpose of this Bill, we should all unite as Ugandans and allow Ugandans to be registered, known and identified. That is what I am trying to say. We should be ideologically clear to support this function that the Government is trying to do. Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am still perturbed when members mix the two authorities: the Immigration Authority with the Registration of Persons Authority. For example, the Immigration Authority deals with people going out and coming in. My mother in the village has never gone out of this country and I do not expect her to go out of the country soon. When will the immigration - she is not yet dead and she is not going to cross any border! When will the immigration capture her data? The only way we shall do this is by creating an authority to harmonise. It is just a simple thing.

Madam Chair, we should understand that it is something simple; to harmonise our data and bring it together so that we move forward. Thank you. 

MR AYOO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think we should maintain the idea of having a National Identification and Registration Authority. We might think about the cost but even the efficiency and effectiveness of these agents of government that we have been giving little money is questionable.

If we want to have the registration of citizens electronically put down in the data to enable us to monitor ghosts in government, then there is need to have an authority that would be tasked with working effectively and efficiently to have data where every agency of government will come and get it. That can only be done when an authority is functioning. 

Yes, an authority will be expensive but what we would get out of it will be very beneficial. I would urge members that let us have an authority to run this programme so that the benefit is for all. Thank you. 

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, this clause is for the establishment of the National Identification and Registration Authority. I have listened to the concerns of members but a good law must be consistent with others. I would request that in the interest of harmonising a very good position, we should stand over this so that we study the other one and see – Madam Chairperson, you may recall the other law we passed where we said that we can create another department and it becomes a monster within the ministry when they are duplicating all the work. Since we want to harmonise some functions, which are not undertaken by the other law, the minister should study them and come out clearly because creating an authority - (Interruption)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give hon. Kakooza and others is that we have a certificate of financial implications that was duly issued by the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. This is what they say, “Planned expenditure over the Medium Term Expenditure Framework period (MTEF). The Bill proposes establishing a National Registration and Identification Authority and if approved, this will require estimated annual funding amounting to Shs 190 billion for implementing the activities.”

It also says, “The funding and budgetary implication: The funding requirement is not in the budget over the MTEF period. However, the projected non-tax revenue generated by the authority shall be used as a source of funding….”

What we are saying is that the authority you want to create will require Shs 190 billion and this money is not budgeted for anywhere in the MTEF period in the next three years. What the ministry did when we put them to task -(Interruption)

MR LUGOLOOBI: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. That was the status-quo then but the situation has since changed. In the projection that we have under the coming BFP (Budget and Fiscal Plan), we have made provision for the establishment of this authority. 

In any case, in this very financial year, we made provision for about Shs 75 billion for the exercise that we have just been undertaking throughout the country. Therefore, we are already implementing some of the activities in this Bill. As such, the money issue is no longer an impediment for us to go forward.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. As a Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, while considering this Bill, we looked at the certificate of financial implication and scrutinised it. At the beginning, we were dissatisfied with that certificate. We invited the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to come and make clarification on that certificate and indeed he came and clarified. After having a long discourse with him, he went back to the ministry and wrote back to the committee. 

With your permission, Madam Chairperson, I can read what he wrote and I can even request to lay it on Table. This is a letter, which was addressed to the Chairperson, Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs and the reference is, “Financial opinion on the Registration of Persons Bill, 2014. 

Reference is made to the above captioned matter. Further reference is made to the meeting, which was held between my ministry and your committee on 9 December 2014. In line with the submission made by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development during the above meeting specifically paragraphs 6 and 7, this is to confirm that Shs 29 billion will be availed to the National Registration and Identification Authority in the Financial Year 2015/16 to enable the authority kick start its activities. 

However, as emphasised in our submission to the committee, this provision has to be justified by the submission of a detailed work plan from Ministry of Internal Affairs. In addition, this ministry would like to clarify that all funds to the authority shall be appropriated by Parliament of Uganda. All non-tax revenue collected by the authority shall be deposited to the Consolidated Fund and only the funds appropriated by Parliament shall be availed to the authority to run its activities as stipulated in the recently passed Public Finance Management Bill. 

Maria Kiwanuka, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
cc the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury.” 

I beg to submit and lay on Table.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Chairperson, the hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has just read to us a section of the certificate of financial implication. He ably quoted what the minister presented to the committee and by extension to Parliament. The minister did not indicate anywhere that he is withdrawing the certificate and its contents. By virtue of what my colleague the chairperson has read, that sounds like a new certificate, an addendum or some form of underhand method.

Madam Chairperson, I need your guidance as to whether we can actually move that way when dealing with such a matter that relates to permission to expend public funds and how certificates are issued and presented to Parliament.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I invite you to read the Hansard of the 19th of December where the Minister of Finance came here and clarified that issue. 

Honourable members, I now put the question that clause 4 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9         

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend Clause 9 by the following: one, under 9(2)(b)(3), replacing the phrase ‘the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration Board’ with the phrase ‘the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control’.

The justification is that the other members of the Board under the clause are technical representatives from the given sectors. 

In 9(3), deleting the word ‘all’ and replacing it with a comma between the words ‘management’ and ‘national security’ on the last line and inserting immediately after the word ‘security’ on the last line the phrase, ‘or any other relevant field’. Thus to re-draft the clause as, ‘The chairperson and the person referred to in sub-section (2)(c) shall be appointed by the minister from among persons with knowledge and proven experience in any of the following fields: registration of persons, law, information and communication technology, public administration, immigration management, national security or any other relevant field.’

The justification is to enlarge the scope of qualifications for the chairperson and representative of the public since the other mentioned representatives of the Board have the necessary qualifications and experience in the required field.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. On the same Clause 9(2), when you look at the composition of the Board, we have the executive director who has no voting rights. In other words, he is an ex-officio member.

However, when you go down to the following clauses, you find that we shall have a board secretary who will be reporting to the executive director. For that reason and in consistence with other laws that we have, I would propose that the executive director who has no voting rights should be the board secretary. We would then remove the board secretary in the subsequent clauses. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am not sure whether I got your proposal. Can you repeat your proposal on Clause 9?

MR LUBOGO: Madam Chairperson, what I am saying is that in the composition, the executive director is an ex-officio on this Board but when you go down to 9(2)(b), it states that the Board shall have a board secretary - not here but in the following clauses -(Interruption)

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The chairperson of the committee has just made an amendment on the composition of the Board; the chairperson and the members. We have not yet gone to the functions of these people. We have also not yet gone to the executive director and the secretary of the Board so would it not be procedurally right if we passed this amendment and then we proceeded with what my colleague is saying?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go step by step. If you want to re-commit something, you let us know but we have not yet reached Clause 19.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When you look at the composition of the Board, why should we have representatives from the Electoral Commission? Can the minister explain to me, why?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think colleagues should be a bit patient. What our colleague was raising is that a Board will always have a board secretary. If you look at the composition, there is no mention of a board secretary and yet they are getting staff with an executive director who will have no right to vote. What is his function on the Board? Either he is the secretary to the Board or he is the advisor to the Board or whatever the case will be. That is one of the things I had wanted to raise.

Having said that, Madam Chairperson, my brother has raised the issue of the Electoral Commission but I am raising the issue of one person to represent the public. Are you telling me that this chairman of the Board is not representing the public? Are you telling us that the staff or the board members you are putting there are not representing the public?

I thought that everybody’s work is in the interest of the public of Uganda. Why should you bring a person to increase the numbers for the sake of it? This is where the minister should explain as to why he wants one person to represent the public. Are the others not representing the public? How will we select this one person who is to represent the public? How will you know that, that is the one who knows the public more than the others?

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am also not satisfied with the amendments. The chairperson of the committee, I am addressing this question to you. I am not satisfied with the amendment of sub-clause (3). We either want a technical chairman or any other person. 

As regards the person you referred to in (2) (c) who is the one representing the public, you either want a technical person or you want any other person. Therefore, you do not need to mention all these other professions: law, information technology and others. 

Why do we have to labour to put qualifications and yet at the end say, “any other field”? We would just say that we need an individual and not elaborate whether he or she is qualified in law or science or whatever. Why should we labour to explain -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I think we need clarification from the minister. What is in his mind for having one person to represent the public? It appears a bit weird. Can we get clarification? If it is not there, then we should be able to delete this provision of one person to represent the public. Otherwise, how will you choose that one person to represent the public?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on the floor of this House we have often complained about boards which are completely bureaucratic, who think in a particular way. Why don’t you want an input from orderly people? They bring a different perspective. All these are government sanctuaries. They think as the government has directed, why don’t you want someone who thinks freely? I think we need a public person.

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chair, on that point either we would have said ‘a senior citizen’ other than just saying some body from the public so that we know somebody is qualified as a senior citizen, “From the public”, is rather ambiguous.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Brenda

MS NABUKENYA: Madam Chair, the issue before this committee of the whole House is very important. I would like to know if it is procedurally right to move on when we do not have the right quorum for such a matter as per Rule 23 of the Rules of Procedure.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes, hon. Oboth.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, it is very important that Parliament is seen to be consistent in the legislation. Some of the statutory bodies which have been created in this country have particular provisions requiring a representative from public. I think the spirit of that proposal is really good - they are also getting a touch and the discretion is on the appointing authority to decide who. 

This brings me to another point, mentioned by hon. Kasule. Why must we prescribe the qualification of the chairperson? Why can’t we give the minister the discretion? He/she should choose who to take the lead. What is the rational of prescribing qualification for the chairperson –(Interjection)– let me take information from West Budama North.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Fox Odoi.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chair and West Budama South for giving way. Madam Chair, this is not the first time in a piece of legislation to provide for representation of the public either in a commission or authority. Way back in 1995, the framers of the Constitution under Article 146 (2)(e), the Judicial Service Commission included, “The Judicial Service Commission shall, subject to clause (3) of this article, consist of the following persons who shall be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament - (e) two members of the public who shall not be lawyers, nominated by the President”. We are not re-inventing the wheel to provide for representation of the public. 

Secondly, the participation of the public in governance is also a constitutional matter; all power belongs to the people. If you are constituting an authority for purposes of registration, you need the common man to be represented there. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It was information from West Budama.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, I was receiving information, I thought hon. Fox was still taking a pause. I did not know he had finished. He summed it up all by noting that there is a constitutional provision. Is there any justification to differ? 

DR BITEKYEREZO: Madam Chair, thank you so much. I have a very big problem with (c) and (d). Uganda has a population of more than 35 million. If they considered the public very well, they opt to look for only one person to represent the whole public. I have a very big problem with this because this number is too small. 

Secondly, I do not know what the qualification of this public man will be? Will it be my mother who stopped in P.3 in the village of Mbarara and Rukungiri, or somebody who has got different qualifications?

On part three, why are they specifically looking for the chairperson to be having a specific qualification yet they are auditing others? You can get people from all sectors we are talking about who are not good enough, yet we can have a doctor who is fantastic and who can be a chairperson of this authority, like Dr Bitekyerezo, a medical doctor, who also does serious legislation. 

I would like us to be properly represented by leaving the qualifications and specifications of the chairperson as long as the person is well qualified. I thank you very much, Madam Chair person.

MR RUHINDA: Madam Chair, I would like to differ from my friend hon. Bitekyerezo. This is not the first authority to be created. Whether it is the Board or authority, we have been following other boards; this is the format. The member of the public cannot be defined; this is not a voting matter, and the public is well represented in Parliament, because they vote us to come and represent their interests here. It is about identifying a person who may have some unique skills that will add value and that is under the jurisdiction of the minister to make prudent decisions. We expect them to make good decisions for the country. 

I heard someone trying to say that the executive director should not have voting rights. In real checks and balances, we have just grappled with a situation in NSSF where the executive director has voting powers. This messes up a lot of things. You cannot allow this technical person to go ahead and have powers. You are going to be undermining the authority which will be dangerous. I am not seeing any problem with that. 

I urge you members; you cannot be chairperson when you are less knowledgeable on the real issues because you will be manipulated. These technical people who have got the knowledge have a high capacity to manipulate you when you are ignorant. We cannot allow a chairperson to come in without such knowledge and we see things being messed up. This is a very sensitive body that touches our livelihood as people and our security. We need a knowledgeable, competent chairperson and I support this definition. Thank you very much, Madam Chair.

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Chair. I am happy with what is going on. However, I am very unhappy with this whole composition of the members not being sensitive to gender. All these members selected should bear in mind gender sensitivity otherwise, we shall only have men.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to draw your attention to sub-clause 4 (9) which provides as follows: “The minister shall, in appointing the members of the board, ensure that there is a balance of skills and gender.” (Applause)

MR SABILA: Thank you, Madam Chair. Mine is still on clause 9, all the entities are public institutions. The only difference between the rest and (c), where we want a person representing the public, is that these ones are technocrats.

In line with the argument earlier on advanced by hon. Nandala-Mafabi and hon. Bahati, which specification should the person representing the public have, what will become of all the other public entities -

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose?

BRIG. KATIRIMA: Madam Chair, I am a member of the committee and we had a good time discussing this area. This person representing the public should have almost the same qualification as the chairperson and it is covered at sub-clause (3) and should be woman or man with knowledge and proven experience in any of the following fields: Registration of Persons, Law, Information and Communications Technology, Public Administration, Immigration Management or National Security as was proposed by the minister.

The committee added “any other relevant field”, in order to make the net wider to enable us zero on the right person. It could be a doctor and Dr Bitekyerezo’s peers will be covered. It could be any other person. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, sub-clause (3) provides for the broad areas where the chair and the other person from the public will come from. 

BRIG. KATIRIMA: I would like to add that the person could be either employed or not employed in civil service. Thank you.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Chair. I would be very okay with the proposal of the member who said the word “Senior citizen” be added there; that is on clause (2) (c) – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, what will you do with all the young people who are educated, sharp and knowledgeable? You want to lock them out, including yourself? (Applause)

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, my understanding of this ‘senior citizen’ is this person who is an all-rounder, very intelligent, of high moral character, someone who can stand the way of the technocrats. If they want to manipulate the whole system, he is able to stand his ground. That would be my understanding.

However, the main reason I rose up is (2)(b)(i), where the ministry responsible for internal affairs is to be represented on the board, and under (3), the Uganda National Citizenship and Immigration Board. My understanding is, this board is under the Ministry of Internal Affairs. I would propose, a representative from the Minister of Defence. Probably -(Interjection)– yes, internal affairs matters, but it goes beyond our borders. If there is someone claiming that he is a citizen, that would be my argument. 

On (4), “The Minister shall in appointing the members of the board ensure that there is a balance of skills and gender.” I belong to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. This is falling back from the position we have been taking. 

I remember when we debated latest law, hon. Fox Odoi suggested that there must be half representation in terms of gender and everyone clapped. Now, why are we backsliding, if we have nine representation - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, I want to thank my colleague for the clarification. If you have read the composition very well, a representative from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, Solicitor-General etc. Supposing those ministries bring their representatives and the minister has no authority over them. In fact, the minister has authority over only two people in the law. Supposing they are only men or only women, how will you balance that?

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, very much. That is why the practice of our formulation of laws here has been that we define the minimum in terms of either a third or half. So that there is no negligence on the part of the minister in constituting this body to say, “You know, I considered that the number of females in that ministry is reducing or they are few that is why -” 

My question again to hon. Nandala-Mafabi would be, what if the minister deliberately decides to give no heed to this law and say, “I was told it is within my discretional powers to consider the balance of skills and gender? I found it very hard to balance the gender”. What then shall we do? For me defining a third -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Chair, I think the framers of our Constitution had it in mind that one day, this can come up and that is why it is clearly stated within the Constitution that a third of at least everybody shall, and they are using a very strong word, “Shall” be women. That is how it is stated. Therefore, I do not see any need of repetition when it is embedded within our Constitution.

Finally, Madam Chair, we have these other authorities which are composed of constituents as this one is. And when the ministers are composing these bodies, they take it in mind and write to their fellow cabinet ministers and indicate that a third must be women. And these are many bodies, we have UNRA, composed of constituents and a third must be women.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chair, my point here is that, we cannot allow customs and usage to override the law. We must have a general rule and that must be in the law. The general practice he is talking about is not an issue.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is your proposal?

MR ANYWARACH: At least a third must be women; I am from the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. I am injured -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, isn’t that a legitimate proposal?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chair, there is a problem, the minister will appoint the chairperson and one more person. Those are two; the rest are representatives from the public sector, for example, the Solicitor-General might be a man or a woman. You will not say the representative from the Solicitor-General should be a man when the one there is, is a woman.

MR BAHATI: The information I would like to give hon. Nandala-Mafabi is that once we make it a law that a third should be women; then once the minister receives these nominations from different ministries, he will ensure that a third are women. If they are not he will take them back.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chairperson, first of all, a point of correction; gender sensitivity does not only lean towards the side of one sex; it is on either side. So if you say, “At least a third should be either gender” –(Interjection)- No affirmative action - you are not going to say that it only applies to - very soon you will be seeking for affirmative action yourselves as men. 

I would like to highlight one point, of course hon. Byabagambi is correct and hon. Nandala-Mafabi is correct that sometimes it may be problematic to achieve. This is why there is that particular component and when these boards come to Cabinet for approval, we task the relevant ministers to ensure that there is gender balance. For example, there is a recent case in Kenya, when they promulgated their Constitution; they put in place a provision in the Constitution that a third of the members of Parliament shall be women. However, they forgot to put in place the necessary laws to achieve that. When the time came, they realised that they may not actually have the a third of women in Parliament. Therefore, the only recourse should have been to go back to Parliament and amend to provide for affirmative action through providing constituencies for women. However, they fear that by doing that, being the majority in the House as men, they would lose their constituencies.

They tasked the Attorney-General to go to the Supreme Court and seek an advisory opinion. The Attorney-General went to the Supreme Court, some lawyers here might be aware of that decision. It was a very interesting decision because the Chief Justice dissented, the majority said “This principle of gender can only evolve but it cannot be cast in stone”. That you must achieve it at any one specific time; it can only evolve. The Chief Justice said “No, you put it in the Constitution, you go and achieve it”, but of course we go with the majority decision.

My piece of advice is the provision that was recapitulated by the chairperson to us, info, is adequate to us and there are many mechanisms, either in Cabinet or elsewhere in ensuring that there is gender balance. Thank you.

MR NSUBUGA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. Still on the composition, as much as I support the idea of gender sensitivity, I am not trying to be sectarian. By experience, when you look at all the members of the boards we have, unlike during the UPC Government, from 1980 to 1985, there is no member of opposition on any board or authority of government. When we are coming up with this kind of a board, can we also consider this issue because this is a very important authority? Can we consider the issue of the opposition? (Interjections) -I challenge anybody to tell me a board where there is a member of opposition; any government board or commission? This is a very important issue; we cannot just let it go –(Interruption)

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to give my colleague information that when you look at the composition of this Board, all members of the Board, save for the chairperson and one person to represent the public, the rest are public servants or technocrats. For that matter they are not allowed by law to engage in partisan politics. You can never know where they belong.

MR NDEZI: Thank you so much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to remind the House that we took an oath; we swore by the obligations of the Constitution. As hon. Byabagambi has mentioned, a third is a constitutional requirement. It is a constitutional duty for us to ensure that a third is adhered to.

It is a constitutional command for me and you to respect that. I remind the House also that Objective VI of the Constitution states: “The state shall ensure gender balance and fair representation of the majority on all the Constitution or any other bodies.”

Going by the explanation given by the Chairperson of the Committee, it is quite clear, we know, what happens when you send a letter to the secretary, who is likely to collapse and who is not likely to collapse. We know the era which you are talking about.

The Attorney-General said gender means men and women but we know, in this country, maybe apart from this Parliament, women continue to suffer marginalisation and denial. Therefore, I would say that this section must be subjected to the constitutional requirement. Meaning, we give the task to the minister to go and ensure that of these people being nominated, the ministries keep gender balance.

If the entire list returned is of men, take it back for amendment. I strongly support the amendment to the effect that a third of members shall be women. We put it in law very clearly this one time. I beg to move.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, if you could permit me move further amendment in line with his proposal, to delete the phrase under section 4, “skills” and then it would read that “The minister shall in appointing members of the Board comply with the Constitution on gender balance” without us necessarily reproducing the word ‘a third’ but if we want a third we could also put there. 

The Constitution is already a marking guide and when this word was balanced what complicated it is having balance of skills and gender. It would have been just on gender balance. It should have been much more clearer - I do not know whether the Attorney-General you - (Interjection) - yes, we can improve on that -

THE CHAIPERSON: Honourable members, the issue of skills is already catered for; the others are ex-officio members by virtue of their professions. The other categories are in Clause 9 (3), where they say knowledge about law, information technology, public administration, immigration management and these things are there.

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I do not know why we are wasting our time. The Constitution has made it very clear to everybody at least a third must be women. If we say must be either gender we are working against the Constitution. 

My fear is that the moment you talk of gender sensitivity, and they see a woman there, they will say “A woman is there already”. Let us have the concession transplanted there to make sure that at least a third are women. We should not waste time; that is a constitutional matter. Thank you very much.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Chair, I appreciate that. However, we must understand what the Constitution is and what constitutionalism is. Constitutionalism simply means the belief in the rule of law. We have policies, regulations in one way or another and that entire package is constitutionalism. 

This principle of gender, the categorisation of a third and I want to challenge anyone because I believe everyone has got a copy of the Constitution. Quote for me a particular article of the Constitution which talks of a third? There is the Local Government Act, National Policy on gender equality; all those are principles of constitutionalism. We cannot quote a particular provision of the Constitution talking of a third. I urge members to go with the guidance of the chairperson, she has guided very well.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, after ascertaining the numbers here we are 113.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.30
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chair, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.31
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” and has passed clauses 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. We stood over clause 3, on interpretation. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.32
THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have done a bit of work, but the House is adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. I am reminding the Whips that the House is in session and the Opposition which is looking emptier today should be here tomorrow. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 6.34 p.m. and was adjourned until Wednesday, 18 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 
