

Thursday, 4 February 2021

Parliament met at 3.46 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca A. Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I do not have much to communicate except to urge that the matters, especially the Bills that were given a second reading yesterday, be handled today so that they get out of the way. 

There are just two matters of national concern. I invite hon. Henry Kibalya to utilise two minutes. 

3.48
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I address myself to an issue concerning migrant workers that are stranded in Saudi Arabia. For long, most of the Ugandans that lost or had their contracts expire moved to the embassy in Riyadh. Unfortunately, the embassy was closed citing lack of resources. Most of the migrant workers that went to Saudi Arabia, whose contracts expired, are stranded there. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development wrote to recruitment companies but they have not responded and they are not showing any signs of intending to respond to retrieve these Ugandans. 

When they were asked to get in touch with their sister companies abroad, the sister companies insisted that these migrant workers must sign a new contract. Unfortunately, the new contract that they want each worker to sign is in a language that they do not understand. They are worried that they might sign a contract that, if not interpreted well, either binds them for life or otherwise. When they requested that those contracts be written in a Ugandan language, those sister companies refused.
Madam Speaker, this letter that I am going to lay on the Table was written on 19 January 2021 from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to all these companies that recruit. Attached to this letter are the names of 43 stranded Ugandans who have been there for more than three months. The embassy is closed and their survival is becoming hard.

Our prayer is that the Government –(Interruption) 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that last week, when we interacted with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, they told us about distressed Ugandans in Kenya. Our question was, Kenya is just a stone throw away from here. Why do we have distressed Ugandans in our neighbouring country? Why can’t we make arrangements, probably by bus to repatriate them?

Therefore, the issue of many Ugandans being distressed is real because we were informed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs that we have so many distressed Ugandans in Kenya. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the information. To be sincere, the Government of Uganda has the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Gender, Labour and Social Development and several others, including the Office of the Prime Minister. Why should stranded Ugandans abroad be crying for help?

Therefore, we request that the Government takes this as a serious matter. We also request your office to intervene and see that these Ugandans are rescued and returned. Thank you. 

Madam Speaker, I lay on the Table the letter, the attached list of Ugandans that are stranded and a company that had wished to intervene. Unfortunately, there was failure in agreement between the recruitment companies and the Government to see whether this company could help Ugandans return. 

THE SPEAKER: What is the content of that letter?

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I can read a small bit of it in one second. The content says, 
“We have been informed by the Ugandan Embassy in Riyadh that the migrant workers on the list attached, whom you externalised, are currently stranded following the closure of the embassy accommodation centre due to resource constraints.

Please, note that Regulation 69(1) of the Employment Recruitment of Uganda Migrant Workers Abroad, Regulation 2005 places an obligation on the recruitment agency to ensure that workers employed overseas are amply protected and their interests and wellbeing are promoted.

Pursuant to the above regulation, you are hereby directed to arrange with your foreign partners and urgently facilitate the repatriation of the affected migrant workers. Please, update the ministry on the measures you have taken in this regard by Monday, 25 January 2021.”

It is signed by Lawrence Egulu for Permanent Secretary. A copy was given to the Executive Director. This letter came from the Ministry of Gender, labour and social development written on 19 January 2021. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we need to get the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to let us know whether, indeed, the instructions he gave have been implemented. I think the companies execute a bond when they are taking these Uganda workers. Anyway, I do not want to go into it but I think the minister should come here. This is an issue of violation of human rights. We need an answer on Tuesday next week.

3.55
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising is on the suspension or closure of activities of Democratic Governance Facility (DGF).

Democratic Governance Facility has played a very big role in many fields. When we heard that the President has written for the suspension or closure of DGF, we were touched because we know what DGF has done as far as fighting corruption and empowering communities is concerned. 

We are aware that there are very many NGOs being funded by DGF. We also know that there are very many Ugandans employed in that entity. If the President comes out to say that “we are closing” or “we want to suspend activities of DGF”, what rings a bell in our minds is that all activities that have been funded like the media institutions –(Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, hon. Sebaggala, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that even political parties, including the NRM have benefitted immensely from funds provided by DGF through IPOD and other related activities. The President is even strangling his own party.

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to the colleague is that even our own committees, like the Government Assurances Committee are benefitting from funding from DGF. It has been implementing some of the activities based on this funding. Government benefits equally from DGF.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, honourable colleagues, for enriching my argument. We cannot stay here without mentioning that the institution of Parliament has friendly partners and we know that one of them is DGF. 

I would not like the President to be misled that maybe DGF has involved itself in politics. We all know that when you look at the funding DGF has been giving to media houses to investigate corruption – we have seen on various newscasts when corruption related issues have come out simply because of the input of DGF.

Therefore, I am requesting, Madam Speaker, that if the directive was from the President and he was misled that DGF is funding activities that are not in line with the development of our country, I think HE the President must find out what activities DGF is doing and how far they have impacted on the people of Uganda rather than saying that they may be funding activities that are harming the NRM Government.

I would not like the President to relate the poor performance of NRM in Buganda to DGF. The stories we are getting are that there are so many activities being funded by DGF that are in the Central Region and that is why NRM performed the way it did. 

We are talking about humanity and how DGF has assisted many Ugandans in as far as fighting corruption and empowering communities are concerned. 

I request, Madam Speaker, that the President should investigate further and let GDF function normally and to empower Ugandans in all fields.

THE SPEAKER: I have not had time to read the issues surrounding DGF but I think that the Government should at some point come and explain to us the circumstances under which DGF has been suspended. I do not know what the Prime Minister has to say.

4.00
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): I think we can take the matter up and come back after investigations. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. We shall expect a statement from the Government on that issue. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE VIOLATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS DURING ELECTIONS AND KIDNAP OF A ONE, SHARRIF KATO, THAT OCCURRED ON SUNDAY 24 JANUARY 2021 FROM KIREKA CENTRAL MARKET.

4.02
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen.Jeje Odongo): Madam Speaker, for me to be heard more clearly, please, permit me to remove my mask.

It is my honour and privilege to share with you, this afternoon, information relating to the matter of kidnaps that was raised on the Floor of this House and referred to me in a letter, AB/186/189/01 of 29 January 2021.

Before I share with you these updates, let me take this opportunity to wish all of you a happy 2021 and also to congratulate you upon the peaceful elections we have just held and indeed, for the triumph you made in those elections.

Whereas the matter at hand was raised by hon. Semujju in relation to the alleged kidnap of a one Mr Sharrif Kato, in order for us to appreciate this matter better, I will also discuss related cases of a similar nature elsewhere in the country.

On 21 January 2021, if you all recollect, I held a press briefing together with the Inspector General of Police (IGP) on the general security in the country.

During this briefing, journalists present in that briefing raised concerns of alleged kidnaps, particularly in Masaka and Kampala Metropolitan area.

On 01 February 2021, the Deputy IGP held another briefing and he too was informed of alleged kidnaps. 

In both cases, the Director of Criminal Investigations Department (CID) of the police was instructed to carry out investigations on all these allegations. 

To bring it closer to your attention, in Mukono, there were allegations that persons were kidnapped and these persons included Mr Musa Male, Mr Muhammed Kamata, Mr Kagimu Musa and Mr Julius Kiberu.

In Masaka, it was alleged that Francis Luganzi, Ruth Nalubega, Kyeyune Nasur, Robert Matovu, Patrick Lubwama, Teddy Naluswata, Sylvia Nakamanya, Hadijja Nassaka, Justine Musiime, Matia Kauma and Christine Nakimbowa had been kidnapped.

On the 29 January2021, as I had mentioned earlier, I received a letter asking me to make a statement on these matters. As investigations on the alleged kidnaps were going on, the following court orders were received:

1. 	On 28 December 2020, a court order was served on the Attorney-General, the Inspector General of Police and the Chief of Defence Forces for the release of a one Nuwabine Daudi. 

2. 	On 6 January 2021, a court order was served on the Attorney-General, Inspector General of Police and the Commandant Special Investigations Department of the Police for the release of Nuwabine Daudi, Lumu Ronald, Kabaale Bernard, Mugarura Ronald and Shafik.

3. 	On 19 January 2021,another order was served on the Attorney-General, the Inspector General of Police, the Chief of Defence Forces, the Special Forces Command, Director of Internal Security Organisation for the release of Male Musa, Kamata Muhammad, Kagimu Musa and Kiberu Julius.

Findings so far

Nuwabine Daudi allegedly went missing on the 19th of November, 2020 at Kawempe. This alleged kidnap was reported by Babigumira Denis, the father of Nuwabine Daudi. He made this report to Kawempe Police Station and the report was recorded as SDREF: 76/27/11/2020.

Mr Babigumira Denis also filed a miscellaneous cause No.368/2020/Nuwabine Daudi vs Attorney-General. As we stand now, investigations are continuing to establish the whereabouts of Nuwabine Daudi.

There is a matter of the alleged kidnap of Lumu Ronald, Kabaale Bernard, Mugarura Ronald and Shafik. I would like to state that the above were not kidnapped. They were arrested for aiding and abetting terrorism. They were logged as SID GEF196/2020. Upon arrest, these suspects were interviewed, they recorded statements and on the 6th of January this year, they were all released on police bond. 

It is alleged that a one Kato Sharif was kidnapped from Kireka Central Market on the 24th of January 2021. The investigating team, upon receipt of this information, went to Kireka Central Market, met the Chairman of the Market, a one Mr Katende Stephen. The chairperson revealed that the person in question was not called Kato Sharif but Kasozi Sharif. We are continuing to investigate the whereabouts of that Kasozi Sharif.

Further, there was a matter of the alleged kidnap of eight male victims from Mukono District. It is alleged that on 23 December 2020 at about 2.00am. at Katogo Village, Nama Subcounty, Mukono District, seven men putting on uniform similar to that worn by the army and a civilian, traveling in a numberless vehicle, stormed this area and kidnapped Fred Kamya, Sulite Kiwanuka, Juma Mukasa, Joseph Kyakuwa, Isma Ssenkubuge, Stephen Ntulume and Julius Kiberu. This matter was recorded at Mukono Police Station as CRB141/2021.

On the 24th of December last year at about 7.00 a.m., Fred Kiwanuka was found allegedly tortured and abandoned at Busunju Village in Kakiri. The others I have mentioned above have not yet been seen and police investigations are still going on to follow up this matter. 

The alleged kidnap of Mohammad Kamata has been recorded at Mukono as SD106/28/01/2021. It is alleged that on the 23rd of December last year, at about 2.00a.m. at Walusimbi Village, Nama Subcounty, Mukono District, a group of seven men dressed in military uniform and one in civilian attire attacked the village and arrested Mohammed Kamata from his house. Mukono police is still following this matter.

There is the alleged kidnap of John Bosco Sserunkuma on 3rd December last year from Nansana, and the abduction of Babirye Rita, Ali Ssebaduka, Emma Kibirige, Sula Muyanja, Twaibu Ddumba, all allegedly abducted from a carpentry workshop in Bwaise on 18 November 2020. We are continuing to investigate this matter.

In summary, I would like to state that so far, we have 44 cases of alleged kidnap. Seven of these - that is, the one of Sulaiman Muyanja, Ssebaduka Ali Bogere, Twaibu Ddumba, Kibirige Emma, Sharif Jjunju, Jane Kakai and Rita Babirye -were not kidnapped. They were arrested and charged and have been bailed.

The other four - Ronald Lumu, Bernard Kabaale, Ronald Mugarura and Shafik - were not kidnapped but arrested. Rogers Galiwango, allegedly kidnapped from Kyebando with 10 others, resurfaced three days later. So, they are no longer recorded as missing persons.

Fred Kiwanuka was allegedly abandoned and we are yet to take a statement from him to determine how he disappeared from Mukono and appeared in Busunju.

From this, therefore, 31 cases are yet to be traced and these 31 are summarised as follows; 11 from Kyotera, nine from Kyebando in Nansana, one from Bwaise, seven from Mukono, one from Kireka and one from Mukono. Those are the 31 we have not yet been able to account for from the 44, who had been reported as kidnapped.

Madam Speaker, I have tried to give an update on the continuous incidents of alleged kidnap. As I have indicated, investigations are ongoing and I undertake to give progress of these investigations with time, as more information is obtained.

I would also like to take this opportunity to appeal to you, honourable colleagues and the public in general, to, please, report any alleged incident of kidnap to the police. I can guarantee that we will undertake to investigate each and every one of the reported incidents and we will provide information as and when we get it.
Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to give this update on the matter raised on the Floor of this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Any supplementary, hon. Ssemujju? 

4.18
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim SsemujjuNganda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. JejeOdongo, I want to thank you. Today, the tone and content of your address sounds more responsible than the press conference.

I am only frightened that the Minister of Internal Affairs confirms to Parliament that people are missing and a month later, he does not know where they are. 

In the case of Sharif from Kireka, he was kidnapped in broad daylight. It is not like in the case of Asuman Ssemakula, one of the senior FDC members, where they went and broke into his house. They drove, parked at the market, put him on handcuffs and drove away.

I would like to find out from the Minister of Internal Affairs. When Zebra was killed in Kawempe, police said they had seen that vehicle called “drone” going to Kyebando and somewhere eventually – but that is how far they went.

What is the use of these cameras that you have, Gen. Jeje Odongo? In Kireka, which we are talking about, there are more than 10 cameras, almost every after a few metres. What is the use of these cameras? Are the kidnappers so powerful that you are even frightened to follow them up? 

Like that case of Zebra who was killed, police said; “On our cameras, you have seen the “drone” going this side and that side – “ –(Interruption)

MS AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Ssemujju for allowing me to give information. Honourable minister, I would like to bring information, in addition to what hon. Ssemujju has mentioned, in regard to the cameras that we have.

I remember it was in November when there were gun shootings in Kampala. I painfully lost a relative; a young boy of 17 in Kawempe. He was shot by the police. I raised that issue for your attention but it was not answered. 

Being a citizen of this country, I thought that these cameras would be very helpful to the nation, in regard to following up culprits. This boy was shot by the police and up to today, it is silent.

When hon. Ssemujju talks about the cameras, I think we have installed them as a decoration. They are not working in the interest of the people.

The information I would like to give you, honourable minister, is that despite the fact that there were violations during the elections – I can confirm that in the different parts and it may not necessarily be on the NRM or the Opposition side but for all Ugandans. I would like to say that there were very many things that happened in this country. Many killings happened and no one came out to save even the name of Government by clarifying. 

This young boy of 17 was all over social media. He was a boy I knew passionately. He was a very good young boy but he was killed. The mother sent him to go and load airtime from a nearby town and he was shot by the police. Everyone saw this but nothing was mentioned about him.

As the Minister of Internal Affairs, my senior and father – I respect you and you know that. I think some of these people should be brought to book because even as we sit here today and labour to talk for the people, my heart yearns and cries for that 17 year old boy. This boy was in Senior Three. To this day, there is no statement.

To make matters worse, the mother of that boy is even an NRM supporter. She is a councillor for the disabled in Kawempe, representing NRM. Up to today, she is yearning. It is actually NUP – (interjections) - what is NUP in full? – that buried this to show how ungrateful –

The information I am giving you, hon. Ssemujju and the House, is in regard to how effective these cameras are when they are everywhere in Kampala, in terms of securing and tracing those people who commit crime and those who are killed anyhow and we do not get the details of their death.

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, finally, on the issue of the cameras, the minister can answer.

After the death of Zebra the boxer, the President said he had deployed troops that had gained experience while fighting Al Shabaab. He said he had also deployed troops that had gained experience fighting ADF. In the particular death of Zebra, he said they killed him because they were in a war formation.

Can the minister help us understand? For many of these cases, either it is Joint Anti-Terrorism Team, Chieftaincy of Military Intelligence (CMI) or military. Sometimes, you do not know which part of security; whether Special Forces Command (SFC) or whether the war situation, as declared by the President, has ended. I can understand the limitation of your ministry and police when people are being kidnapped by people with training from Al Shabaab and fighting here in the mountains. 

I called the police spokesperson for Kampala, Patrick Onyango, and told him I have two ladies at my residence, whose husbands who worked in Owino Market were kidnapped. He advised me to send them to his office. 

At every police station I have visited in my constituency, there is an office of CMI. This CMI has already taken over police. You have mingled; you do not know whether you are dealing with the military or CMI. 

In one of the cases, Madam Speaker – I am sorry I am taking more time than I thought I would – one of the children of the late Maj. Kiggundu recorded soldiers at a polling station in one of the elections. They arrested the brother and when the sister complained, they also took her and immediately took them to court martial and sent them to Kitalya.

I am told that the reason you are investigating and cannot trace some of these people is because they have already been killed. That is why you cannot locate them and you will continue reporting that there are investigations into their whereabouts.

Were they kidnapped by Kenyans? For you are a whole General of the military heading police. We thought police should benefit from your experience as a General of the military and yet, you cannot get people – (Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: The minister should tell us and Ugandans - We are seeing many traffic roadblocks almost everywhere. You can see many numberless vehicles moving unstopped “To Whom It May Concern.” They are not even taking responsibility of – Many vehicles including some of the taxis have no number plates. You cannot even identify who is in them because they are tinted. 

Is there no way the minister can guide on who should have a tinted vehicle? They all have completely dark windows and they have no number plates. Therefore, how are we going to avoid the kidnaps? Thank you. 

4.27
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (Jeema, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the minister, Al Hajji Abubaker Jeje Odongo for the statement. I have used his title, “Al Hajji” deliberately. 

I think the concern that was raised in Parliament was about the violation of human rights. Unfortunately, the minister is evading that crucial issue of human rights violation. We were concerned at the manner in which people were being arrested and the manner, which is contrary to the Constitution. The Constitution is very clear on the mode and manner of arrest. 

If security officers come to arrest you, the first thing they have to do is to identify themselves. This is not happening. Secondly, they must inform you in the language you understand why you are being arrested. This is not happening. Thirdly, they must give you an opportunity to inform your lawyer, relatives and next of kin. This is not happening. 

Fourthly, you should be taken to a gazetted detention facility. This is not happening. Fifthly, you must not be detained beyond 48 hours. This is not happening.

That is why the public is using the word “kidnapped.” It is a very strong word. Honourable minister, you should be concerned. The reason people are saying Security is kidnapping Ugandans is because the mode of arrest is completely against the Constitution. That is where the focus should be. 

Can Parliament demand that henceforth, nobody should be arrested unconstitutionally? Even the people you are saying were later released and they were not kidnapped were actually illegally arrested. It is not that police has a right to arrest anybody anyhow. The arrest must follow the law and that is why Ugandans are concerned at the manner in which people are being arrested. 

Finally, in this country, we have Local Council Defence Secretaries everywhere. Long ago, when there was still some sanity in the country, before anybody would be arrested, there would be courtesy to inform the Secretary for Defence for the village. Even the Chairperson LC1 would be informed. It is not happening anymore. That is why you go to the Secretary for Defence to inquire the whereabouts of a person and nobody knows. Sometimes, people are arrested and even the DPCs are not informed. Therefore, you go and harass a DPC over somebody who has been arrested and there is no information. I think that is what the minister should be addressing about the mode and manner of arrest. Thank you.

4.30
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you look at the minister’s statement, it leaves a lot to be desired. We have talked about kidnaps since we began the election process. There are many Ugandans that have been kidnapped. 

Madam Speaker, you directed the Committee on Human Rights to investigate all related human rights abuses during the election period. Indeed, we have started on that work. Up to now, we are getting many Ugandans calling to tell us that men in military uniforms came at midnight or during the day and took their husbands, wives and children. 

We cannot say that kidnaps ended during the election period. Up to now, there is some handpicks in various parts of the country. I am surprised when the minister says that since November, they have 38 or 40 people that they are still investigating. The relatives of these people are suffering. It could be okay when I am taken that my relatives know that I am at CPS or Kitalya. Many of these relatives, however, do not know where their people are. 

Right now, if we go to various police cells, they are full. Every day, they are taking youths. In fact, the best word to use is kidnapping. They are kidnapping and taking youths to various police cells. Getting someone out from those cells need a lot of money. 

I believe that the Ministry of Internal Affairs, at times, is not in control as it is for police. When you go to police, they say, “Our work is to protect someone who has been brought here but we do not know why he was brought and we do not have the powers to even give a Police Bond unless we have been given that permission by someone above us.”

As I wind up, I believe that the issue of human rights abuses is of paramount importance. Whether you are in NRM or in the Opposition, when you are abusing human rights of Ugandans, it touches all of us because an abuse to one Ugandan is an abuse to every Ugandan. Therefore, we would request the Minister of Internal Affairs – I do not know whether they coordinate with Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Security. It seems each security agency is doing its own things in its own way. 

If we ask the minister and he tells us that he does not know, and instead, he refers us to the military, many Ugandans out there will continue living in fear because of the uncoordinated kidnap of Ugandans. Thank you very much. 

4.35
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the minister to clarify - because I did not get it in his statement – the issue of the killing of Zebra, the boxer. The President admitted on television that he was killed by the security. Today, I met a widow called Mercy Kankuzi. She is wondering why, after the President had admitted to the country live on television, those known people have not been arrested. 

Maybe, since the President is going to address the nation today, the Prime Minister should tell the President’s press secretary to say something, because the widow is in pain. They have not yet heard anything, despite the President admitting that he was killed by security officers who are now known.

The Minister of Internal Affairs could also clarify on the grapevine information alleging that the Criminal Investigations Department of Police and the Inspector General of Police handed the investigation report to the President. The President should, therefore, tell the country what happened. Maybe the minister can also confirm whether it is true that the investigations were concluded.

The widow is really in pain and wondering why the people whom the President said he knows have not been apprehended and brought to book and thereof justice dispensed. Zebra has been denied justice. That is the clarification I would like to seek. The Prime Minister or the Minister of Internal Affairs can inform the President, so that the nation can know how far the issue has been handled since he made it known. Thank you.

4.37
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to first thank the minister for the statement. We have seen situations where ministers have been asked to bring statements to the House and they take so long. However, I would like to appreciate the honourable minister for the work that he has done.

I have comments to make specifically regarding the issue of the security cameras. I am not sure under which docket these security cameras are; they are either under the Ministry of Internal Affairs or the Ministry of Information and Communication Technology (ICT). I would like to demand that Government gives this House a statement on the functionality and reliability of these security cameras. I would like to believe that we spent a lot of money as a country on putting these security cameras in place. 

I have heard people cry about rigging of elections at polling stations; if these cameras were so reliable, they should be able even to go a long a way in detecting who rigged the elections and how. People would be able to see somebody ticking or kicking somebody because they want to take charge of the ballot papers -(Interjection)- Yes, at close and far range. So, how reliable are these security cameras? Madam Speaker, we are demanding for a statement through your Chair. Let the relevant ministry bring a statement to this House showing us, with evidence, the functionality and reliability of these cameras.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I know it is very difficult to run a state. Sometimes we have hardcore criminals, but even amidst such challenges all of us must stay under the law. If you allow the judicial process to take its course, we shall all live in harmony.

It is very painful for a family to lose somebody to a kidnapper and they do not know exactly what has happened. Therefore, I would like to ask that we all abide with the law.

Some of these families have lost people to kidnaps and these people who have gone missing are breadwinners in their homes. Who is looking after these families? Who is paying fees? Who is doing a, b, c, d? What is Government doing to support such families? Some of them probably have been taken–(Interruption) 

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to thank the minister once more. We believe that you are going to help us sort out these problems, using your experience. I thank you.

4.40
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. Actually, he has given us a lot more information than I expected. The minister is aware of the details of the numbers of people kidnapped or arrested, which means that there is some work going on.

Madam Speaker, my concern is that when people go missing, the lives of the people are threatened. You and I represent our people in this Parliament. Today, it is happening mainly in one region - in the central Uganda - and it is sending panic in the country. After central Uganda, which region is next? We are, therefore, a bit scared, particularly me who comes from Dokolo in the north. I am very scared as to why these kidnaps and arrests are taking place in Buganda. I am worried that after Buganda, the next region could be the north and probably starting from Dokolo. I am very worried about that.

Can the minister therefore, in the process of replying, tell us why these arrests are taking place in Buganda? We believe we are a united country in every way. We would not like a situation where people think the Baganda are different from the rest of the country. You touch a Muganda, you would have touched a Langi, Itesot or a Mukiga. Therefore, we would like to find out why our brothers and sisters in Buganda are being attacked, arrested and kidnapped and the rest of the country is quiet. 

Madam Speaker, I feel that the statement of the minister should be holistic. I have heard from the media that the Deputy Inspector General of Police has given instructions to the intelligence agencies to give a response urgently about the missing persons. Now, if this minister is the one presiding over the same ministry and his technocrats are asking themselves as to who is responsible for these arrests or where these people are, then we are wondering whether we have called the right minister to give this statement. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I would like you to enlighten us. In the early days of the administration of the present Inspector General of Police, there was supposed to be or there was a census of the guns in this country, I think with a view of identifying those who have guns and withdrawing them from the wrong hands. However, we are concerned because we see people on the streets without uniform, unidentified but armed, in the open walking and life goes on. We would like to know who they are and who can account for their guns. Thank you, minister.

4.44
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Jeje Odongo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the supplementary questions they have raised. 

First of all, let me respond to the very last question which you asked, Madam Speaker. You indicated a concern about the issue of guns out there and our inability to be able to identify them, yet according to what you have said, you have heard that there was an attempt to record all the guns in the country.

First of all, the exercise on fingerprinting of guns - that is the process of identifying guns - has been going on. We have been able to do that for all vehicles in police possession. We now know police guns and to whom they belong. If one is used to commit a crime, we are able to match the cartridge to a gun. If it were from the police stores, we would be able to say, “It was this gun”. We can then be able to do the following actions of identifying the individual responsible. We have done that with the UPDF and also the individuals who have licensed guns.

You will appreciate the fact that there are illegal guns still out there and we have not been able to fingerprint them. It is still an on-going exercise and we hope we will be able to identify and pick as many of those illegal guns as we can. However, it is true that there are still illegal guns, which have not been fingerprinted.

There was a concern as to where next after Buganda. I would like to clearly assure the honourable member that Buganda is not being targeted. You will remember that in the history of this Parliament, in about 2017, we had a wave of women murders. It was in a particular area of this country.

The point I am making is that criminality tends to move in a wave and cycles and we must take note of that. We will be dealing with it in that manner. Therefore, it is not intended. The wave simply happens to be in a particular place.

Hon. Aogon, hon. Amongin and indeed, hon. Ssemujju pointed out the question of how useful the CCTV cameras are. Are they reliable or are they just - I believe they call them “scarecrows”?

I would like to take this opportunity to inform you that, indeed, the cameras are functioning and are doing a job they were designed for. However, you must also note that not the whole country has been covered. You have just come back from the countryside and you will notice that we are continuing to grow into Mbarara, Soroti, Lira, Gulu and West Nile. We are in the process of linking all these to the central command centre.

It is also important to note that the cameras do not cover a 100 per cent of the entire country. Even in Kampala where they are now functional, there are still gaps. We ought to remember that some of these gaps may be taken advantage of.

Finally, in relation to cameras, it may not be prudent for me to share publicly all the capabilities, weaknesses and problems related to these equipment because the bad elements could easily take advantage of this. However, indeed, I would welcome the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs to have an opportunity to come to the command centre in Naguru and have an opportunity to see what goes on in that place, in relation to the functioning of the CCTV cameras.

Hon. Ssemujju pointed out – and I would like to differ from him a little. You said that we are unable to produce the individuals I have mentioned because they may already be dead. I would not like to go that far. I have not yet concluded investigations and I cannot, therefore, categorically share that view.

Secondly, you also wondered why it is taking long to come to the conclusion of these investigations. Many of these happened in November and some in December 2020 but you will also appreciate that during that same period, there were very many other activities that could have taken a lot of attention away from specifically addressing these issues.

Secondly, I would like you to remember that investigations are a painstaking and time-consuming exercise. It would be wrong for us to hurry through for the sake of wanting to respond to public demand. We must recognise that, do a meticulous job and be able to come to the conclusion of this matter – (Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, these matters are specific. The Kireka that I am talking about has more than three cameras at the market. Now, you are saying cameras have not reached Lira; I am talking about where they are.

Secondly, we are talking about lives. You cannot say that you will come at leisure next year to say, “These people are here.” I am talking about human lives; where are they?

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The Minister of Internal Affairs who is responding to these questions is not an ordinary person; he is a military man. He knows what we mean when we talk about guns.

When these people of the fourth estate met him, they even showed him – even at your home, honourable minister, you have been watching vehicles having civilians carrying guns to the extent of carrying revolvers. You know what is meant by a revolver, an AK47, an SMG and those categories of guns.

When we are asking these questions – actually, I was expecting you to give us a detailed answer that you have even arrested those people who have been carrying guns in “drones” while wearing civilian attire, that have been shown to you by the press. That could give us a better answer than what you are telling Parliament.

Gen. Jeje Odongo is an Army General. He knows who is supposed to guard him. He is not a police officer. He is supposed to be guarded by an army officer. However, now, we know that military police are guarding civilians and yet, they are supposed to arrest you as a General.

Have you taken interest in identifying these vehicles, which have been baptised as “drones” in public? Faces are shown holding guns.

GEN. ODONGO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to hon. Ssewungu’s concern along with those that were raised by the honourable member from Mukono in relation to the numberless tinted vehicles.

It is true that many of the incidents I have quoted today were perpetrated by these vehicles. We have taken interest, arrested some of the individuals in these vehicles and confiscated their arms and they are in our custody. If you wanted, I could give you names later on but I did not come with the details. For example, in Mukono, there was such an incident and the people involved were arrested and are in our custody.

I would also like to respond to the question raised by hon. Basalirwa. He pointed out the manner and mode of arrest that seemed to contravene human rights. 

I would like to state that it is true that in some instances, there is overzealousness on the part of the soldiers carrying out these acts. We have stated severally that each police officer has a book that indicates the standard operating procedures on this matter. Where an officer falls short, he is individually liable. Many of these officers have appeared in the Police Standards Unit for disciplinary actions for actions they have perpetrated. Therefore, in some cases, the officers have overstepped but they have had to answer individually. 

Finally, let me once again thank you and request that this matter is one that concerns all of us. Let us continue to cooperate. If you think a police officer you have reported to is not taking action, I will be very glad if you reported to me directly. I would take the matter up and we will try and find a solution. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for responding to the concerns of the population.  Let us go to item 3 (ii) 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CONTINUED PROHIBITION OF UGANDA DAIRY PRODUCTS TO ACCESS THE KENYAN MARKET

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of East African Affairs is not here. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the procedural matter I am raising is in relation to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. Last year, I raised a matter here about the Mineral Protection Unit where we saw all the police officers coming from one tribe. 

There were many issues on this Mineral Protection Unit. The Minister for Energy and Minerals, hon. Sarah Opendi, has never come back here to clarify this matter but there are many issues coming out.

The Minister of State for Education and Sports was here and I raised the matter on the opening of schools but he told me that he had brought a report. However, I do not see him and we do not know what is happening to our children. I expect the same. 

I do not know whether it would be procedurally right to know when the minister will come back to tell us about the Mineral Protection Unit, which has only one tribe running minerals and swindling them heavily through the same team. (Interjections) I do even know – he is on record. It is one tribe. Can I mention it? I said it here and even read the names; they are all from Western Uganda in Ankole. 

I raised this matter here and the minister was supposed to come and explain it. They have caused havoc. How do they go there? We need to get an answer. Who deployed them? They are all from Ankole and are Banyankole. (Interjections) No, I am not one of them. The Speaker knows where I come from and she knows all my names. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday, we concluded debate on the issues of the mining complex in Buhweju and Mubende. We ruled that the minister will come on Tuesday, 9 February, 2021 to respond to the issues raised in those reports. She is also going to explain the composition of the mining police. We expect you here on Tuesday to respond to those issues. Let us go to the next item. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014 
THE SPEAKER: Are the commissioners here? Commissioner Bahati, please, come and assist us. 

5.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2014 for the following local Governments:

Kabwoya Sub-county, Hoima District
Central Division, Kasese Municipal Council 
Ruteete Sub-county, Kabarole District 
Cegere Sub-county, Apac District 
Apac Sub-county, Apac District 
Harugali Sub-county, Bundibugyo District 
Soroti Sub-county, Soroti District 
Aboke Sub-county, Kole District 
Ayer Sub-county, Kole District 
Bala Sub-county, Kole District 
Ngora Sub-county, Ngora District 
Bukedea Sub-county, Bukedea District
Loroo Sub-county, Amudat District 
Osukuru Sub-county, Tororo District 
Kumi Sub-county, Kumi District 
Atutur Sub-county, Kumi District 
Nyero Subcounty, Kumi District 
Kakoro Sub-county, Pallisa District 
Nyamwamba Division, Kasese Municipal Council 
Orum Sub-county, Otuke District
Bulembia Division, Kasese Municipal Council 

I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, all of those are sent to the Committee on Public Accounts(Local Government) for perusal and report back. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES ON THE FLOODING OF BULAMBULI, NAKAPIRIPIRIT AND BUKEDEA DISTRICTS RESULTING FROM ARC MINING OF LIMESTONE

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present the report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the flooding in Bulambuli, Nakapiripirit and Bukedea Districts resulting from mining operations in the Elgon area.

On 30 October 2019, in a matter of national importance, hon. Alex Burundo of Bulambuli County raised a concern. He said that due to mining activities in Nabongo Sub-county, Bulambuli District, seven sub counties in Bulambuli District and parts of Nakapiripirit and Bukedea districts were being flooded. This was due to mining activities of Kampala Cement and Hima Cement factories. 

He prayed that the committee of Environment and Natural Resources visits the area and assesses the damage caused by the two companies and also assesses what can be done for the people that have been affected. 

The House directed the committee to undertake this work but you also directed that the Minister of Disaster Preparedness arranges some support for that area. I will be talking about that as I conclude. 

We visited and inspected the flooded sites in Bulambuli District. We also inspected sites in Kapchorwa District. However, we were unable to reach some sites because of the flooding in the area. The area was inaccessible at the time. The site for Simba Cement was also inaccessible. 

When we got to a site, which was under development by Simba Cement, several houses located at the periphery of the site were flooded and they were uninhabitable. People could not stay in these houses.

The gardens on a large swathe of the area of Nabongo Sub-county had been abandoned because of the floods. Therefore, people had nowhere to grow crops and actually, many had migrated from this area, trying to find somewhere to stay.

We also noted cracks on the walls of several houses due to use of explosives by the mining company.

The community near the site operated by Tororo Cement had several pit latrines, which had caved in. A very sad thing here is that the floods from the mountain, where the mining was taking place, together with the faecal matter from the latrines that had caved in had all interwoven and were flooding the area.

Some roads in Nabongo Sub-county were flooded and impassable. We also noted that along the Mbale-Moroto Road, several structures, including toilets, had been flooded to form large pools of water, which was hazardous and could potentially lead to the spread of waterborne diseases like cholera and dysentery.

There was also the threat of increased breeding grounds for mosquitoes due to large ponds of stagnant water. There was evidence that stagnant water along the newly constructed Mbale-Moroto road would eventually lead to damage if not properly managed.

The community around the Tororo Cement quarry reported increased cases – this was well out of the ordinary because it is not what we expected to hear – of defilement of girls by the employees of the mining companies.

What is the cause of the flooding? We noted that a number of mining companies were operating in the area - this is shown in table 1 on page 5 – and this has increased the vulnerability of the people in the area. Companies with mining leases in Kapchorwa were mining pozzolana, which is used for cement. 

Some of the flooded areas such as Bwikhonge and Nabongo are part of the Kyoga catchment area and are poorly drained. This is something to bear in mind - they are poorly drained and this adds to their vulnerability. Also, the area is traversed by a number of rivers like River Cheptui, River Chebonet, River Nabongo and River Sipi.

I will go to page 7, point 4.2.1. The Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development was keen on blaming this flooding on heavy rains experienced in the area. National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) also reported that the area is prone to flooding. However, human activities like agriculture, road construction and urbanisation had also made a large contribution to this flooding.

On page 11, the committee concluded that although the area is susceptible to flooding, there was a link between the flooding and the mining activities in the area. Against this, we make several recommendations.

Probably, some of these would have been avoided if good practices were being observed. However, there were problems like lack of regular inspection of the activities in the mining sites. Some companies have been mining for the last 15 years. We asked the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for reports for the last five years. Unfortunately, they were unable to provide them. Instead, they gave us reports for three years, which many members of the committee did not find satisfactory. There were fears that they had purposely been manufactured for purposes of fulfilling what had been required. 

The committee also noted laxity in monitoring operations of licences after issuance of the environmental social impact assessment certificates and the mining leases.

There was also a report of no funding being allocated to support some of the activities, which is leading to environmental degradation, revenue loss and underutilisation of resources.

There was a problem of lack of inspectors. We report this on page 15. In the ministerial policy statement of 2019/2020, it showed a number of key positions vacant. 

There was also lack of environmental monitoring plans. Environmental monitoring plans offer an indication of what is going to be done and how that is going to be regulated. In many instances, these were lacking or if there, they were not being followed.

There were inconsistencies in the inspection report. One very interesting example - there was monitoring of Tororo Cement on 4 July 2018 but they were given notice of inspection for purposes of notifying them of the findings they had discovered when they did the inspection dated 6 July 2018. Because of this, we were concern as to how this is actually being conducted. 

There were also problems with the manner of operations at mining sites. There was a problem with the method of quarrying for pozzolana stones. Several machines were being used to remove the overburden, which is in open pit mining – removing the top soil and the dust from the surface of the mine and then drilling, and depending on the hardness of the rock, using blasting machines and getting to the rock they want to get to. This is what was causing the caving in of toilets.

There was also a problem of restoration. After the mining, the area was not being restored. There was also insufficiency in mining plans. Some plans do not indicate the actual activities to be undertaken and they generally talk in very generalised terms about mining in Uganda. 

There was also the breach of mining conditions. Mining conditions are intended to offer safety - some protection. There is anticipation of some hazards and these hazards are managed by the conditions of mining that are given to the entity. In many cases, those were not being followed. 

Very interestingly, there was also lack of record on the production volumes. There were no inspectors from Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development at the mining site and no Uganda Revenue Authority officials. Obviously, this had a direct bearing on how much is being mined and how much royalty they were paying affecting the revenue that we may be generating from this.

The ministry reported good corporate social responsibility by many of these mining companies. They told us that they had drilled boreholes, built health centres, offered scholarships, employment and helped with skills transfer but unfortunately, this was in Kapchorwa.

The area of Bulambuli, which was mostly affected had not witnessed any of these corporate social responsibility activities. All these has had an impact on the flooding in the area.

Against that background and each of these areas, we make recommendation in the report, which runs through pages 11 and 12, page, 14, 15 and several other pages.

I have tried to summarise this, on the 30th October, 2019 when hon. Bulondo presented this petition you directed; “Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees is required to go and assist the people of Bulambuli who have been affected by the flooding.”

About two years later, the minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees has not moved anywhere near this sight. It seems they took it just for fun. You may like to direct this again because the people there are still suffering.
Secondly, the place at the moment is not flooded because it is a dry season. However, lives there are threatened and they are praying for when the rains start again but what we find very interesting is that this matter has been brought to the attention of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development but they have not offered any intervention.

The ministry may correct me if I am wrong but as of this morning, the people of Bulambuli have not witnessed any intervention from the ministry, not even talking to these companies under their good corporate social responsibility to see if they can dig trenches to divert this water or offer good drainage for this, which is a hazard in the area.

On that note, I thank you for allowing us this time to present our report and I beg to lay the minutes of the meetings and other submissions that we had in the process of the report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, Mr chairperson and members of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources for this report. I must commend your committee for producing several reports on your sector but more importantly, the fact that you have identified policy vacuums that the Government needs to address. Thank you very much.
Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum members of Parliament and you can now make your comments.

5.20
MS RUKIYA	CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you upon success in the recent elections. As a member from Kapchorwa District, since the Eighth Parliament, I raised this issue of the mining area.

The area where mining is taking place is holding water from Mt Elgon and the moment you reach where the water table is, it just gashes out.

We have seen this from the roads that they have been working on in Kapchorwa. The machines work shortly and the water is out. You can go and see for yourself. If mining continues in that area, then we may have no road to Moroto and Bulambuli. We may use a boat between Kapchorwa and Mbale. 

It is a very serious matter because Mt Elgon is an area that does not need to be tampered with as that is where all the water comes from.

When these people use strong machines, the rock is shaken and the particles open up and so, whatever water comes on top, it goes underground and comes up. Even when Tororo Cement touches the water table, it is going to be very serious.

When you are at Tororo area where Tororo Cement is mining, where our chairperson and the team did not reach, the opposite side has an S corner where we last time had the UPDF accident. That is where those people are mining and as they go deeper, the other side will break and block the road. It is a very dangerous issue.

I know we need minerals, money but there are certain areas of our country that need not to be tampered with especially that area of Kapchorwa District and Mt Elgon. Let us spare them.

MR AOGON: Thank you, honourable colleague, for the opportunity. It is not only Bulambuli that is being affected by this mining when the water comes down. Even us in Kumi on lake Bisina. You are aware that we have a ferry connecting Kumi to Toroma, Katakwi but recently, it could not operate because of too much water.

Scientifically, if you study, you might connect this water to the mining. It is a bigger problem than what we think here.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Madam Speaker, we also have a live example on the border side of Kenya and Uganda. They harvested some material and when it reached the water table, the whole thing was covered up. It is very poisonous.

I have a fear that even in this area of Kapchorwa where Tororo Cement is harvesting lime from, the moment water gashes out, it will be very dangerous for this country and for the people of Kapchorwa.

Secondly, the health centres they were talking about were there before. These were put up by Government. None of those companies have done anything. Even the bridge that is next to Tororo Cement Industry, people just contributed some money to put timber and no heavy vehicle can pass there. When we talk about social responsibility by these people, there is nothing completely that we see, as Kapchorwa District, that we have benefited from this. We see danger ahead of us because even when Tororo Cement was told to plant some trees, they only planted a few. 

When the wind comes – you have been hearing us complaining about the wind blowing off roofs of people’s houses. This is because that side has no trees. These people cleared all the trees and planted none. So, in those areas, people have lost houses and still, nobody has come in to support the people.

Madam Speaker, it is a very serious matter. Just as our committee chairperson has said, it is something that you should take seriously. 

I take this opportunity to thank the committee for the commitment they exhibited because the time was very rough. There was a lot of rain but they tried to reach some of the places. We thank you and I hope action will be taken. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

5.26
MR STEPHEN BIRAHWA MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you very much, Madam –

THE SPEAKER: Three minutes, please, and no national dialogue. (Laughter)

MR BIRAHWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is clear that national dialogue is long overdue. You saw the army general struggling to explain the challenges. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee for the swift response to the floods, particularly, in the mineral sector. However, I would like to use this opportunity to plead that the Prime Minister does the same for the floods in other places that have affected us.

Madam Speaker, I came to you with the people of Ntoroko, hon. Pacutho of Pakwach - I would like to request that next week, the Prime Minister’s Office and related ministries come and report about our dire need of about 50 square miles under water in Buliisa in particular.

Relatedly, the issues of inter-ministerial collaboration, inter-agency coordination and multi-sectoral cross pollination are increasingly becoming a problem. The Mining Act, as it is, is not tight enough to deal with hydrology issues, which are under the water sector. 

I am in a place where we are going in another grey area; the oil and gas, where oil production is going to depend on water abstraction. However, Government has not invested in the studies related to water yet, it is a trans-boundary water resource, which may require a permit from the Nile Basin.

I am bringing this aware that just on Tuesday, Maama Mabira, the Minister of State for Water and Environment said she has Environmental Police, which are a challenge and some have overstayed. Hon. Ssewungu has just reported that it seems some relatives, friends and in-laws are running the mineral police.

These are big challenges and as my sister has just mentioned, we talked here on Tuesday about the relationship between surface water and ground water. On the foot of all hilly areas, there is gravity water. The moment you mine under any hilly area, you are bound to get water. Even when you drill these simple boreholes, you will find water, 15 or 12 metres down. This technology is very well known by my Bazzukulu in Busoga.

This means that apart from these people flooding and showing the problem, there is already pollution of underground water going on; the chemicals being used in the minerals. Therefore, NEMA alone, working under the Mining Act and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development is not enough to guarantee the safety of water. Tomorrow, you will even find when this water finally leaves that gulley, it will end up in the lake or the Nile and the Nile Perch, which the natives of Albertine eat, is dead, the other fish species are dying because the water quality is very poor. 

It is quite a grey area, Madam Speaker and I would like to request that since the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources is in charge of both water and minerals, it should really do much more and we push Government to save the future of this country. Otherwise, anything to do with water quality affects safe drinking water. It affects the aquatic life; it affects all these fisheries sector and tomorrow, it could also affect the Agricultural Sector. I think this area needs very serious attention. We are worried.

We are very happy with oil roads but we are concerned. We want to see what studies were made, regarding the rift valley water points. You sometimes find a gulley of almost 20 metres has cut down the escarpment. We need the road but have we taken enough studies, as far as the effect of this cliff we are cutting and as far as the water is concerned?

I thank the committee for this presentation but I would like to end by requesting the Prime Minister to move on the issue of inter-agency collaboration, multi-sectoral collaboration and inter-ministerial oversight on some of these things. I thank you very much.

5.31
MS JUSTINE KHAINZA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the good report. It is unfortunate that the area he mentioned, particularly Bunambutye in Bulambuli, is where the people displaced by landslides from the Elgon sub-region have been resettled.

Factories have existed for 15 years. Upon their inception, of course, there was the environmental impact assessment. They should have been conditioned at that time to dig up trenches so that this water is guided and even harvested. This water would have been harvested for irrigation. It would even enable the people in these lowlands to produce throughout the year.

The chairperson mentioned that during this season, one cannot notice the flooding because it is a dry season. So, at such a time, the water harvested would have been used for irrigation because where the country is moving, we want food production. It would have ensured food production and food security would have increased in the area.

Madam Speaker, the companies that carry out mining – mining is a sector in this country, which would have helped us a lot in revenue collection; we would have boosted our revenue. 

Currently, we are struggling - of course, with the coming in of COVID-19 and other factors, especially after elections. This is an area we should pay a lot of attention to, in terms of revenue. As a nation, we need revenue. We need to revamp the economy but this sector should be closely monitored because it is a rich area; minerals are all over. 

They said there are no inspectors. We have environmental officers in each district. However, we need specialists who will help us evaluate how much these companies are harvesting from the minerals and in turn, it will enable the country establish how much revenue we are to generate from them.

Above all, as part of their corporate social responsibility, they should specialise very much in the area of environmental protection because this big challenge is coming with effects of climate change.

Therefore, I request that the ministry keeps a close eye on the companies in the area of production but also ensure that they pay a lot of attention to the communities in which they are operating, for safety of the community and protection of the environment. Thank you.

5.33
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to the voices of others in congratulating you for winning the election and of course, Gen. Moses Ali, the veteran too. (Laughter)

When I was a boy, I used to read Hard Times by Charles Dickens and Mine Boy. I could not believe that as I would grow and become a legislator, the characteristics that I picked in those ancient days would be reflected in this modern era. We made very fantastic laws that should safeguard the lives of Ugandans wherever mining activities are being carried out. Therefore, I think this is total negligence on the part of the technical wing of Government, which should really be able to monitor and prevail over these mining companies. 

I do not think we have run short of laws to protect the lives of our people. I think the Government must take responsibility and put the technical staff to account. Largely, if you look at the role of NEMA, they should not be throwing all these challenges onto the country while leaving the peasants to suffer. When I look at the report, of course it falls short of these concerns of the dysfunctionality of the Government organs that we set up to protect the lives of Ugandans.

I know some of these companies are owned by foreigners and they are after making profit. So, it is our duty to control the appetite for money making at the expense of humanity. I would really implore that we assert ourselves and task the Government to take the necessary measures. I cannot believe that a whole committee of Parliament can fail to access the sites of these multinational agencies. How can the whole Parliament, with all the powers that we have, be bounced as if we are seeking for jobs?

I think we need to get serious on these matters of the environment. I have witnessed the flooding in Ntoroko; it is terrible. How much loss have we incurred as a region? The economic activities – You cannot believe that two sub-counties have been submerged. They are under water! All the economic activities in these sub-counties are gone. Thousands of Ugandans are now without livelihoods.

These are disasters that we must take very seriously. One of the reasons why we had it rough with the younger people during this election was because they see that we are not really fighting for the cause of their existence. So, we have to be very careful. I implore all the responsible offices to take action and reprimand whoever is responsible. Thank you.

5.38
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the Committee on Natural Resources for the report that has been well presented to this House. I have three issues that I would like to address.

We are talking about companies that have existed for some time. As an environmentalist, I believe that those companies took an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA). In the EIA, there is always a review after a certain period of time. 

When you are carrying out an EIA, you are looking at the interest of the company as well as the people whom that company is going to serve. In this particular activity of mining in Bugisu and Kapchorwa – I was actually in Kapchorwa last year with the Committee on Presidential Affairs and I felt that these things had gone beyond.

I would imagine that in Uganda, we have a ministry dedicated to monitoring. Monitoring means assessing programmes to determine whether they can continue or have to be discontinued. In this particular area, I think it is very wanting. An EIA should be redone to determine whether those companies should continue to do mining in these areas or they should be stopped. 

We have to look at the economic benefits. The chairperson of the committee was talking about the corporate social responsibility. Whereas we raised the issue of corporate social responsibility, that is not really the interest of an investor. An investor looks at how much he can bring on the table and how much he can take for himself before looking at what services he can extend. After all, if I am not mistaken, I do not even remember if we have an Act regulating how corporate social responsibility should be extended to the communities that are affected. Maybe that is a lacuna that we should address as we move forward.

Flooding has been an issue that has been brought up in this Parliament for some time. I remember we sat in different caucuses and the responsible ministry has never come up. We should be looking at the flooding as an opportunity for continuous farming. Most of our comparative advantages are in agriculture but we have failed to utilise the opportunities of having excess flood waters utilised during the dry season like now. 

We travelled to Morocco where it never rains but there is abundant food. We travelled to Egypt; it never rains in Egypt, but there is abundant food. We should be able, as the Government, to engage technology to utilise this excess water, so that our people can continuously engage in economic activities.

Otherwise, looking at the situation in Kapchorwa and Bugisu, I think we are bound to lose out. It is the local people who will lose out despite those companies existing there. They will be cut off and some of their areas will be taken up by the floods if we get very heavy rains in future. 

5.42
MR LAWRENCE SONGA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and members of the Committee on Natural Resources for the report on the floods and mining in the Elgon area. I would like to make brief comments. 

Mount Elgon is about 4,321 metres above sea level and it is an area which receives a lot of rainfall – over 1,000 millilitres. So, it is important that activities taking place on Mount Elgon or the foothills of Mount Elgon are properly guided to safeguard the communities living there – whether those activities are in agriculture, mining, infrastructural development or activities to do with the harvesting of trees. 

Mining and floods are therefore not only limited to Mount Elgon but all high-altitude areas. Mining activities undergo what we call environmental impact assessments. They come out with a report, which is called an Environmental Impact Statement. In that statement, there are many mitigation measures that are put in place for the mining companies to follow. Periodically, they should do what we call environmental auditing, to see whether they are still in line with what was permitted in the environmental impact assessment. So, constant monitoring and supervision is very important. 

Coming to the floods themselves, usually when you mine minerals, definitely you leave some large holes that should be refilled after. First of all, we cannot do without mining. We have to do what is called a cost-benefit analysis. If the activity is going to be more costly to us, we must weigh our actions. 

Since we cannot do without mining, we have to strictly follow what is in the guidelines of the environmental impact assessment. If the water is too much, we should divert it. We should also continue to see to it that the holes left behind are filled. That will help us a lot.

Other people are saying that we should use the water for agriculture. Mining has lot of chemicals and we produce a lot. When you mine silver, gold and so on, we shall produce a lot of sulphuric acid and sometimes, they are acidic and cannot support agriculture. Alternatively, we need a lot of cleaning, which is also costly. Therefore, the best way is to follow the guidelines issued by NEMA in the environmental impact assessment.

Another issue is the people living downstream drinking water from some of these streams. This is already a threat to their health. All those are catered for in the environmental impact assessment. Therefore, we urge that NEMA should continue with the supervision while the mining company should also strictly follow the environmental impact assessment guidelines and continuously do what we call environmental auditing. That will be the only way we can address some of these challenges in the area where mining activities take place especially in the high-altitude areas.

I would like to thank the committee and the Speaker for the time.

5.46
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much. I also thank the committee for the good report. In fact, this is one of the honest reports I have read in the House. The content is very clear.

I would like to mention four points. First of all, according to the report, the minister does not have any report. For fifteen years, they were asked to write for five but they wrote for three. However, according to the committee report, it appears like the report was manufactured. I think that was the word that was used. If it was manufactured, then it is a big problem and that is where I would like to be helped. 

The committee was not satisfied with the report that has been presented. This is why I would like to request the minister to tell us why they manufactured a report, when they have staff.

Secondly, they allege that they were no inspectors to inspect whatever was going on. This is where there is big problem, which is causing all these challenges we are experiencing. The water from Mt Elgon comes all the way through Bukedea, it visits Kumi and comes to Ngora. All of them are affected because of the water coming from Mt Elgon. Therefore, for us, we are on the receiving side. By the mere fact that the ministry has not done a good job, we shall be suffering with floods. This is one thing I am concerned with.

Thirdly, I am concerned that Bulambuli and Bukedea in terms of corporate social responsibility did not benefit. I am wondering why and yet, they are at the receiving end. They are the ones who raised this matter and are affected but they only receive floods, not an economic activity.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, since you directed the Minister of Relief and Disaster preparedness to support people who were affected by floods, nothing has been done. That is where I have a big challenge. I need to be helped why this has not be done. It is really not good for the Office of the Prime Minister not to sort out some of these matters and yet, people are affected. 

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, as you come, regarding the issue of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), in South Africa, all investors are required to use four per cent, of their profits on CSR. However, here, they can buy you footballs, netballs and claim that that is CSR. We should get serious with the partners we have.
 
5.49
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERALS (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I would like to also state that mining definitely takes place on land and it can have a devastating effect on the environment.

The Mining Act, under sections 108 and 109 specifically address the issues of the environment and are intended to ensure that the environment is protected, despite companies having the mining lease.

I listened to the report and I still feel that there is work that we need to do. Listening to the presentation under 4.4.2, where the NEMA stated that the flooding cannot be attributed to the mining activities and it was quoted as from the report of NEMA.

Madam Speaker, allow me to pledge that I am going to take this up with my technical team. We shall make a visit together with NEMA and may be, at some point in time, come and update this House accordingly. I also note that we need the cement companies to be on board because the report recommends having channels put up by these mining companies and this cannot be answered here now.

Regarding the corporate social responsibility, it is true that we leave this to the company and therefore, they are the ones to decide what exactly to do. As we come up with the Mining Bill, 2020, we should look at this and factor it. Like I said, mining activities take place in communities and they can drastically affect the people. Some of the water sources can even be contaminated and yet, we say that when mining takes place, people benefit in terms of employment.

I request that I take this up and report after we have interfaced with NEMA and the technical team in the ministry. Thank you.

MS CHEKAMONDO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity again. I would like to inform the minister that as you go to visit that area, I would like you to also find out how people have suffered from the dust coming from the mines. 

Secondly, all the minerals are being mined and taken to Tororo and Kampala. However, the people of these mining areas are not benefitting from the activity. At least, if you could employ some of the people from Kapchorwa and the mining areas to work in the cement factories, so that they can benefit by getting jobs. You are getting the minerals and transporting all the jobs away from this area. What can we do?

The information I am giving is that the honourable should see how to help our people. Otherwise, they are badly off with dust and are not getting any jobs. Even the land was bought cheaply and those people who were evicted are in bad state. (Interjections) Even the price of cement is high. Madam Speaker, those people were misguided and cheated. Thank you. 

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. I listened to the minister’s response to the issues. It would be procedurally right for her to give us the timeframe when she will be ready to present the report before this august House.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Speaker, I have a very important supplementary. Some of us have been following the extractive industry, including minerals. We need to be more alert in Uganda because the mineral boom is expected and it will take much more time than even the oil and gas.

The practice of multinationals to silence the communities and regulators – they can use the social corporate responsibility budget. Therefore, whoever is overseeing, in the principle of “Polluter Pays”, should be very careful not to get lost into social corporate responsibility.

For us, as Government, we have interest that is beyond profit and beyond today but for generations to come. I would like to plead with the ministry and the whole Government that as we go into these new areas of minerals of oil and gas, let us even not get very interested in just discussing it, because it can be a way of disarming you. Can we apply the principles of best practice of the “Polluter Pays” principle?

As the woman Member of Parliament said, this mineral industry can help this country move even after post COVID-19. I would like to plead - In my area, I have refused to look at social corporate responsibilities because I know it is a way of silencing you and they make a lot of waste.

Some of those dangers of pollution will affect generations to come. I thought I would bring this information out.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, would you like to close?

5.56
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (Dr Keefa Kiwanuka): I would like to say that I am a bit surprised by what the minister has said because we have been dealing with them on this for some time. However, the response is like they are seeing it for the first time. 
I thought there would be an update to the House on what has happened in terms of positive developments, at least, because it is not new to the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, it is new because we have just presented the report and debated it. We are about to adopt it and then we expect action from the minister.

However, honourable minister, there are many policy lacunas. I hope you can address them.

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The chairperson of the committee should be fair. I am just seeing this here for the first time. If I had appeared before you, maybe, I would have taken this up.

I, therefore, do not know whether it was my colleague, hon. Kitutu with the technical team, who came before you with the technical team to answer some of the issues. If I had seen it, it would have been a different story because I would have definitely moved to Bulambuli, Hima Cement and Kampala Cement to see how to resolve some of these problems.

Madam Speaker, regarding the issue mentioned by hon. Rukiya Chekamondo, (Laughter) she made some suggestions. I would like to just state that, as I said, we are in the process of coming up with the Bill on mining. Critically, let us factor in the issue of corporate social responsibility so that it is not something that is left to these companies.

When you go to mine in an area, definitely, that community is affected in one way or another. Hon. RukiyaChekamondo, we will take up your proposals. 

On the issue of the timeframe, I think March would be okay with me. I should be able to come and report to the House.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members. Let us go to item 7. We have heard the report, debated and got responses. I now put the question that this House should adopt the report of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources on the flooding in Bulambuli, Nakapiripirit and Bukedea districts, resulting from mining operations in the Elgon area.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE UGANDA NATIONAL EXAMINATION BOARD BILL, 2020


THE SPEAKER: Where is the minister?

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that Clause 1do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2 agreed to.

Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4

6.00
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mr Jacob Opolot): Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that the clause be amended as follows:

Paragraph (a), by substituting the word, “The Board may consider where necessary,” with the words, “Within the mandate of the Board.”
By replacing paragraph (b) with the following: “To prepare, protect, conduct, supervise and mark primary and secondary national examinations and any other examinations within the mandate of the Board.”
Paragraph (d) by inserting the words, “legally authorised” immediately after the words, “any other person.”
Paragraph (e), by inserting immediately after the word, “Board” the following words; “in consultation with that examining body.”
Paragraph (h), by inserting the words, “and keep a permanent record of information concerning that centre,” immediately after the word, “centre.”

The justifications are:

The amendment in paragraph (a) is to ensure that national examination Board does not act beyond its mandate.
Paragraph (b) is to make the provision more encompassing.
Paragraph (d) is to curb unauthorised access to information.
Paragraph (e), it is in order to mandate the Uganda National Examinations Board to act in consultation with other examining bodies while equating qualifications.
Paragraph (h) is to compel the Uganda National examinations Board to keep records of examinations centres. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Does the minister object?

MR OBUA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, the ministry has no objection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 4be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed an amendment to clause 5 as follows: 

Substitute the words, “subsection 4(1)(c)” with the words, “section 4(1)(c)”.

Insert a new paragraph (d) immediately after paragraph (c) to read as follows: 

	“(d) To demand any information, document or record in respect of an examination centre from the person in charge.” 

Justification: For proper referencing and to provide an enabling environment for record keeping.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, do you have any objections? 

MR OBUA: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, we have no objection.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment to clause 6 as follows: 

In sub-clause (2) paragraph (a), delete the words, “appointed by the President” appearing at the end of the sentence. 
In sub-clause (2) paragraph (e), substitute the word, “Attorney-General” with the words, “Inspector General of Police”. 
By substituting for sub-clause (3) the following:

“The chairperson and members of the board of directors shall be appointed by the minister”.

Justification: 
The amendment in sub-clause (2)(a) is to give the powers of appointment of the chairperson to the minister. 
In sub-clause (2)(e), the amendment is to provide representation of the Inspector General of Police on the board. 
In sub-clause (3), the amendment is to provide for the minister as the appointing authority of the chairperson and members of the board. 

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to comment on the representation of the police on the board. 

Madam Chairperson, thank you for facilitating us with other means of monitoring even when we are out for another exercise. Yesterday, after listening in to the debate, and now the chairperson has brought an amendment, I was quite perturbed that we are turning the core mandate of UNEB to fighting examination cheating.This is a one-off during the exam time, but here it brings the requirement of police representation on the board. 

I thought the role of Parliament, and Cabinet which brings this Bill, is to provide a cure for a situation where a seven-year primary exam is sat and passed only in two days; a four-yearO-Level exam is sat and passed in only 20 days; and A-Level is passed in only seven days. The cure is to have continuous assessment as in other jurisdictions. I thought that right from the principle of this Bill, we should put more emphasis and effort on that. The preoccupation should be on how to cure this problem.

The reason people are investing in exam cheating is because it is possible to pass by just getting “masasi” even when you failed mocks, because nobody looks at the mock exams. Continuous assessment in some jurisdictions contributes 40 per cent to your final mark. So, even if you cheat, you cannot get beyond 50 per cent. 

I thought it was a mistake by the Ministry of Education and Sports, who are responsible for this Bill, not to look at the cure, which is in other jurisdictions, yet this was proposed in earlier debates on the review of the education system. It was proposed that we go towards adopting a continuous assessment system. If I failed to score some percentage by P.6, I cannot pass Primary Leaving Examinations (PLE) on two days -  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, your argument has nothing to do with the proposal. 

MR MUKITALE: I am saying the police involvement is because we are now so preoccupied with catching exam cheats - police inquiries. That is where we are. That is my prayer, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know what the minister is going to say but I believe that this board does not sit in one day to set exams. I think they have got to sit, design and plan. I do not know why we cannot have expertise from the police.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, probably I will help the honourable member, who is my senior. As we speak now, the police is fully involved in the process of examinations in Uganda. Throughout the process, from the day during transportation up to the time of delivery and bringing them back, the police is involved. What the honourable member is saying about continuous assessment is something else for another day. What we are talking about is the system that we currently have.

Let me tell you, honourable member, my good friend, even the universities have failed to go with what you have talked about; they have gone back to examinations. That is why they give course work tests. We used to do course works only when I was at Makerere University when I did education, but now – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we are not talking about assessment. We are talking about the police being on the board. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Yes, it is very prudent and necessary because, throughout the system, in the process of examinations, the police are fully involved. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, I beg to differ with the proposal to have police on the UNEB board. We should not militarise civil institutions. The police have a mandate clearly stipulated under Article 211 and 212 of the Constitution. That authority cannot be ceded to any other authority. 

What is surprising is that they want to bring police on the board and remove the Attorney-General who has a constitutional mandate as a principal legal advisor. 

With due respect, chairperson, the police has no role whatsoever on the board of UNEB. Let their roles be maintained under Article 211 and 212 of the Constitution. We should instead preserve the Attorney-General whose responsibility it is because to – -(Interjection) -- I was rising on a point of clarification but if my chairperson of the committee – 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to get clarification from the Member of Parliament from Bugiri Municipality - my immediate neighbour after crossing the swamp and my former Guild President of Makerere University. 

I would like to know whether we are outstretching the constitutional role of the police, as you said, by involving the police on this board. If so, can we agree that cheating of exams is criminal? If the answer is yes, what is the role of the police? 

MR BASALIRWA: Chairperson, the role of the police – for me, the bigger issue is, you want to substitute police for the Attorney-General. It would be a travesty for anybody to think that a principal legal advisor is legislated out of UNEB and police is included. 

My proposal is that the police has a very elastic mandate. Whether they are members of the board or not, their mandate is very elastic. Substituting the Attorney-General for police would be limiting – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Would you be happy if they were both there?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Chairperson, I think the honourable member has forgotten that UNEB is an agency, which has the capacity to sue and be sued on its own name. Indeed, what we are trying to say – and I have said it clearly – is that the process of examination involves police from day one up to when examinations are completed. And even after.

He is a lawyer and I am a professional teacher. I have ever transported examinations to Bugiri, Gere, Sigulu Islands and the representation of police – I do not know why he is calling police a military body but I am seeing it as a body that is handling – (Interjections)- oh, post-election hangover.(Laughter)

Madam Chairperson, what we are saying as a committee is that these people are very useful, as we plan from day one. Let us accept what we are proposing because it is useful. We have seen it elsewhere because they come in to give – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Before hon. Basalirwa comes in, Madam Chairperson, we are beginning something that we shall fight to cure at a certain point and we shall not be in position to cure it. 

As we begin putting Police on the Board, tomorrow, the army will come on another board. As we fight to say the Army is involved here and there, we are legalising their participation. 

Unless somebody comes to tell us that as Police has been monitoring and supervising UNEB – as hon. Ssewungu said – there was a weakness because it was not part of the board. For police to supervise properly, they do not need to have a representative on the Board. Police can do this work without being on the Board. 

We are beginning this. At a certain time, when somebody comes in to say that the Army should be on the other board and Police should be there, we must not be seen here again fighting it.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek this clarification. I am a quality systems auditor. The process of UNEB mandate does not begin with managing exams. It recruits staff, it raises funds and it creates systems. Where we are putting a lot of emphasis - the role of police is only at the time of administering exams, not even setting exams. How then, does all of a sudden, Police become very important on the Board of UNEB, if we have not lost track of what the core mandate of UNEB is? 
I would like to plead that we should not cause Police conflict of interest by being part of the cooks and we expect them to come and do their oversight role. They should remain on their oversight role. The law enables them to do so and gives them leverage and latitude to come in even without being part of the Board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can I ask the Minister of Education and Sports to give us the rationale for that proposal? What is the rationale for including Police on the Board? We want to know.

MR OBUA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to confirm that this proposal is a proposal of the Committee on Education and Sports. When you look at the original Bill, the ministry had proposed the Attorney-General to be represented on the Board. The justifications are clear. 

One is that legally, the Attorney-General is the principal legal advisor of Government. Secondly, by involving the Attorney-General at this stage, we would enable our UNEB to be more efficient and effective by having a direct representative of the principal legal advisor of Government.

If I am given the latitude to persuade the chairperson and members of the committee, I would request that we stay this provision as it was. Police is already involved on issues of examinations. As and when they are needed, they can be invited. They can be called to come and execute their legal mandate.

We may be setting a bad precedent. Tomorrow, you will find Police coming to ask, “can we be represented on the Civil Aviation Authority Board? Can we be represented on Uganda Revenue Authority Board? Can we be represented on the National Water and Sewerage Cooperation Board? Can we be represented on the NEMA Board?”

I would like to persuade the chairperson and the House that we maintain the original position of the Bill by leaving the status quo of the Attorney-General to be represented on the Board. For police, as and when they are needed, they can always be called in. I beg to submit.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, as the chairperson of the committee, I must be on record that I have no passionate attachment to that amendment. As I said yesterday, about 95 per cent of the stakeholders that contributed to the processing of the Bill proposed that.

Secondly, the ministry came and defended it before we invited UNEB. Otherwise, I do not want it to appear like it is a proposal from the committee that came from nowhere. I am surprised there is somebody from the other side who does not know that there is a chairperson in this House. Madam Chairperson, I concede. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, let us address 6(2)(a) first. I put the question that clause 6(2)(a) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed an amendment on clause 7 by deleting paragraph (a) and in paragraph (b) by substituting for the entire provision the following: “...has been convicted of any offence and sentenced by a competent court.”

The justification is to ensure that a former offender shall not be appointed to serve as a member of the Uganda National Examinations Board. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The provision is good but it needs some qualification because if a person has been convicted, for example, for a traffic offence, would you deny that person the opportunity to serve on the Board?

Why don’t we say, “an offence involving moral turpitude” and prescribe a minimum sentence? If it is imprisonment, at least not more than six months but if it is a simple offence and you get a caution then you stop a person? I would want the chairperson to justify the proposal and see whether he cannot go by what I am proposing.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Thank you very much, hon. Niwagaba, for your submission. The committee looked at the provision, which says, “... has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment for six months or more by a competent court without an option of a fine.”

By the time court does not give you an option of a fine then that offence is a little more serious but again, in a country of over 40 million people, do you really think that we can fail to get competent people who have no record of conviction? Who is that we are particularly interested in putting there? Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you stand by your proposal?

MR OBOTH: I would like to implore my namesake and the chairperson of the Committee on Education to buy into qualifying the proposal by hon. Niwagaba. What are these offences because if you say out of the 48 million Ugandans, can we fail to find - You will be inviting us to ask whether we have any sinner amidst us.

We should not make a law that is very open and wide in its application because it can be self-defeating. I would be suggesting that hon. Niwagaba helps us to process the qualification; the specific offences. What caliber of a person do we want on this Board? Is it about morality or integrity? Why don’t we peg it to that? (Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, hon. Oboth, for giving way. The information I would like to give relates to paragraph (a) of the amendment on the issue of offences. The way it is worded is to the effect that once you are convicted of dishonesty or fraud - That is how they coined it in the Bill; so, I do not know whether that could serve the purpose of qualification. That is what the clause is taking about.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, that is quite useful information from Bugiri and if that is the case then the proposed amendment is in order to be processed in that way. We maintain the position of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: On all the issues in Clause 7(a), (b) and (c)? Okay, honourable members, the question -

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, (a) is conviction under this Act but (b) is conviction under any other Act. That is what -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairman, why are you deleting sub-clause 7(a)? 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Because we are looking at a conviction; whether it will be under this Act or any other Act, for as long as somebody has been convicted. A conviction is a conviction whether it is under this Act or any other Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No. I think that is what hon. Niwagaba said. If you are convicted under the Traffic and Road Safety Act, should that prevent you from being a member of the board?

MR BASALIRWA: My proposal would be for (b) to read: “... has been convicted of an offence under (a)” because that brings out the kind of offences we will be envisaging. Those are offences involving dishonesty or fraud. If we leave (b) the way the chairperson of the committee is proposing, it takes away the qualification proposed by hon. Niwagaba and hon. Oboth.

My proposal is that (b) should have the conviction and the sentence should relate to offences involving dishonesty or fraud but not any other offence as seems to be proposed by the committee. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, what do you say?

MR OBUA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In order to avoid ambiguity as we make this law, it would be important that we qualify. I would like to draw the attention of Members to the original provision in the Bill; whether it cures as other Members are proposing because this is what we had proposed: “A person shall not be appointed to the Board where the person: (a) has been convicted of an offence under this Act.” That is the first qualification. 

Or “of an offence involving dishonesty or fraud by a competent court.” 

This is what is contained in the original Bill. I do not know whether it cures in terms of removing the ambiguity and we make a law –

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you proposing that we do away with sub-clause (b) and retain (a), (c) and (d) of the original text?

MR OBUA: Madam Chairperson, I would seek for your guidance because (a) restricts this provision under this Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It says, “…or of an offence involving dishonesty or fraud by a competent court.” This brings in any other - 

MR OBUA: Yes. So, if we retain paragraph (a), we can delete (b).

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think it assists us if we remove (b).

MR OBUA: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that paragraph (b) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 7 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 10 is amended in subclause (1), paragraph (f), by substituting, for the entire provision, the following: “who is convicted of an offence and sentenced by a competent court”.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment, arising from the amendments in clause 7 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Should we delete it? Members, I put the question that paragraph (f) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 10, as amended, do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes that clause 11 is amended as follows:
In subclause (2), by substituting for the words “one month” the words “thirty days”.

In subclause (3), by replacing the entire provision with the following: 

	“(3) The minister shall, within sixty days of receiving notice of a vacancy, appoint another person to the board in accordance with section 6 of this Act.”

Deleting subclause (4).

The justification is threefold - for consistency; to prescribe the time period within which the minister shall fill up a vacancy on the board; and it is a consequential amendment, arising from the amendment in clause 6.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 11 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposed that clause 14 be amended -

In sub-clause (1) (c), by substituting the words, “the Appointments and Disciplinary Committee” with the words, “Human Resources Committee”.

In sub-clause (3), by substituting the entire provision with the following: “A committee appointed under this section may, guided by the procedure provided in schedule 2 to this Act, adopt its own rules and procedures.”

The justification is: to broaden the functions of the committee and also provide for the procedure and rules to be followed by the committees of the board.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 14 – I do not think there is schedule 2 to this Bill.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, we got schedule 2 at committee level. I want to believe in the file that I laid on the Table yesterday, as part of the documents, schedule 2 was supplied.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Members, I think let us stand over this. There is something we are checking on clause 14. Let us stand over this and go to clause 15.

Clause 15

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment under clause 15 as follows:

In sub-clause (3), substitute the words, “for one more term” with the words, “subject to performance review.”

In sub-clause (4), substitute paragraph (d) with the following: “(d) where he or she has been convicted of an offence by a competent court.”

The justification is: to provide for performance review as a condition precedent for reappointment of the Executive Director; and to allow the application of the provision to all offences and competent courts within and outside Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, you are removing the words “for one more term” and substituting with “subject to performance review”? Really! So, you are creating perpetuity. 

MR BASALIRWA: Madam Chairperson, besides creating perpetuity, this is going to be the first piece of legislation in this country that has a provision couched in such terms. When you look at most of our pieces of legislation here, you will notice that all of them are subject to term limits. You can look at the one for Executive Director of NEMA, Executive Director of National Council for Higher Education and the others. I do not know what is so sacrosanct about the Executive Director of UNEB that he or she must enjoy limitless terms. 

Two, when you talk about the performance review, you have to bear in mind that this review should apply across board. Parliament must be consistent in legislation. I do not think the justification provided by the committee would provide the solution that he is proposing because a performance review can also be subjective. Therefore, I do not think it is wise and good legislative acumen to remove term limits and just leave it open for anybody to come and serve, as long as they are subjected to performance review. You want to create an impression that there is no institutional growth in terms of human resource and yet, ideally, when we are in these organisations, opportunity must be created. When somebody joins UNEB as a junior officer, they should work very hard to become the Executive Director one day. When you close out, then you are going to kill initiatives. This demotivates staff. 

Honourable chairperson, I propose that we maintain the proposal in the original Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, are you still – 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I concede on this though I would like to add that this is not really the first. Thank you. 

MR OBUA: Madam Chairperson, first of all, I thank you and the committee members. Because the chairperson of the committee has already conceded, I think we are moving in the right direction. 
In addition to avoiding perpetuity, it is modern corporate governance practice that there are term limits especially for CEOs. It is also a standard practice that for positions of CEOs, one must know when they enter, how long they stay and when to exit.

Therefore, since the chairperson of the committee has already conceded, that takes us back to the proposal in the original Bill where we had proposed, under clause 3, that the Executive Director shall be appointed for a period of five years and is eligible for reappointment for one more term. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we now look at the other leg of sub-clause (4) (d). There is a proposal under sub-clause (4) (d). Is that okay? We can delete the present sub-clause (4) (d) and substitute it with this one. 

Honourable members, I put the question that sub-clause 4 (d) be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you have something on clause 25? 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment in clause 25. The clause is amended in sub-clause (1) by substituting the words, “2,000 currency points” with the words “1,000 currency points” and for the words, “ten years” with the words, “five years.” 

The justification is to harmonise the prescribed currency points and term of imprisonment with other provisions in the Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be amended as proposed.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment, under clause 26, as follows: In paragraph (a), insert the words, “or equipment” immediately after the words, “any other material.” 

In paragraph (b), substitute the words, “ten years” with the words, “five years.” In paragraph (f), by substituting the word, “or” appearing immediately after the word, “results” with the word “of.” 

The justification is to make the provision more encompassing, and to harmonise the currency points with the term of imprisonment. It is also to correct a typo error. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, I would like a clarification. You had talked about paragraph (b) of (4) of clause 26, hadn’t you? Yes, but it does not talk about years. It talks about “with the intent to fail or pass a candidate, alters the work, data, information, scores or marks of a candidate.” 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: I am sorry, Madam Chairperson. Please, disregard that. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Okay. Therefore, we will take into account the first under paragraph (a). Are the ones under paragraph (f) okay? 

Honourable members, sub-paragraph (b) is not for amendment. Let us now look at the other two. 

I put the question that clause 26 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Excuse me, Madam Chairperson, I am sorry. This amendment is for paragraph (g) and not paragraph (f). The one that is without the years is sub-clause (26)(f), which is indicated but it is sub-clause (26)(g). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read the sub-paragraph? 

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Sub-paragraph (26)(g) reads: “While engaged as a supervisor, invigilator, scout, monitor or special needs education support personnel, negligently allows or fails to stop unauthorised assistance from being given to a candidate, commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to a fine not exceeding 1,000 currency points or a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years or both.” 

Therefore, because of the consequential amendments, this is supposed to be five years. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, sub-paragraph 26(g) is supposed to be sub-paragraph (26)(b)?

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us look at sub-clause 26(1)(g) and substitute the word, “five” with the word, “ten”. I put the question that sub-clause (g) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment of clause 28. Clause 28 is amended by inserting the word “equipment” immediately after the words “examination paper” and substituting the words “10 years” with the words “five years.”

This is to make the provision more encompassing and to harmonise the number of currency points with the term of imprisonment.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 28 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29
MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 29 by substituting the words “10 years” with the words “five years.”

The justification is to harmonise the term of imprisonment with the number of currency points, again.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 29 be amended as proposed.

(Question put agreed to.)
Clause 29, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 30

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 30 (b) by substituting the words “10 years” with the words “five years” and the justification is to harmonise the terms of imprisonment with the number of currency points.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 30 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 30, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, in clause 32, the committee proposes an amendment by substituting forsub-clause (2), the following;  
“In addition to the penalty in sub-section (1), the person convicted shall pay back the money collected from the concerned students or the sponsors of the students and compensate them accordingly as the case may be.”
By inserting a new sub-clause (4) immediately after sub-clause (3) to read as follows: “Where it is established that the person in sub-section (1) (a) is a proprietor of the school, the examinations Board may suspend or cancel the examination centre.”

The justification is to ensure that students who do not sit for examinations due to the failure of an authorised person to remit the registration fees are compensated.

The next one it to give the Board the discretion to cancel or suspend the registration of an examination centre, where registration fees are misappropriated.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 32 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 33

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 33(2) by substituting the word “shall” appearing immediately after the word “Board” in the fourth line with the word “may”.

This is to provide for the discretion of the Board to suspend or cancel registration of an examination centre.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 33 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 33, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes an amendment of clause 38 as follows: Clause 38 is amended in sub-clause (2) (a) by inserting the words “or work” immediately after the word “script” and in sub-clause (2) (b) by inserting the words “or work” immediately after the word “script.”

In sub-clause (2)(e) by inserting the words “or any other source from which a candidate may obtain information or” immediately after the word “device.”

Also, by inserting a new paragraph after paragraph (f) as follows: “Proves to have had prior knowledge of the examination.”

The justification is to broaden the provision to provide for other sources of information and ways in which a candidate may obtain information prior to or during an examination.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 38 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 38, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, the committee proposes to amend clause 43(1) by substituting the word “may” appearing immediately after the word “Board” with the word “shall.”

The justification is to make it mandatory for the concerned persons to take oath before preparing, conducting and supervising examinations.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 43 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 43, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Schedule 1 agreed to.

MR JACOB OPOLOT: Madam Chairperson, I would like to also propose an amendment to the schedules by inserting Schedule 2 to read as follows:

“Quorum
The quorum for meetings of the board is half the number of members.” 

The justification is: to provide for the quorum of the meetings of the board.

The Chairperson: Honourable minister, what do say about the proposal?

Mr obua: Madam Chairperson, we have no objection to the proposal.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, I put the question that Schedule 2 be introduced as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Chairperson: Honourable members, we had stood over clause 14; can we go back to it. Honourable chairperson, just make the presentation again.

Mr Jacob opolot: Madam Chairperson, in Clause 14, the committee proposed that sub-clause (1), paragraph (c) is amended by substituting the words, “the Appointments and Disciplinary Committee” with the words, “Human Resources Committee.”

In sub-clause (3), the proposal is to amend by substituting for the entire provision the following: “A committee appointed under this section may, guided by the procedure provided in schedule 2 to this Act, adopt its own rules and procedures.” 

The justification is: to broaden the functions of the committee and also provide for the procedure and rules to be followed by the committees of the board.

The Chairperson: Honourable chairperson, your new schedule only relates to quorum but under clause 14(3), it talks about procedures under that schedule. Honourable minister, did you have a look at the schedule?

Mr Jacob opolot: Can we get it clearly, Madam Chairperson?

THE Chairperson: Subclause (3) reads, “A committee appointed under this section shall adopt its own rules and procedure but shall, in any event, be guided by the procedure provided in Schedule 2 to this Act”. But the schedule 2, which you have brought, has got only one item - quorum. How does it relate to this one? Is it just for the board?  

Mr Jacob opolot: Maybe I should consult a bit with the honourable minister.

Mr obua: Madam Chairperson, I beg to propose that the proposal under clause 14(3) and schedule 2 be deleted.

Mr Jacob opolot: Honourable minister, you cannot delete the schedule on quorum for the board. You can delete others but maintain the guidance on quorum. 

Mr obua: Mr Chairperson, if it is okay with you, I beg that we   maintain schedule 2 but delete clause 14(3) as proposed.

The Chairperson: So, do we revert to the original text?

Dr lyomoki: Madam Chairperson, I am proposing that instead of deleting the sub-clause, we look at why we are bringing in the word, “procedure”. What brings the contention is for us to refer to “procedure” yet the schedule that is being proposed talks about quorum. Therefore, why don’t we remove the word “procedure” and use a word that is more acceptable? I think that will cure the confusion.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, why don’t we abandon the words, “guided by the procedure provided in Schedule 2 to this Act” and just say, “A committee appointed under this section may adopt its own rules of procedure”? Is that okay?

Mr Jacob opolot: Madam Chairperson, it is okay. 

The Chairperson: Okay, let us leave out the words, “guided by procedure provided to Schedule 2,” and just say, “A committee appointed under this section may adopt its own rules of procedure.” We shall not affect that schedule.

Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 14(3) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

Motion for the House to resume

7.11
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Sports) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. I beg to move.

The Chairperson: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

Report from the committee of the whole house

7.12
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Sports) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020” and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

Motion for adoption of the report from committee of the whole house

7.12
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Sports) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

The Speaker: Honourable members, the question is that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS BOARD BILL, 2020

7.13
The Minister of state for Education and Sports (Sports) (Mr Denis Obua): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020” be read the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020” be read for the third time and do pass. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE UGANDA NATIONAL EXAMINATIONS BOARD ACT, 2021.”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: At 7.15 p.m.?

7.16 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I am being influenced by hon. Okupa to move that a question be put. 

For the record, this report has been ready for several months and I have been waiting for the opportunity. I have not been available with a few trials this week and I have not been able to see the Order Paper. This matter has been on the Order Paper and I would like to seek for your indulgence, that if we got a morning and afternoon session so that we present this next week, debate and come out with issues out of this report. Thereafter, we could take a decision. 

We actually have a number of Bills that we shall seek for your indulgence so that we can fast-track them. I would like the next coming members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs to find a clean slate. We worked very hard and we do not want to leave any backlog. 

Therefore, you could give us one day from morning up to evening, people will talk and debate. Some of the proposals are very interesting and the constitution amendment matters are national in nature and so, the interests are very nationalistic. If that would be accorded, then, we could adjourn. However, I am ready. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it would be a presumption for me to determine the time before I listen to the report. Let us give you time on Tuesday to present the report and then, we shall determine how much time we will need to debate it. I would like to urge you to clear your slate as quickly as possible. 

Allow me thank the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, who has been here since morning, the members of the Cabinet, the Opposition and the Members of the House. Thank you very much for the work that you have done this week. We have done quite a bit. 

I adjourn the House to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. but also to give notice that during the course of the week, in the next few weeks, we shall try as much as possible to facilitate the tributes to important Ugandans that have died. We shall create time for them but it will not interfere with our regular sittings. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m. 

(The House rose at 7.17 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 9 February, 2021 at 2.00 p.m.)

