
PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

Tuesday, 8 February 2022

Parliament met at 2.06 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you so much for coming for today’s sitting. As I said last week, we have a very important Bill that is a must for us to pass today.

Also, as you may be aware, the Speaker of Parliament, Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, has been unwell for the past two weeks. During that period, he was receiving treatment at Mulago Referral Hospital. However, the medical experts, in consultation with his personal doctors, decided to refer him out of Mulago to another specialised medical hospital for better management.

Subsequently, on Friday, 4th February 2022, the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah travelled out of the country for that treatment. Let us pray that he recovers faster so that he can come back to resume work. Sickness is for everybody and this statement is not for debate; I am only informing you about what is happening to your leader.

On a sad note, we lost our Teso cultural leader, Papa Emorimor Osuban Augustine, who was a great advocate of peace and unity in Teso, where I come from.

He was devoted to preaching about moral and cultural values in the community and contributed a lot to the peace we are proud of in Teso. We will dearly miss him.

At an appropriate time, we will want to hear from the Government on whether we shall have to pay tribute to him, as a House. For now can we stand to observe a moment of silence in honour of Papa Emorimor?

(Members stood and observed a moment of silence.)

2.11
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join you and colleagues in mourning our fallen hero, the Emorimor. In regard to your statement, I request that you give us space on the Order paper on Thursday so we can move a motion, as Government, to pay tribute to the Emorimor because the President has offered an official burial for him.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR THOMAS TAYEBWA: Finally, I want to join you – and I am speaking on behalf of all of us - to pray for our Speaker, for a quick recovery, and to also thank you for updating us because street talk had gone way beyond. I remember when he met us, after he had returned last time, he told us that we had to be ourselves and that the moment we worked as a team in this House, we would ensure that work goes on even when one of us is indisposed.

So, I want to thank you for leading this House and passing very serious business. I am very sure that wherever the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is, he knows that he will take his time to heal because there is no vacuum in this House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Leader of Government Business. Honourable members, forget about what is being said on social media. What is circulating on social media is not the reality. I even spoke to the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah, just before I came to the House. (Applause)

He is in a good mood and I told him, “I was going to tell your Members” and he told me, “Tell them I love them.”

So, messages that have been circulating on social media, saying, “Rest in peace, Oulanyah” is the act of the devil, which we will not allow. The 11th Parliament is not for the devil’s work. Thank you.

Honourable members, we will pay tribute to Papa Emorimor on Thursday. Thank you so much, Government.

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to also stand with the people of Teso and wish Papa Emorimor eternal rest. 

I raise this procedural matter for Government’s attention. Different traditional leaders, including Papa Emorimor, now the late, the Kyabazinga and several other kings have properties that were used and taken over by Government -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: My Commissioner, don’t you think that is what you would bring up during the debate?

MR SILWANY: Much obliged but I was still moving to the procedural matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will be the first to speak that day.

MR SILWANY: Much obliged.

2.16
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, at the time Members were supposed to be oriented, there was Covid-19. I wish you could organise orientation for the new Members because a Member cannot raise a point of order against the Speaker. 

Madam Speaker, I thank you very much for your communication. Even yesterday I was in panic when the people from my subregion, Acholi, were calling me and demanding for an explanation, especially because I am the Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group. Fortunately, when I called you yesterday and got clarification, at least I talked to the people in the subregion.

On our own, we thank you for taking leadership in this House. We wish Government could keep updating the people because the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is No. 3 in the country and that vacuum created the panic on social media.

So, I thank you for taking this step. At least now, we are okay as Members. We believe in you and pray that this Parliament will not see anything bad in this country. I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairman Acholi Parliamentary Group. I would like to assure you that the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah is now Government property; he is no longer for only the Acholi. (Laughter) When anything happens to him, it is Government that is most affected first. 

There is no vacuum; do we have a vacuum? There is no vacuum. Let the Rt Hon. Jacob Oulanyah first rest; we need him to recover. He is still the Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda –(Applause)– for 10 years. He is the Speaker for 10 years. (Laughter) 

Mrs Okia, matters of national importance. [Hon. Walyomu rose_] Hon. Walyomu, do you have a point of order? On what matter do you rise?

MR WALYOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)– it is not procedure, it is a point of order. I think we have the list of shadow ministers in this august House. I am wondering, Madam Speaker, that on the front bench of the Opposition side, where we expect the shadow ministers to sit, I see hon. Macho –(Laughter)- hon. Richard -(Hon. Macho rose_) Ah ah ah. Let me tell you; when you have nothing to say in the House, just keep quiet. (Laughter)

2.21
MS JOANNE ANIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Madi-Okollo): Thank you, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Be brief.

MS ANIKU: I rise on an issue of national importance. Madam Speaker, on 16 September 2021, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development came to Madi-Okollo to perform what they called a reaffirmation exercise of the boundary between Madi- Okollo and Terego districts.

Madam Speaker, there were three red flags when this exercise took place. The first red flag was that the person presiding over the exercise had conflict of interest. It was the Minister of State for Housing and Urban Development and this was raised the day of the meeting. However, we were assured that nothing bad would happen.

The second red flag, which was raised, was that they brought two maps. One was the 2006 map; another one was a 1960 map. The 2006 map was rejected on site and the 1960 map had a disclaimer, stating that this map should not be used in determining boundaries. Now, the report from the Ministry of Lands states that these are the two maps on which they based their whole exercise.

Madam Speaker, this report has since been disseminated to ministries and other stakeholders and is being taken as an authority in the current state of the district boundaries for Madi-Okollo and Terego.

Recently, the state minister for refugees came to Madi-Okollo and signed in the visitors’ book as if she was in Terego District. The RPC is being put on pressure to enforce this fallacious report.

Madam Speaker, I have three prayers. The first prayer is; since this exercise was based on two false maps, two maps which were rejected at the time of the meeting, my prayer is that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development nullifies this report and the exercise.

Secondly, I ask that the Ministry of Local Government maintains the status quo, as per the boundaries of Madi-Okollo and Terego districts, as resolved by Parliament on 30 April 2019 and 5 May 2020, respectively. Those are the dates on which Parliament resolved to give Madi-Okollo and Terego their own districts. So, I pray that the Ministry of Local Government maintains the status quo.

The third prayer is that the Rt hon. Prime Minister comes on ground with the Minister of Local Government to chart a way forward, together with the MPs of both districts, the district chairpersons, the CAOs, district local councils and all other stakeholders, so that we can ensure that this impasse comes to an end. Madam Speaker, I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Joanne Aniku, before you sit, you said somebody had conflict of interest. Who is that minister who had conflict of interest?

MS ANIKU: Hon. Obiga Kania presided over the exercise and yet he is an MP in the disputed area and he is the one who disseminated the information to stakeholders. I have a letter from the RPC; it is from the district chairman of Terego, which I call a “threatening letter”, for him to enforce the district boundary. That goes against what Parliament resolved. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is fine. I just wanted to know that. [Hon. Afidra rose_] Do you have something to say on the same?

2.24
MR RONALD AFIDRA (NRM, Lower Madi County, Madi-Okollo):  Madam Speaker, my name is hon. Afidra Ronald, the area Member of Parliament for the affected district boundary conflict between Madi-Okollo and Terego.

The information I want to give is that during that fateful event, I rose on the Floor to reaffirm that this exercise should not continue. However, the honourable minister Kania, who is my colleague from the conflicted area, presided over and confirmed to us that he was sent by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development to preside over a border conflict, of which he is party to, since 1996 up to today.

So, my further information that I want to give is that a month ago, in December, I held a thanksgiving in the place where I was voted. The police of Terego, under the RPC, were deployed in Madi-Okollo land to come and distract my ceremony and thanksgiving function. (Laughter) This is total madness.

Through you, Madam Speaker –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Use parliamentary language. “Madness” is not part of our language. (Laughter)

MR AFIDRA: I withdraw.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have gotten the information; we have gotten what your concerns are. Government?

2.26  
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a very sensitive matter. We know how sensitive issues of boundaries have been in this country.

I can do two things: One, I am going to relay this information to the Rt hon. Prime Minister to request the Ministry of Local Government to maintain the status quo as per now. Thereafter, we are going to arrange a meeting with the Prime Minister, the representatives from the disputed areas and the ministers involved, to resolve this matter as soon as possible. By Friday, we should have had that meeting. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You need to report back to the House on what action you have taken and the solution you have come up with. Please, be brief.

2.27
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti City): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance concerning the running of Soroti Fruit Factory and the Uganda Development Corporation.

Government of Uganda, through Uganda Development Cooperation, invested huge sums of money in the Soroti Fruit Factory. This was done with the cardinal purpose of uplifting the socio-economic welfare of the people of Soroti, Teso and the country as a whole. However, there is gross abuse of office and resources, which has affected the growth of the factory. As per the evidence, a perimeter wall of Soroti Fruit Factory is estimated to have cost the taxpayers Shs 2.5 billion. This is way too high - in fact, making it the most expensive perimeter wall in the whole world. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the same managers at Soroti Fruit Factory and Uganda Development Corporation (UDC) spent Shs 5.5 billion to construct a one-kilometre road at the factory - also making it the most expensive road in the history of Uganda. 

Like I had said earlier on, the main purpose of establishing the Soroti Fruit Factory was to improve the socio-economic welfare of the people of Teso and Uganda as a country. However, this is very far from the reality.

Thirdly, the managers are buying fruits from the neighbouring countries - Kenya, Tanzania and Congo - leaving our people, the local farmers to suffer a lot - in fact, frustrating their efforts. 

Madam Speaker, the other area that is very sensitive is that Government gave free pumps to help the farmers but the managers at Soroti Fruit Factory and UDC, charged the farmers Shs 200,000 per pump.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the Executive Director of UDC, a one Mr Birungi is totally untouchable. He is the “alpha and the omega”. In fact, he is like a demi-god. He summarily fired the board that was established in 2018 - he fired the whole board. Right now Soroti Fruit Factory is operating without a board. 

In addition, the fruit factory just picks employees; they are not following the right procedures of recruiting staff. 

My prayers are that: 

    1. Parliament orders for a forensic audit into the operations of Soroti Fruit Factory and UDC. 

    2. Parliament orders the board of Soroti Fruit factory to be instituted immediately; and finally, 

    3. Soroti Fruit factory managers make public the list of employees in Soroti at the factory. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give this House is that when we are talking about projects managed by UDC, a majority of them - actually not only Soroti Fruit Factory - but a majority of the projects that have been funded by UDC are being mismanaged.

It is time that UDC be looked at by auditors because across the country - when you go to every district, where they are funding a project - there is a very big problem. Therefore, it is something that Government needs to take charge of and then we look at it. That is information I wanted to give. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

2.32
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Madam Speaker, the allegations made in the submission are grave. And some exhibit a very high level of mismanagement and incompetence on some of the officers. 

Before Parliament takes the initiative to go into a forensic audit, I would request, Madam Speaker, that you give the Minister of Trade two weeks to study, investigate and report back to this House. Once we give Government a chance to also take action - some of these things are surprising when I read them here. 

Then it will help us better in terms of appreciating the issue. I request for two weeks so that we will report here.

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, we have a very competent Committee on Trade in this Parliament, and I have trust in the chairperson, hon. Mpaka, who did a lot of work both at the Soroti Fruit Factory and with Atiak Sugar Works. I have very high hopes that if we trust our committee, when there is a complaint of this kind, the Committee on Trade can do a better job than the minister to come and report to us. We are tired of these ministers coming with statements. (Laughter) Can we do that? It is more practical, and we go by the recommendation of the Committee on Trade. That will help us to decide what we can do with the Soroti Fruit Factory.

The matter, which is very painful, is that when such a project is put in place, we expect the local people to benefit. And they can benefit when the fruits are bought from them. In a situation where we are importing the fruits to run the factory, it becomes very frustrating. 

I was in the 10th Parliament and I was on the Committee on Budget and we gave money to run the factory. Even the running costs were given by this Parliament. I think it is important that the Committee on Trade - I suggest you give them that responsibility. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much honourable members. The allegations made by hon. Ebwalu might be a reality. It is unfortunate that I cannot raise an issue myself, but I am happy you have raised it. We will wait for a report from the Minister of Trade on Thursday next week.

I am also going to ask my Committee on Trade to get a report and we will look at the two reports concurrently. (Applause) And I will ask you the Auditor-General to audit after the reports of the minister and committee are out. I will ask them for a forensic audit.

Honourable members, Soroti Fruit Factory - I do not think it was worth being there. We have put a lot of money into that factory but the output is zero. The people who are managing the factory manage it as if it is personal property. We need to put our feet down and say, “If we are giving out money to anybody, whether Atyak, Soroti or anywhere else, we must see results.” It must be able to change the lives of the people. Thank you. (Applause)

2.37
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Hon. Silwany said something in relation to this very matter. I think it is about amending the prayers. 

I know that UDC has a lot of work across the country, not only in Soroti. I would like to request that your instruction, Madam Speaker, comes out clearly so that we handle these matters once and for all. All these issues handled by UDC should be audited at once so that we get a comprehensive report and we complete this issue. Otherwise, tomorrow, another person will come from the west and say, “There is also this problem.”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The forensic audit we are doing is on Soroti Fruit Factory. UDC is managed by the Committee on Public Accounts (Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises). The committee should look at the audited books of UDC and give a report to the House; not in piecemeal. Otherwise, I just handed them the books last week. Give a report for all the institutions. 

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER ON GOVERNMENT’S INTERVENTION TO ADDRESS INCIDENTS OF CATTLE RUSTLING IN ACHOLI SUBREGION

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, cattle rustling is very rampant and has taken a long time in various parts of Teso, Acholi, Lango, Karamoja and Sebei subregions. Honourable minister, I know you are a General but when the Speaker is speaking, the General first sits down.

Let us receive the report from the minister and see what solutions he has. I hope the current interventions the minister has will give us a lasting solution. It is something undesirable and so we need to have that issue resolved. 

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the report uploaded? 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Indeed, I was tasked to present a report from Government regarding the interventions to address the incidences of cattle rustling in Acholi. However, like you truly said, Madam Speaker, the adjacent regions of Karamoja, Acholi and the others like Bugisu, Teso, Sebei and Lango, especially those on the fringes, suffer incursions from these warriors from Karamoja. 

Due to the nature of the problem being paramilitary, it has been in the main - led by UPDF, although, it is an internal security problem, which ordinarily should lie with the police. The main effort following the resurgence of rustling and rearmament, because of the porous borders, was put on Karamoja to decisively deal with this problem. However, this has left gaps, especially in the adjacent regions. 

Madam Speaker, this is not to say that these regions are less important than Karamoja. Therefore, measures to address the suffering adjacent regions are in the offing although, I want to admit, that sometimes the means to mobilise these measures are not as fast as the problem. The measures include the following:

    a) Working with the Internal Security Organisation (ISO). We are working at recruitment of low cadre ISO staff from the villages upwards who will help in early warning regarding this problem like we do in Karamoja.

    b) We also want to look at kraal protection to reduce the loss of animals in the areas. I had a discussion with some of the Members of Parliament and their appeal was: “Can we have a stopgap of identifying some local personnel along the model of LDUs to man our areas as the bigger effort is being mobilised?” All these ideas are being firmed up in order to come up with a quick and fast solution. 

    c) Intelligence has also been tasked to identify the hotspots and crossing points, especially Agago coming to Acholi, and the security gaps so that UPDF can be deployed. 

    d) We are also thinking of deploying military detaches at Lawoireng and Lela-Padela crossing points in addition to Kamurono, Ochala-Mero and Agwata crossing points. 

Madam Speaker, we had a force called Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU). It was unfortunately depleted, but it has been re-organised. However, the first call was Karamoja. We want to spread this capability across the other affected regions by recruiting more of these and positioning them to protect the other adjacent areas. 

    e) The other measure is the recruitment of LDUs to act as screens in these affected areas, in addition to sensitisation programmes to alert the communities about the need for communal grazing in the protected areas, which would make protection much easier. 

    f) Lastly, we want to reinforce the use of animal permits for inter-district movement and the continued restriction of animal movement, especially during night hours. Of course, not to say the construction of security roads with the support of the district engineers but mainly the Ministry of Works and Transport. I beg to submit. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for your statement. I will allow a debate on this. Honourable minister, you will realise that this is a very serious issue. Most of those areas – at the borders - these people do not only take animals; they also kill people. Therefore, you need to be mindful of that.

You said that ASTU did not perform to the expectations, however, when we had them in Bukedea, our cows were not stolen. Now, cows are stolen every day. Why would you remove ASTU yet they have been trying to protect the cattle and you leave the place bare? 

Honourable minister, you need to consider a number of things and also consult the community on what you can do to protect the lives and the cattle of the people. I now open debate for 20 minutes. You will use two minutes each. 

2.46
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, this issue was raised by Hon. Beatrice Akori and she sent me instructions to respond to the honourable minister.

According to her, even this morning, a raid took place in Omiya Pachwa, Agago. I have been disappointed by the minister’s response. When growing up, I was one of the people from whose homes these rustlers took cattle; I still remember the number; they were 48. That was the only thing that my father had and the rustling brought poverty.
 
The question of concern in this House, which the minister should answer, is: What are the root causes of this raid? When you know the root causes, you are able to tackle the problem. Why don’t we learn from the doctors? What they do is to make sure that blood or any other sample is taken to the laboratory so that they can find the real problem and sort it out once and for all. 

What they are doing here is just massaging a continuous problem. When something happens consistently for many years and we still talk about the solution, which does not clearly address the root causes of the problem, that means this issue is not going to end. It is affecting human life and the livelihoods of the people. As I speak, it is not only in Agago but they have moved up to the Kitgum side. Like the Speaker said, this is also happening in Teso and the surrounding places.

They are talking about disarmament but the problem we face is that when you disarm the people, what else do you give them? I remember in the Committee on Budget, they told us that – (Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Conclude. 

MR AKOL: We were told that when you bring your gun, you are given 10 goats. How can somebody that can use a gun to raid 1,000 cattle have his gun replaced with only 10 goats? Do you think that will end disarmament? I think we need to do something serious. Let us look at the root causes of this problem and solve it once and for all. Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Akol. I am not sure whether we shall be able to find the cause of this problem. When I was growing up, there was a saying – and this should not offend my uncles, the Karimojong – that all the cows belong to the Karimojong. So, when they come, they have come for their cows. (Laughter) That was that. I grew up in those raids.   

2.49 
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, that is very true. That is how it used to be. Even when we sit in the restaurants with my “uncles” and “aunties”, they still talk about it. That aside, Madam Speaker, these are the issues I would like to front.
 
One, the Government should review its operations in matters of insecurity. We have had very many interventions but they do not seem to work. What is the problem? Can we review them so that we get to know where the problem is? 

Two, on the issue of LDUs, yes, they are good, but there have been challenges around them. Sometimes, we put them to guard the people and they go overboard. You find them getting involved in other issues.

Three, there is the issue of the ministerial policy statements. Minister, how I wish this time when you come to bring the policy statement for your ministry, this matter comes out very clearly so that we get to know what you are going to do in Financial Year 2022/2023.  

Madam Speaker, disarmament took place in Karamoja, but we are hearing that across the border in Kenya, the other “relatives” have not been disarmed. So, when the Turkana come and attack our “uncles”, the “uncles” automatically run to the “nephews”. So, we are left unprotected.
 
Just yesterday, I got information that there were many Karimojong “brothers” and “uncles” that had come to Ongino in Kumi because they had been chased away by the armed “relatives” from the other side since they do not have guns anymore. The same applies to Acholi, Bugisu and Sebei. 

Finally, when people lose lives and animals, they are never compensated but constitutionally, our Government is responsible for protecting lives and property. Therefore, you are obliged to compensate. Can we see the budget for compensation because there are many people who have lost animals, lives and property? What are you doing about this? It is the answer that we are all waiting to hear as the greater north. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable minister, what people may be afraid to mention is that these people do not only take animals, but also rape women. They abduct people. You need to know that. 

2.52
MR RICKY ANYWAR (NRM, Agago West County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The warriors have caused a lot of pain, humiliation and economic destruction in the area for a very long time. Even the implementation of Government projects in the area is becoming a problem. We are very worried about the Parish Development Model that is coming. We are worried about whether it will benefit the people from this area. 

Madam Speaker, we know that the UPDF is a very professional army that has dealt with similar situations, both in this country and outside it. I wonder if the minister could tell us about the skills that the UPDF used to defeat the previous rebels in Uganda. Can they use similar skills on these warriors? Thank you. 

2.54
MS ROSE OBIGAH (NRM, Woman Representative, Terego): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a similar matter. The minister was in Terego about a month ago, trying to flash out the long-horned cows but I think they just relocated from one subcounty to the next.

Madam Speaker, these cows eat indiscriminately; they even eat dry grass. They have finished all my people’s food. I kindly request the honourable minister to go back and redo the work because we now have five subcounties that have been affected.
 
The honourable minister also said that they can offer detachment. I kindly beg you – my people are sleeping out. They have been attacked by Madi-Okollo, so, I kindly request for a detachment in Terego where we have just worked on the border. (Laughter) Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I request that this is done. God bless you. (Laughter) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order! Hon. Rose, before you came, there was an issue of Madi-Okollo versus Terego, just like Apaa versus Amuru. Therefore, we are going to get a statement on the issue of Madi-Okollo versus Terego but you people in that area, why don’t you coexist like we do? 

2.56
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for the statement. However, I would like to point out that this matter has been coming up in the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, several times.

One time, hon. Margaret Lamwaka protested attending the committee because of these issues. She alleged that we were doing nothing and that the Government had neglected her people. 

Last week, hon. Ochero from Abim almost cried here; he was looking for similar solutions. 

The challenge is that the ministry has only kept emphasising that fact that they are overstretched and logistically constrained. I wonder why the minister cannot come out to clear this and tell the House what is required. He has to do that because this is now a public issue that we need to address squarely. 

Honourable minister, I implore you to open up and ask this Parliament for resources to help you wipe out this vice once and for all. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Milton. Yes, hon. Okwalinga

2.57
MR SIMON OPOLOT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the record, I am Opolot Simon Peter, Member of Parliament for Kanyum County. One thing I have noticed is that -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do not say that the name Okwalinga -

MR OPOLOT: Yes, I am called Simon Peter Opolot Okwalinga. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR SIMON OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This issue of cattle rustling has been going on for so many years, and we still wonder what is causing it. Well, yes, Government has come up with a statement in trying to address the issue. However, I feel there is something that we need to look at. Karamoja is not a very big geographical area; and Karamoja Subregion is serving as a supply hub for the warriors that go and attack their neighbours. 

Karamoja Subregion is socially structured in such a way that people live in communal huts called the manyatas. Each manyata has a leader who is able to know all the families in there. I am sure Government also has the LCs presence in those manyatas. 

It is, therefore, possible to know the problematic youth in each manyata. It is, therefore, also possible to document the movements of these youths because these manyatas are fenced. They are all fenced off and so, when somebody is going out or coming in, it is noticed. 

The Government has ISO personnel picking intelligence from each manyata. If they are able to collect intelligence on ADF that is far away in Ituri Forest, then it is possible for them to pick intelligence on who the warriors causing havoc to the neighbours to the Karimojong are. 

I really request Government to profile all the youth based on their manyatas so they can get to know who they are. Government can also collect all of them together and possibly try to rehabilitate them. If not, the problem will continue escalating. You can even use some other methods like how the NRA worked before on some problematic people. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. The good thing you are a former intelligence officer and you should be able to help.

3.00
MS SUSAN ABEJA (Independent, Woman Representative, Otuke): I want to thank you for this opportunity. In addition, I want to thank our minister for the statement he has made. 

Madam Speaker, the challenges associate with solving this issue in Northern Uganda, Acholi and Teso subregions are not associated with the minister himself. I, for one, one time had a meeting in the minister’s office with the heads of department. There was the commandant of the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) and other police department heads. 

However, one day, I got touched when these Karimojong raided my district. And when I called the Commandant of ASTU to help me, he told me that his area of command did not stretch up to Lango, Acholi and Teso. He said his area of operation was only Moroto, which has gold. I am sorry to say this. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Abeja, did you see a real Karimojong or a cattle rustler? 

MS ABEJA: A cattle rustler or Karimojong, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, no. Did you see a cattle rustler or a real Karimojong?

MS ABEJA: They are rustlers because they come for cattle. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, they are rustlers; they are not Karimojong.

MS ABEJA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. My concern is - the problem in this country is that Government deploys people to handle such issues even when they do not hail from those places, and so, they do not feel the same pain as that felt by the affected people from the affected area.  You find the head of security is from elsewhere and the other is being promoted from there –(Interjections)– I am begging -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, honourable member, for you to put up a credible submission, you must substantiate what you are talking about. If you are saying, “there and there” - we do not talk in parables. You should know that you enjoy immunity in this House.

MS ABEJA: That day, we even agreed with the minister that we should do recruitment of our wananchi to take care of our cattle. 

The Minister of State for Internal Affairs instructed his ASTU Commander to take charge, but when somebody tells you that they are not concerned with matters in your district - let me ask the Minister: that day, you told me to work with the ASTU Commander, but he refused to work with me. Who should I really work with? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Did you report back to the minister about that police commander’s refusal to help you?  

MS ABEJA: The minister is ever busy. I tried calling him; he did not answer his phone. I sent him a message, but I am still waiting for his reply. 

Honourable minister, if you are in charge - I am coming back to your office – yesterday, honourable minister – let me inform the minister - there was a meeting in Angaro but your security men were almost beaten up by the wananchi. The situation in Otuke is not good. 

I appeal to you to help us settle this matter. We have a barracks that you established there, but your ASTU Commandant has withdrawn all the personnel from this barracks and at the moment, there are no policemen in that station to protect our people.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I think for us to solve this problem, we need to get involved. Let us talk to our communities and tell them the dangers of going for raids. Let us get down there other than this business of saying, “your cows have been stolen; go and steal more.”

We should be able to take responsibility, as leaders, as we wait for action from the ministry and Government at large.  Let us talk to our people because the people stealing cattle are our voters; let us talk to them. 

3.04
MR WILLIAM CHEMONGES (NRM, Kween County, Kween): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of cattle rustling in this country, especially in my area, Sebei subregion, is really a serious matter that even the statement from the minister looks a bit polite and not strong enough to finally solve this problem. In fact, the entire Sebei Region right now, is in a total mess.

Before the NRM came to power, we had the same problem. However, from 1986, I think NRM tried and reduced it a bit. However, in the last one year, our friends from Karamoja - in fact, we cannot talk about cattle rustling without mentioning the word “Karamoja” –(Laughter). It is difficult, when you talk about cattle rustling in Sebei, in Lango, in Acholi, in Teso, you have to bring in the word “Karamoja”. We should all agree on that. 

I would like to bring it to the House – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Chemonges, if you went to Abim, half of the voters of Ochero – Ochero will confirm this – are from Teso. If you went to Bukedea, half of the voters that I have are from Sebei, Bugisu and Busoga. 

So, if there is an aspect – why don’t we be civilised as Parliament. You should not say anything until they are arrested and you confirm that these are Karimojong. We must co-exist in this House. 

You will leave this House having spoken about the Karimojong, and when you reach out there, hon. Ochero will punch you. It will not be in the House. (Laughter) We need to be civilised. Let us use the term “cattle rustlers”

MR CHEMONGES: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I withdraw the word “Karamoja” and use the term “cattle rustlers” instead. However, Madam Speaker, most MPs from Karamoja are my very good friends and they are also suffering the very same issue. Members here have lost cows to the cattle rustlers. And they also know that it is their own people. 

I would like to request that on behalf of Sebei Region, we feel – 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I have risen on a point of clarification, because your guidance shows us that rustlers are not only Karimojong, but whenever the word rustlers is mentioned together with Karimojong – I have been a good friend and brother to hon. Ochero for a long time, even when we were still youth leaders – I see him very happy in the mask. (Laughter)

I have, therefore, risen on a point of clarification. Could he clarify to the august House whether the words “Karimojong” and “cattle rustlers” are the same? Judging from his happiness, it seems that these two words are the same. Thank you, Madam Speaker. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am trying to create harmony in the House, where we stop pinpointing at people. If we decide to pinpoint - my own cows were stolen by rustlers. (Laughter) 

Incidentally, the people I caught with the cows were not actually Karimojong. But I cannot mention that they were people from this area or the other. We should also accept that there are thieves – people who just go and steal cows. Can you imagine someone coming to your kraal with a vehicle and loads 100 cows -(Interjection)- yes. That is how mine were stolen. 

For you to now start mentioning – do not do that, simply make your point, but avoid pinpointing. Can you conclude?

MR CHEMONGES: Only between March last year and today, Sebei subregion has lost about 500 cows and we have lost about eight people – five are dead and three were seriously injured. 

I give information to my colleague. Even hon. Emma can say something –(Laughter)– these are MPs from Sebei Region –(Interruption)

MR CHELIMO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and thank you colleague for giving me way. The information I would like to give to my colleague and to the honourable members is that Sebei Subregion and parts of Bugisu do not only face cattle rustlers from Karamoja or the other region but it is also affected by the Pokots of Western Kenya. 

I remember in 2002, Government took a step to disarm all the people from the subregion, but on the other side, they were never disarmed. They have been raiding us and burning property like granaries. 

I remember in 2003, a testimony was laid before this House where houses were burnt; 33 people were burnt in the houses. It is, therefore, a very serious matter. That is the information I wanted to give to my colleague. It is indeed true. I confirm that a lot of animals, even more than 500, have been stolen and  people have been killed. 

And to make matters worse, Government again disorganised all detaches of the Anti-Stock Theft Unit (ASTU) in the subregion. As we speak right now, it is just open. This has encouraged thieves from the other side to attack the people. Thank you. 

MS CHERUKUT: I am a daughter from the Sabiny soil. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On the topic of discussion, being the District Woman MP, Kapchorwa is a mountainous area. But there is the lower belt in the plains. 

I know why my brother Chemonges is busy trying to point at our brothers – we are all brothers and sisters to the Karimojong. 

I would like to put it to you that right from 1986, peace had been restored in Sebei subregion. But it is very unfortunate that after the elections that were held last year on 14 January 2021, there was an order to disarm or to transfer all the ASTUs from Soy County to Karamoja to go and restore peace among the Karimojong. 

But since then, for us in Sebei, in Kween, we have suffered as a result of this trauma of cattle rustling. My brothers have us for breakfast, lunch and dinner such that my people in the lower belt are living in a state of quagmire. They do not have any peace at all. By 4.00 p.m. they are already in their houses ready to sleep for fear of their neighbours. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When they go to sleep at 4.00 p.m., they can also do other activities. There is, therefore, no problem with sleeping at 4.00 p.m. (Laughter)

MS CHERUKUT: My prayers –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you cannot make prayers. You were simply giving information. Even as we talk about this issue, we need to look at the neighbouring countries – the Turkanas, the Pokot – that group there. 

MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have key issues that I would like the minister to address. When the minister was giving us a report, he did not handle these: One, I would like to know, from about five years ago, how many lives have we lost? The minister should have told us this in his report. 

Then, what is the population of the animals that have been taken away from their rightful owners? The minister should have told us that too. 

We are talking about cattle being taken. What plans does Government have, after trying to stop this, to compensate these individuals? Some people, especially in the cattle corridors, have the cattle as their only source of livelihood. Some have very few, but you find that the cattle have all been taken away. What plan does Government have to compensate these people; because when you lose all your cows, children cannot go back to school; you get stuck. So, I want the minister to respond to those key issues because they did not come out clearly in the report.

This has been one of the reasons that in Busoga, we have failed to have cows; when we see what is happening in the neighbourhood, you cannot have the energy - we used to have cows in Busoga but right now people are discouraged. If this is sorted, I am telling this Parliament that Busoga will have a lot of cows.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know sugarcane cannot be stolen (Laughter)– so, you deal with ebikaado. Maybe on top of what Hon. Silwany said, you also need to have a plan on how to restore peace. It is not only the cows that are stolen; people are being beaten, women raped and people are being abducted. What plan do you have to restore peace in the area?

3.17
MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that this matter has continued for all this time. We thought that Government had controlled cattle rustling but unfortunately, it is back. 

I am aware that several meetings have been held between Members of Parliament, the President and ministers. What were you discussing in these meetings that to date the minster still says that they are going to identify hotspots, crossing points where they can deploy; what have you been discussing, honourable minister?

Secondly, unless there is a complete mindset change in Karamoja, this problem will continue. We need to diversify the sources of income for the people of Karamoja because they believe that it is only through cattle that they can be able to earn an income and sustain their livelihoods.

The Ministry of Agriculture is key in resolving this challenge in Karamoja. Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, Karamoja is mineral-rich, but the Karimojong are not benefiting from the minerals in their area. Unless we address the challenge - but most importantly, unless we have a mindset change in the Karamoja region, this problem will continue.

Lastly, this is a bilateral matter; it cannot be an issue for the Ministry of Internal Affairs or Security in Uganda alone. We need to address the challenges on the other side of the border. The Turkana, Pokot and all those that are coming in because when they raid Karamoja, the people from Karamoja move to Teso and other parts. The bilateral matters must be resolved with the Kenyan Government if we are to resolve this issue. Otherwise, we shall go around and around.

It is unfortunate that the Members of Parliament from Karamoja are not here today when we are discussing this subject but when you sit with them, they will tell you how trucks of cattle are being ferried out of Karamoja. Who owns these cattle that are being ferried out of Karamoja? That is another issue that has to be addressed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Sarah Opendi is not a pastoralist like some of us. The first thing, like you said, is mindset change. My uncles and aunties in Karamoja believe - even if they went to the west they will say, “That cow looks like mine.” They believe that all cows belong to them.

First, we need to have a mindset change, even if you got the Minister of Agriculture to go to Karamoja, they will never embrace agriculture. For them it is about cows and their milk.

3.21
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I thank the minister and Government for the effort so far put in place. With all that we have listened to and after analysing the effect of this activity on human lives, we must prioritise and ensure that this activity is kicked out.

You can imagine your children being raped; what is the effect on your family and the generation after? Analysing the capacity of this Government in fighting wars and causing peace in other parts of the country, I believe it can still sort out this problem.

My proposal is: Let the minister and the committee ensure that the budgetary issues in relation to the management of the root causes of cattle rustling are handled. I propose that the ministry gets to Karamoja subregion and listens to these people. Without listening to them and addressing their challenges, we may not do much. You have explained the issue of mindset and beliefs, and I believe they may open up because I do not think that those who are doing it are also happy. 

The minister proposed that they are going to recruit GISOs. I propose that let them have the component of transport to support the GISOs to do their work. I know that it is also in your district; many of our DISOs and existing GISOs do not have transport. (Hon. Kangwagye rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you also have cattle rustling? (Laughter)

3.23
MR STEPHEN KANGWAGYE (Independent, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As a cattle keeper, I feel what my brothers and sisters are going through in Karamoja. I come from Isingiro; Bukanga touches the border of Uganda with Tanzania -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Correction; you feel what we are going through in Teso, Lango, Acholi, Sebei and Bugisu?

MR KANGWAGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for rightly correcting me. Some years back, we, cattle keepers in Ankole subregion, used to face what our brothers are facing. Tanzanians used to come and raid all the cattle in Ankole and the following morning we could also go and do the same. (Interjection) Yes, I want to be sincere to this august House.

However, as Ugandans, we found that it was not helpful at all. So, when Government came in, we formed village security committees and the soldiers were in each and every subcounty such that whenever these Tanzanians came, we would all wake up and make an alarm and give the information to the soldiers. This village gives an alarm and the other also does the same; so, the Tanzanians had to leave –(Interjection)- I am still on the Floor. 

Madam Speaker, what the minister was saying is that all they need is to recruit the LDUs. However, honourable minister, the villages should also have what we call village security committees to work hand-in-hand with the soldiers on ground so that they can give you enough information and you totally handle this matter without having any problem on ground. Tomorrow, this issue will come to an end. Thank you.

MS ABABIKU: Thank you, for the information. Madam Speaker, in summary, Government has to take the lead in ensuring that there is total peace in Karamoja and in the neighbourhood. Thank you very much. (Members rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Members, we have a number of issues. Now, I will start with you, on the next item because they are related. [Honourable member: “It is very important information.”] Honourable member, you delegated hon. Akol to speak for you. 

Honourable minister, hon. Koluo said yesterday that 14 cows were stolen from his constituency. Can you respond to what has been raised and give us a way forward? Hon. Ebwalu is also saying that in most cases, when they are stealing cows, especially those with trucks, the police even escort them.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have noted the concerns of Members and they have very enriching proposals. We shall condense them into actionable interventions, especially those that promote prevention, rather than reaction because all this time, we have been reacting but inadequately, as Members rightly put it. 

All the points raised are very important but I will dwell more on the one of hon. Sarah Opendi. Indeed, it is a multi-dimensional problem. I think priority should be given to stopping the trouble now and then, going into the other interventions, which are multinational or multi-sectoral across Government. 

Whatever requires additional resources, Madam Speaker, we shall condense into a paper and then see how the House can help us to decisively deal with this problem. I pledge to engage more with all the concerned neighbouring districts so that where we can seek early interventions as we work on the bigger ones, we do so, in order to resolve this problem, which is affecting development and the security of the people in these areas. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, if I may ask, how much time do you want us to give you to try to resolve the issues in the area? Do not give us a paper but resolve the issues? 

GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, I request that we work out proposals and get back to you because I cannot put a timeframe on some of these issues. I think it would be more realistic, if I consulted across Government with my senior minister and the other major partners in this, especially the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs so that we come to you with a timeframe and concrete actions.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. Minister, what I am asking you is about what you said, that you want to do deployment in a number of detaches and see how that can help. So, what I am asking you is: How much time do you need to do that? How much time do we give you for us to see at least some sufficient peace in the area?

MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I was on a procedural matter. The General knows the issue of security cannot wait. While the minister is answering a very serious question on how to handle a matter of urgency, he is telling the august House that he does not want to give a time limit. 

Madam Speaker, are we, proceeding well in this House, when we are dealing with an issue of emergency? We are talking about lives and livelihoods being lost. People are sleeping in IDP camps and the minister is telling us “I cannot give a time limit”. Are we proceeding well?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: When they were doing disarmament in Karamoja during that time, a time limit was given and it was achieved. Now, you are making us lose our cows, honourable minister.

GEN. MUHOOZI: Madam Speaker, disarmament took four years and so, I cannot stand here –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked you how much time you need to report back to this House that there is some sufficient peace.

GEN. MUHOOZI: On the immediate and medium-term interventions, Madam Speaker, can we have three months? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: No!

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, do not heckle. In the three months, they are going to be deployed there and they will be working and then, you will give us feedback. It is not a one-day thing that you can do; it is a security issue. 

In the three months, we should be able to see that cattle rustling has reduced and people have been deployed. Let us not look at it, as if it is just eating mandazi. (Applause) So, we are giving you three months.

I thank you, honourable minister and honourable Members of Parliament for your contributions. This is a very pertinent issue because it affects most of us, especially when it comes to peace and even the loss of our cattle. Some of us believe in our cattle. 

Beyond the interventions to address the security challenges, Government needs a conscious effort to reform the farming practices among the pastoral communities, as hon. Sarah Opendi had said. Stringent measures should be put in place to regulate the inter-district movement of animals in the region. You need to have very stringent measures. If cows are crossing from Katakwi to Bukedea, there must be full documentation to the effect to avoid allegations where they say the police are the ones that authorise. Let us try our best to see how we can do that and we will achieve what we want at the end of the day, Members. Thank you very much. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF THE VALUE-ADDITION FACILITY AT THE BUSIA BORDER POST

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the minister around?

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (TRADE) (Ms Harriet Ntabazi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This matter was raised one week ago. Last Thursday, when you adjourned, Madam Speaker, we were prepared to listen to the reactions and comments of Members on these issues, so that we could respond. Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are still waiting.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Harriet Ntabazi, you were supposed to come and present a statement to this House on the status of the value-addition facility at Busia Border. If you are not ready today, just say that you will come back tomorrow. Hon. Ntabazi, if you are not ready today, say, you will come and make a presentation tomorrow.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. Indeed, we had prepared this presentation but I am asking you kindly to allow me present tomorrow, when I come with a copy. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable minister is just being sincere. Next item – yes? 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, with the apology of my good sister, the minister, let me spare her for today because she came unprepared. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON INVESTIGATIONS TO STEM THE ESCALATION OF ATTACKS ON THE PEOPLE OF APAA COMMUNITY

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. David Muhoozi): Madam Speaker, this is a report regarding the clashes in Apaa. 

An investigation by joint security agencies was sanctioned mid-August last year to inquire into the renewed clashes in Apaa/ Zoka area. 

The area has been the subject of contention between the Madi and Acholi communities for quite some time. Apaa village, with an estimated population of 35,000 people, was until 2017 under Lubala Parish, Pubbo Subcounty in Kilak North County, Amuru District. However, following the demarcation of the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani districts in 2017, Apaa Village was placed under Mungula Parish, Itirikwa Subcounty, Adjumani East Constituency in Adjumani District. The area has since experienced recurrent clashes between the Acholi and Madi communities that have inhabited the area for quite some time. 

Since 2018, following the visit of the President, Apaa has been generally peaceful. However, there is resurgence of clashes once in a while between the Acholi and Madi, with the most prominent incidents registered between June and August 2021. 

The prevailing situation is that the Government has several times engaged stakeholders to have the issue resolved amicably. The latest issue is the one on 19 January 2022 when the Acholi community fought with the Madi, who had gone to the garden in Ngoro village, where a one Mr Alex Moroga Uruga was seriously injured and he later died. At the same time, a one Mr David Ambayo – his body was recovered and buried on 26 January 2022. Seven suspects were arrested and taken to Adjumani Police Station after the death of the two people and investigations are going on to have them prosecuted. 

On the 26th of January this year, separate meetings were held with both the Acholi and Madi cultural leaders to find a long-term solution to the conflict. Therefore, this is a background.

The findings of the investigation were as follows: 

    1. It was found out that there was incitement by politicians before and following the recent elections, especially the promises they made, including the promise that they would recover what is perceived as the Madi land that was taken by the Acholi and vice versa. 

    2. Fear of the Madi and Acholi communities that large numbers of either of the two continue to pour into Apaa as settlers, an area that is already gazetted as a game reserve. Every small matter between the individuals of the two communities is quickly escalated as a “community versus community” issue. 

Other factors fuelling the conflict are:

(a) 	Varying perceptions by the two communities about the status of Apaa land.

(b) 	Increased agitation by the Acholi in Apaa following the boundary demarcation in 2017, which has disrupted service delivery in the area, since neither Amuru nor Adjumani is providing services. On the other side, the placement of the boundary has intensified agitations by the Madi to push the Acholi out of Apaa on account that the Government has finally recognised the area as belonging to the Madi.

(c)	The economic imperatives of the land in Apaa/Zoka by interested parties in the communities. 

From these investigations, some leaders have been identified as fuelling the clashes across all levels of social and political strata. 

The Apaa/Zoka area is currently secured by the UPDF and the Uganda Police Force deployed in five detachments of Apaa/Zoka. 

The forces are there and responding well to the emerging threats despite constant interference from politicians who demand the release of suspects once arrested, but also of removal of these forces – because they are more or less an interposition force.

The team observed the following: 

    1. The establishment of the boundary between Amuru and Adjumani in 2017, including the placement of a boundary mark at Omee, has emboldened the Madi to claim full ownership of the contested land, while it is highly contested by the Acholi with a counterclaim that it is their ancestral land, with a historical boundary at Zoka River, thereby exacerbating the conflict.

    2. The conflict in Apaa has been hijacked by politicians on either side to the disadvantage of the local cultural institutions, through which land conflicts have always been resolved in this part of the country and where communities previously coexisted amicably. The underlying communal tensions are, therefore, selfish interests of leaders for land and political capital. 

    3. Service delivery in Apaa has almost stopped since the area can no longer be serviced by either Amuru or Adjumani districts. The reluctance by the Apaa community to accept services from Adjumani District, due to distrust, further compounds the problem. 

Way Forward

The following are the steps being taken: 

    1. Government is engaging and prevailing over the national and local politicians, who have been identified to be behind the renewed clashes in order to promote harmony. 

    2. Government will consider resettlement of the communities that occupy the area of Apaa that was re-gazetted as a game reserve, with the following possible options;

i) 	Compensation of those who are verified; and
ii) 	Resettlement on Government-owned land or through acquisition of land to resettle these people. 

3.	Government will also consider engaging the Acholi and Madi cultural institutions to promote dialogue between the two communities and as a mechanism to address, decisively and completely, this land conflict. 

In conclusion, the land conflict in Apaa/Zoka area has been protracted, continues to stoke deep-rooted tensions and the renewed clashes point to the delay by Government, unfortunately, to find a lasting solution to this challenge. 

The conflict has also stood in the way of development in the area and is likely to frustrate social transformation and other programmes of Government. 

I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for this statement. The Apaa issue has been very contentious. Like I said before – Members, as politicians, we need to advise our people to coexist with each other. We have intermarried and we all belong to those communities. 

As the minister said that it is being fuelled by politicians – politicians, let us stop fuelling these things. We are one people. We should love and support each other, as communities. 

Although the issue of land is very important, it should not cause us to kill each other. We should not treat each other with unnecessary animosity. I call upon politicians from those regions, at whatever level, to desist from causing confusion among the people and fuelling the animosity in the area that is causing people to kill each other. 

It is an ugly thing; every term we are talking about Apaa.

My colleague has even said, “I will not chair when it is Apaa.”

Therefore, if Apaa cannot get out - another one is coming from Terego. We should create some harmony in our areas. Let us emphasise to our people to live together; let us work together.

As I said the other time, since Parliament has failed to take a decision on this matter, can Cabinet help us? Let it come up with a solution. We have issues, like the ones in Tororo District - we referred the issue to Cabinet but we are still waiting for its decision; it is something unpleasant. Yes, point of procedure?

Ms opendi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that this Apaa issue has gone on for over 10 years. When I came to Parliament in 2011, I found this matter raging on. It was referred to us. As Minister of State for Lands then, I visited the locus and I know the actual problem in Apaa.

A select committee in the 10th Parliament was even assigned to handle this problem. The report was complete. However, if I can remember very well, the Prime Minister requested that we allow the Cabinet some time to go and sit, and that they would report back to this House. 

Madam Speaker, since the problem has persisted and Cabinet seems not to have resolved it, can’t we ask the relevant committee to look up that report and maybe bring it to this House? From there, we can move because that report has recommendations –(Interjections)– yes, I welcome information – (Interruption)

Mr aogon: Madam Speaker - I know it is a procedural matter but this one being my sister, I need to support her with information. 

Madam Speaker, I remember vividly that the House discussed the issue of Apaa. The chairperson of that ad hoc committee was Hon. Agnes Ameede if, I recall very well. The discussion was done under the tent outside there. I remember it was one afternoon and it was a heated debate. 

Therefore, what remains is basically for Government to pick on the resolutions which were in that report. The problem is that Government, often times, takes its time to act on Parliament resolutions. 

Let me tell you one thing: voters always elect their best to Parliament. By the time these people agree on the right thing to be done, it is the right solution. Why is Government not acting like that? That is the information I wanted to provide.

Ms opendi: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I still insist – because this being the 11th Parliament, Members do not know what transpired in the 10th Parliament – but we did not conclude that issue. The Prime Minister, then, requested that we give them time and they would come back to the House. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to ask the relevant committee to interface with the ministers responsible and then come to this House with a new position on how far Cabinet has gone? Maybe from there, Cabinet could take this up again because these are also new ministers who may not have known what transpired at that time. Thank you.

The Deputy Speaker: Honourable members, what was in the 10th Parliament lapsed with its time. Remember, majority of the Members we have are new. Can I ask the relevant committee to go back to the field, find out what is happening in Apaa and report back to this House? When I say “relevant committee” the committee knows; I have ruled. Let us go to the next item.

statement by the Minister on reports of alleged human rights violations by state security operatives

3.50
The acting minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, this statement is made in response to reports of alleged human rights violations by State security operatives.

I would like, on behalf of Government, to make the following responses: 

Criminal offences in Uganda are a creation of the law, and so are the procedures of arrest of suspected offenders. Political affiliation does not invite criminal liability under our laws, and breach of due process in enforcement of the law also has remedies for those who feel mistreated or unlawfully treated. 

Government does not know and does not intend to know the political inclination of all the suspects in custody. What is true is that nobody is above the law. Any attempt to politicise the handling of offenders would be in breach of the spirit of the Constitution and impartial administration of justice. It would also promote impunity. 

Those suspects, for whom colleagues are speaking, and indeed all the suspects in custody, are entreated to have recourse to the remedies provided for in our laws in pursuing the management and conclusion of their cases. 

The honourable Minister of Security received a list of names of those people who were alleged to have been mistreated. A good number of these names, unfortunately, did not have clear particulars regarding their address and area of abode. 

When that list was received, it was given to the police and other security agencies. As we talk, the case is being investigated separately. The investigations are going on because in some of these instances, the search and identification of these people is indeed difficult given the fact that one has to look around to locate where these people are. All the persons in the custody of Government agencies can and will be accounted for in accordance with the law.

Madam Speaker, torture is not a policy of Government nor is it even a method of interrogation. There is, indeed, a law about this and it is very clear. His Excellency, the President, has, in his own words, stated this position and policy of Government many times. Any security agent or operative or any person who conducts himself or herself in such a manner, that is torturing, that person does so in his or her own personal capacity, and indeed, will and shall be handled in accordance with the law.

Madam Speaker, in respect to the charges; Uganda vs hon. Ssegirinya Muhammad and hon. Allan Ssewanyana Aloysius, together with four others, charged with terrorism, aiding and abetting terrorism, three counts of murder, and one count of attempted murder; I would like to say that the investigations in this matter were completed. Both hon. Allan Ssewanyana and hon. Ssegirinya Muhammad have since been committed for trial in the High Court at Masaka.

The State carried out the investigations and completed the inquiries. Once the court cause list is out - for the cases - the State shall be ready to adduce evidence at the trial.

Madam Speaker, thank you for your indulgence. I submit. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, you have heard the report from the honourable minister. When you talk about matters of human rights, they are international in nature. We need to approach them in that context.

The reports on human rights violations by security agencies keep coming up day-in, day-out and so, we need to see how we can handle it, as Government. There is need for security agencies to provide us with information so that we build confidence and transparency among the public. The public needs to know; if somebody has been arrested, where is that person? Why was he arrested? They need to know that kind of information. That is why we have made sure that we have this on the Order Paper and you availed the Members with the required information. 

Maybe, at a later time, we may need to find out where the 26 people come from; where they were arrested from and what allegations were there for them to be arrested. You may need to find that information because that list was handed over to the Minister of Security.

3.59
MR MUHAMMAD NSEREKO (Independent, Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister for the report he has presented. Of course, none of us agrees that it is a policy of this Government to torture suspects or torture people. However, all of us are aware, including the President, that there is torture going on in this country; there is also abuse of human rights.

Every five years, in the recent 10 years - now it has become a routine for the President to come and address the country on matters of torture.

On the 16 of May 2017, The President addressed security agencies, through a letter that he wrote, and I quote, he stated that, “Torture is not one of the ways to acquire information from victims. Whosoever does it is someone who is shallow in thinking; a person who does not aim to secure justice but only humiliate the individual, they do it against...” 

That had come on the wake of people that had been delivered to Nalufenya Prison, which you all remember; a detention centre in Jinja, including the unfortunate Mayor of Kamwenge who you all remember, whose body - that you all saw and it was clearly on all forms of media - he was beaten. Pliers were used on him to pick part of his body. By the time he was released from Nalufenya Detention Centre, he could hardly walk. He was one amongst hundreds of victims; Ugandans, that had suffered the same fate. After the closure of Nalufenya, five years later, in August 2021, the same is reoccurring. The President made an address specifically on this matter. 

Therefore, after every election cycle, we are seeing spates of torture meted against Ugandans. We heard the minister clearly say that it is not political. We do not want to say it is such, but indeed, the President is on record having condemned the previous Governments of Obote and Idi Amin for having tortured people in dungeons and not presented them before the law or even abused the law before suspects – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, it is two minutes each. We are running out of time. 

MR NSEREKO: Madam Speaker, Members of this august House are on record for having been tortured. For example, the hon. Zaake; even courts have judged that he has been tortured and is awaiting compensation. 

Torture victims in Uganda, according to the report of the Uganda Human Rights Commission of 2019, are owed Shs 12 billion of taxpayers’ money in the form of compensation, as a result of having been tortured by errant officers. This means the taxpayer must foot Shs 12 billion as a result of the work of errant officers. 

Recently, you all saw a gentleman called Kakwenza - we cannot keep quiet. Our silence is deafening. If we fall silent, then, where will people run? He was arrested, detained beyond the reasonable hours prescribed by the Constitution and beaten to pulp like you all saw. Up to now, you can see all the marks of him after being beaten. What message are we sending out to the country; that officers can arrest people and detain them? 

If the minister is serious about this, can they tell us the case they have opened up against officers who detained Kakwenza; Rukirabasaija? Yes, he could have committed wrongs. Yes, there are criminal responsibilities but is torture the way that you saw it - we cannot pretend that we did not see it - it was on TV and everyone saw how this man was beaten. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you conclude? 

MR NSEREKO: Up to now, I think he has mental stress and people are telling him he should not talk. Madam Speaker, we cannot keep quiet, as this august House. We owe the country explanations. We cannot sweep it under the carpet. Yes, it is not political but even if it is man to man - if torture starts from Government institutions, it will move to homes. How will you fight violence at home when it is meted by the State on its citizens?

Therefore, men will start beating women and women will start killing their husbands because we have – pursuit of justice, Madam Speaker, people can be beaten; incarcerated for hours without charges and without being introduced before courts of law but we all fall silent. This must –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know people are being tortured; you may not understand why and where. However, let us debate calmly. 

First, before I give hon. Aogon a chance to speak, I thank hon. Zaake and I appreciate his effort. Much as he was tortured - as you have said - he was able to win a gold medal in athletics as Parliament of Uganda with a broken leg. (Laughter) Yes, it does not require a response; I am appreciating my Member that he won a gold medal for us. 

4.06
MR JOHN TEIRA (NRM, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, as we wait for hon. Aogon to take the microphone, I take this opportunity to thank you. The image of Government, the image of President Museveni - which he has protected for the last 36 years - and the image of this country, is at stake because of cases of torture that keep coming up every day. 

The honourable minister has presented a report and in my opinion, he attempted to politicise the issue; I entirely disagree with you. 

Honourable minister, every day, we see non-uniformed men brutally arresting people on the streets and this information finds its way onto the social media platforms. This embarrasses us, as Members of Parliament, as Government and as a country. 

We can afford to shy away about certain things but we are defiling our own Constitution. It has provided vehemently against torture of Ugandans. Must we take pride in doing it again and again?

Madam Speaker, this House must come up with a clear guideline on the particular individuals who torture Ugandans in the name of state operatives. 

We have grown up hating State Research Bureau, and I am afraid to say the condition in Uganda is inviting back the activities of State Research Bureau in our country. I submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. As the Member said, we have a very beautiful Constitution; when you look at chapter four of the Constitution, and you look at what our operatives are doing, we feel ashamed. We even wonder whether we should still continue having chapter four of the Constitution.

4.08
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. From the onset, allow me to applaud you for being strong to allowing this debate to take place. If you were a weak Speaker, you would have decided and said, “The Order Paper is congested, we cannot do anything.” 

I am also surprised today that the ministers are very many; I do not know whether there is voting. However, I want to express my happiness -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Aogon, leave my ministers. Make your submission but leave my ministers.

MR AOGON: Okay. Madam Speaker, my concern is that at least for the first time, we are discussing a very pertinent matter when the front bench is almost fully constituted; so take time and listen to us. 

One for you, the ministers, I am not holding you but the day when you get personally tortured, by plucking your skin using pliers, removing your nails, putting a nail on your bums or by working on you properly, that is when you will know that torture is indeed bad. 

There are also people who think that this is for the Opposition, Independents or the non-NRM. I can tell you that certain times in society we agree to disagree. However, when we disagree, you feel like speaking out, then somebody comes to torture you; I can tell you, you will be in that position any time from now. 

My issue is, what are you doing as Government to stop this kind of vice? How can we allow drones without number plates to be - Madam Speaker, I just have two or three issues then I leave the microphone, if you can allow? I would think it is the duty of Parliament to speak out. Otherwise, as you put it right, Madam Speaker, chapter four of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda becomes redundant. 

What happens to the Bill of Rights? Did we now decide to delete that part of the Constitution? Article 24 - the law is very clear, if you have an issue with somebody, can’t you take them to court? There is a process; how would you feel if it was your mother? How would you feel if it was your daughter, your son, your relative, your father, what would you do? Would you speak out or remain silent the very way you are silent today? Those are questions for us to answer –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we are not blaming you; we want you to pass on a message to those people who are alleged to be carrying out the torture. It is not you who is doing it, it is not President Museveni and it is not Government; there are particular people who are doing it. We cannot say our good President is the one, no; our good President is okay. However, there are people who are doing it. 

As parliamentarians, we have a deep connection with people’s concerns. At times, when our societies are divided, it is we parliamentarians to come in and promote essential values of respect, dialogue and compromise. Therefore, if there are some issues that are there, it is we, the parliamentarians, that should bring people together. 

Let us leave politics aside. In addition, let us separate criminality from politics. If you are a criminal, you are a criminal; the law should handle you because nobody is above the law, but it should be handled in a systematic manner. 

4.13
MR JONATHAN EBWALU (Independent, Soroti West Division, Soroti): Madam Speaker, the police and the security operatives have now made it a habit. They arrest people, beat and torture them until their lawyers come to demand to produce them in courts. Many of the people who have been tortured, at the end of the day, are exonerated by the courts but we do not compensate them. 

Madam Speaker, I was arrested in 2012 by a DPC called Aruk Maruk –(Interjection)– no, he was from Karamoja subregion. I was locked up in a cell alone in Arapai. He ordered the police officers who were there to pour water inside the cell. I stood up to morning like a bull. By the time I came out, I was shivering and almost dying. 

It took the efforts of leaders in Soroti to demand for my release. At the end of the day, I was not even produced in court; I was released unconditionally. 

Madam Speaker, torture is everywhere in Uganda. In addition, as you rightly put it, sometimes the security people torture us even when President Museveni is not aware. What only makes President Museveni a suspect is when he comes out to say, “We should not give bail to the capital offenders.” 

Nevertheless, security people, stop torturing us; stop torturing Ugandans. One day, you never know, you will be out of that chair, what will happen to you?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ebwalu.

MR EBWALU:  Yes, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ebwalu, that utterance made by the President is not the law; it is a political statement. So do not quote that and say, “The President said we do not give it”. There is a law that one should follow. 

MR EBWALU: Madam Speaker, with your guidance, I withdraw. In conclusion, our people are rotting in prisons and most of them are innocent. 

Before you arrest a person, you must have a case, produce them in court and let the courts convict them. These illegal detention houses – Madam Speaker, you are a very passionate, and compassionate person; and you love people. I would like to request you, since you have the power, to order people who are in the detention centres to be released and that detention centres should be closed. I request you to use your power to save Ugandans. (Laughter) May God bless you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I wish I had the power (Laughter). Honourable members, as you have heard from hon. Ebwalu, Article 21(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides for equality and freedom from discrimination. It states, “All persons are equal before and under the law in all spheres of political, economic, social and cultural life and in every other respect and shall enjoy equal protection of the law”. So, everybody should be treated in an equal way. 

4.16
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his statement. I take this opportunity to thank the President for lifting curfew in this country. Ugandans have suffered during the time of curfew; if only I could narrate the stories to this Parliament. 

The Uganda Police Force utilised curfew in this country to torture our people in a number of districts in Uganda. When you go to Nakasongola, Luweero, Kyegegwa, Arua or whatever district you go to, our people have been tortured; they have been beaten. We have no problem with our good government – because we support the government and hon. Muruli Mukasa is aware of that. We are not criticising or castigating the government but we want the government to put itself in order to make sure that our policemen are brought to order.

I would like to cite an example. I went to attend a burial ceremony of one of our own; the first district speaker of Nakasongola. When I arrived, I met many people at the burial.  Since it was COVID-19 time, I asked where the Officer-in-Charge (OC) of the area was, but he was nowhere to be seen. What I heard in the evening was that the OC started beating people in Kakooge Town Council and telling them that their Member of Parliament said that he was doing nothing in the area. He told them that they must enter their houses at 5.00 p.m. and started enforcing curfew while beating and harassing them at 5.00 p.m. 

People have utilised the issue of the poor fishing methods to –(Member timed out.) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As the Member has said, we should organise our government institutions and agencies. We need to have our office bearers such as the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) and the police to be duty bound to abide by and protect the Constitution in the discharge of their roles and responsibilities as enshrined in Article 1(3), which states, “All power and authority of Government and its organs derive from this Constitution, which in turn derives its authority from the people who consent to be governed in accordance with this Constitution”. This should be done in order for us to organise our institutions. 

We may be here thinking we are running a country yet other people are spoiling what we are doing. We are seated here in the House while others are doing wrong things. We really need to reorganise our institutions as Government. Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights -
	
4.20
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RIGHTS (Mr Fox Odoi-Oywelowo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hear the collective revulsion of this august House when it comes to matters of human rights, and especially torture. 

Every cultured person should detest torture. Every living human being should detest torture. Those of us who have religious backgrounds will recall that the Bible instructs us to treat fellow human beings only as we would want them to treat us; that is the standard that is set for us in the Bible. 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, we are discussing a very pertinent issue but the ministers are starting to walk out one by one. Is it in order for them to leave us with this very heavy matter alone? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Which minister has walked out? I have not ruled on that. Members, I gave you only 20 minutes to finalise this. As far as I can see, my ministers are all still here and they have a very serious Bill coming next. We should appreciate that they are here today. (Applause) Let us move on. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Madam Speaker, I had the Floor and I was about to conclude. The Rules of Procedure of this House and the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda created a parliamentary Committee on Human Rights. Rule – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, who are going out, people are complaining. We are here and we want quorum. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Rule 185(1)(d) empowers the Committee on Human Rights to inquire into any matter relating to human rights in Uganda. The burden and the responsibility to inquire into human rights abuse in the country is squarely placed on the House. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee on Human Rights is sitting, starting 10 February 2022, to inquire into the state of human rights and human rights abuses in Uganda and we shall file a comprehensive report. Otherwise, it is difficult for us to make conclusions on allegations. We must always investigate and speak from a very informed position. We should identify the victims, identify the culprits and make recommendations. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights. You now need to go on the ground and find out all these allegations that are being brought forward and see whether it is true and you should name them. We will want a report in this House for us to know whether what was said is correct or not. Article 44 of the Constitution prohibits derogation from the enjoyment of freedom from torture and cruel treatment. It is not proper to torture anybody. Just like you said that you are from a Christian family, it is not correct for you to torture. 

As a committee, we want you to give us a report. Minister, you can also give them the list of the names that they talked about and  work together with the Minister for Security and all the agencies and produce a report to this House within - how much time do you need?

MR FOX ODOI: Madam Speaker, 45 days.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We need to be accountable for everybody, whether a person is a thief or any other criminal. So, let us have a report from the Committee on Human Rights in 45 days.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Madam Speaker, I note, indeed, with concern, the anguish and concerns that Members have expressed regarding the behaviour of errant security operatives. It is also very good that the chairman of the Committee on Human Rights is going on the ground. Certainly, I am sure that given his abilities and calibre, a lot could be unearthed.

What is clear is that nobody condones torture and nobody enjoys torture. Maybe, just to dive back in the past, I have been here for quite some time and have in, my time, experienced raw palpable torture. However, what is quite consoling is that at least the infrastructure and will to fight torture is there now and the fact that we can sit in Parliament is enough. I would like to thank you for this opportunity and to go along with the members of staff who have –(Interjections)- I am winding up. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are going to work together with the Committee on Human Rights and report back to this House on the issues that have been raised. We must have respect - minister, I am speaking to you, stop talking to hon. Sarah. We must have respect and uphold our Constitution. We all swore to that effect and we must act within the Constitution.

The errant persons who are causing problems to the Government must be brought to book – and who makes them to do that? Are they above the law? Is there a problem? Do you need help from us? If you need, we are here to help you.

As Government, you are supposed to be accountable and responsible for all the citizens. We have had problems where women are raped and women selling tomatoes are beaten. I know that is what hon. Sarah wanted to say but I am a woman and I can speak for you. (Laughter) This must be accounted for. We cannot tolerate this kind of thing in society. Please, take the leadership. Thank you.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON HUMAN-WILDLIFE CONFLICTS AND THE UGANDA WILDLIFE AUTHORITY’S HANDLING OF FIRES IN NATIONAL PARKS THAT AFFECT ACTIVITIES NEIGHBOURING NATIONAL PARKS 

4.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A number of issues were raised the other day, especially to do with the fires and their impact in and outside the parks. My request is that you give us tomorrow so that we can effectively bring all the information needed to the House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR SILWANY: Madam Speaker, whereas we appreciate that the minister will come tomorrow with the report, I would like to give the minister information. As we speak now, another lodge – Mazike – in Queen Elizabeth National Park is burning, courtesy of fire from Uganda Wildlife Authority.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You will give us a report on what is happening.

MR MUGARRA: Yes, I will come with the same tomorrow.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was tabled for first reading in this House and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The committee has considered the Bill and the Bill is due for the second reading.

4.32
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli-Mukasa): Madam Speaker, under Rule 130 of the Rules of Procedure, I beg to move that the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021 be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion  is seconded by hon. Anifa, hon. Oboth Oboth, UPDF Representative, hon. Okia, chairperson Human Rights Committee, hon. Aogon, hon. Charity, hon. Abeja, hon. Akello, hon. Muwuma, UWOPA chairperson – Sarah Opendi – hon. Tom Bright, hon. Muzaale – the whole House. Would you like to speak to your motion? 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Madam Speaker, you recall that on 5 October 2021, the Succession (Amendment) Bill was introduced in this House and read for the first time.

Madam Speaker, the Bill intends to align the Succession Act to Article 32 of the Constitution, which is in favour or provides affirmative action for the marginalised groups, and Article 33, on the rights of women, in the Constitution of our country. 

The Bill also intends to -

    1. Provide for the distribution of the estates of intestate deceased persons, in accordance with Article 33 of the Constitution; 

    2. Provide for guardianship of minor children of deceased persons; 

    3. Provide for the discretion of courts in granting probate and letters of administration;

    4. Provide for the expiry period of two years for grants of probate and letters of administration; 

    5. Provide for the requirements of the consent of spouses and lineal descendants, prior to disposal of the estate property by the administrators;

    6. Provide for the joint administration of executors and administrators of estates; and 

    7. Remove from the Act, all the obsolete terms used therein.

Madam Speaker, there are salient provisions of the Bill; it provides for repealing of definitions of legitimate and illegitimate children and replacing the age of minority of 21 years with 18 years, in accordance with the Constitution. 

The other provision is to insert a new subsection, under Section 27 of the Act, to provide that 20 per cent of the deceased’s estate shall not be distributed, but shall be held in trust for the education, maintenance and welfare of minor children or children above 18 years of age but below 25 years of age, if, at the time of death of the intestate, these children were undertaking studies and were not married; and to cater for children with disabilities who are above 18 years of age, if, at the time of the death of the intestate, these children were not married and are wholly dependent on the intestate for their livelihood. 

The Bill also seeks to uphold Article 32 of the Constitution, namely affirmative action, by allowing married women to dispose of any property, which they would be entitled to dispose of during their life or which they are entitled to under a Will.

The clause also repeals phrases “is deaf or dumb or blind” or “is ordinarily insane” and “is of unsound mind” with more suitable terms. 

The Bill also makes it a requirement for a widow or widower to give notice of his or her intention to apply for letters of administration for his or her deceased spouse’s estate to the Administrator-General. It makes it compulsory for testators to provide for their spouses, lineal descendants and dependent relatives in their Wills, and makes an addition to the legal requirements of making a Will that is valid in law. 

Clause 31 makes it a requirement for each of the witnesses to write his or her name and address, on every page of the Will, in the presence -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, haven’t you gone to what is supposed to be discussed at committee stage? 

MR MURULI-MUKASA: We shall go to the committee stage, Madam Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Briefly speak to the matter because there is a report to be read.

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Madam Speaker, the Bill intends to make these changes to bring the issue of succession in line with the current practice and best practices, and in line also with our aspirations as a country. 

We interacted with the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and we have shared comments also from interested parties. We have our own views. 

Madam Speaker, Government is receptive to the proposals that are meant to further improve this Bill. Once again, I beg to move that the Bill be read a second time. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson, can you present the executive summary of the report? The report was uploaded on your iPads, so let us have its executive summary.

4.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Robinah Rwakoojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee on the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021. 

Before I continue, I would like to thank the members and staff of the committee who stood with me to do this hard work, and I would like to request that they stand up for recognition, if they are here in the House. Please recognise the effort they put in. (Applause)  

As you said, Madam Speaker, last week, the report was uploaded. Allow me to lay, on the Table, a signed copy of the report; signed by 16 out of 32 members and a set of the minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please lay.

MS RWAKOOJO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, I have an executive summary that I will present. Like the minister said, the Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was read for the first time on 5 October 2021. 

Pursuant to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, it was referred to the Sectoral Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny. In accordance with those rules, we examined the Bill and present it here for consideration with its observations and recommendations. 

We met various stakeholders; those can be looked at in the report. I will straight away go to highlight some of the issues that are coming up for consideration. 

First is the amendment of Section 2 of the Succession Act. The Bill proposes to amend Section 2 of the principal Act to remove repugnant words, which create a distinction between children based on the marital status of their parents. So, the Bill proposes to substitute the phrase “illegitimate child” with the phrase “lineal descendant.” 

The second is about the ownership of property before and during marriage. The Bill proposes to delete Section 3 of the Succession Act, which prohibits a person from acquiring interest in property of a person he or she marries. 

The committee examined the provision and is of the considered opinion that Section 3 be deleted since it is misplaced. It deals with matrimonial property, a matter which is relevant to marriage and divorce laws and not to succession; it is supported by a Supreme Court decision. 

The other one is the distribution of property of an intestate. An intestate is somebody who dies without leaving a Will. The Bill proposes various amendments to Section 27 of the Act, which relates to the distribution of the estate of an intestate. 

Section 27 of the Succession Act was declared unconstitutional in the case of Law and Advocates for Women in Uganda v. the Attorney-General, where court found that the provision was discriminatory on the basis of sex, since it made reference to distribution on the death of a male intestate or not for female intestate. So, it fell short of guaranteed constitutional standards of equality between men and women, and led to a lacuna in the law. 

So, some of the provisions that come up are expanding the application to both male and female intestates and spouses in marriage, reserving 20 per cent of the estate to be held in trust for the education, maintenance and welfare of the lineal descendants; then giving the surviving spouse, in case the deceased is survived by a spouse, lineal descendants and customary heir, changing that from 15 to 20 per cent and reducing the entitlement of a dependant relative from nine to four per cent.

It also allows the surviving spouse, who remarries before the estate of the deceased person is distributed, to share in the estate of his or her deceased husband or wife respectively.

Another is clause 13; and 21; reservation of the residential holdings: The Bill makes provisions reserving the principal residential property and any other property from distribution. Clause 13 proposes to amend section 26 of the Act to devolve the residential holding and any other residential property to the surviving spouse and lineal descendants.

The other one is clause 17, which talks about separation and its effects on marriage. The Bill proposes to amend section 30 of the Act relating to separation. Currently, section 30 bars a spouse of the intestate from taking an interest in the estate of an intestate; if, at the time of death of the intestate, the spouse had separated from the intestate as a member of the same household. So, that is also one of the provisions. 

There is also clause 43, on preference of the surviving spouse to administer the estate of a deceased person. The Bill proposes to insert a new section 201(a) in the principal Act granting preference to the surviving spouse the right to administer the estate of his or her deceased spouse. And the committee agrees with the proposal in the Bill.

Another provision - okay, those are the ones that we have highlighted, but we also had emerging matters. I will look at one of them. During the consultation that we undertook, a number of new matters were brought to our attention and these matters are currently not provided for in the Bill of the principal Act, and have been considered by the committee in accordance with rule 129 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

One of them is the application of the principal Act to Muslims. The committee received memoranda and met with the Uganda Muslim Supreme Council, the Uganda Muslim Lawyers Association, as well as other Muslim scholars and clerics who proposed that the Succession Act should not apply to Muslims. 

They justified their proposal on the grounds that the current Succession Act contravenes the distribution of property of a deceased person ordained by Allah in the Quran. The committee examined this proposal and rejected it on the grounds that it will create a lacuna in the law, since it will exempt the application of the Succession Act to Mohammedans yet there is currently no law as envisaged in Article 129(1)(d). 

In such a situation, if a Muslim leaves no Will, how shall the estate be handled between the period when the Bill is passed into law and the enactment of a law envisaged in Article 129(1)(d). This is to make the estates of intestate Mohammedans subject to abuse and unregulated. 

The committee is also concerned that exempting the application of the succession to Mohammedans will have the effect of fettering that discretion of persons professing the Islamic faith, who may wish to distribute their estates in accordance with the Succession Act. 

Therefore, we recommended that the proposal be rejected and that Government expeditiously introduces, in Parliament, a Bill for an Act envisaged in Article 129(1)(d) of the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, the proposed amendments in the Bill, if passed, would transform the law of succession in Uganda by clearing the lacunas in the Succession Act, Cap 162 to provide for gender equality, and repealing provisions that were declared unconstitutional. I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much for the good report. Members, I believe you have read the report. 

4.48
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam speaker I would like to applaud the committee. This is a very brilliant committee.

In my opinion, they have done justice to this Bill and I would like to particularly commend you for dropping the aspect of exempting a certain section of our society, from the application of this law. I say so because in my opinion, and constitutionally, it is all Parliaments, which are empowered through the law, to make laws unless Parliament delegates to another person. 

Therefore, for any section of our society to try to say, exempt us because we already have a law that handles that aspect of life becomes, in my opinion, a nullity, which cannot stand. Therefore, we have a committee, which knows what they are doing. I stand with the committee on this aspect. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. And thank you for starting the debate before I opened it; the debate can continue. If there is no debate - 

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I had not completed, since you have allowed that we debate. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: And one thing I have liked in the report is the precedents that have been set. They have got a precedent from court so that nothing else should be challenged. Thank you -(Mr Aogon rose_) - haven’t you finished? Okay, finish. 

MR AOGON: Very good. Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was also highlighting the aspect of gender equality. Madam Speaker, you are aware that in most cultures, especially when we talk about the issue of the females vis-à-vis the males, society has had that tendency of thinking that when you are female, you cannot take over from your parents; that you are not entitled to succeed and you are not entitled to a piece of land. 

I ponder that any Member seated here right now should give maximum attention to this Bill because tomorrow, it is going to affect you; not the next person but you. I have seen people who have decided to step out. Maybe some people don’t know how important this particular law or piece of legislation is.

So, I support this act of making sure that we have some sort of gender balance when we talk about succession. I think it is a very intelligent committee and the chairperson is doing very well. Thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members, thank you so much. I am going to allow just five people and we go to Committee Stage. 

4.51
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I commend the committee for the report. As a feminist and the father of a good number of girls, I am happy and I have every reason to smile for us to show that females are clearly captured in this law. 

Madam Speaker, last weekend, we were in Kamuli for the burial of a parent, a prominent citizen of this country. However, when they announced that his heir was a lady, it sounded like an abomination to some people. People asked why a lady was being made the heir.

I am happy that you are capturing it loud and clear in this law. And I should say, bravo! I am happy it is a government law. I thank my government for moving ahead of the societal challenges. 

Secondly, every time we talk of affirmative action, to some extent it has been endangering a male. We talk of women this, women in this. There are women or ladies who earn more than men in the homes or more than their husbands; however, when it comes to inheritance or sharing of the estate, it is normally taken by the relatives of the deceased. I am happy the law is also addressing this. Therefore, I thank the committee and Government for this law. I thank you and I rest my case.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you so much. By the way, I am also the heir in our home.

4.53
MR NOMAN OCHERO (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice to appreciate the wonderful work done by the committee although I have one or two issues to raise. 

Madam Speaker, you quoted one of the most powerful articles of the Constitution: Article 21 and it tickled my mind; “All men are equal before the law.” Article 32(2) is very emphatic that laws against the dignity of women are prohibited by the Constitution.

Madam Speaker, in my study of this report, I look at a provision, especially on dissolution of marriage or on death; who benefits? 

One other thing I look at is that men do not only have married women. Men who are here can also have unmarried women. I am raising a very serious matter of concern –(Laughter)- This one is completely absent. The laws should not segregate. 

I assure you that married women who benefit do so because they contributed. Even the unmarried women contribute to the family. More so, why are we condemning the unmarried woman as if it is her duty to marry herself? It is the man who is supposed to marry her. 

If a man decides to stay with you without marrying you and dies, they are saying you do not benefit from anything. Yet, if you look at it carefully, ladies and gentlemen, even the unmarried women suffer more. 

We cannot punish the already punished. This Parliament must come up with a clause catering for women who are not married, but have stayed with a man. After the man has died, the children of the unmarried women are catered for, leaving the mother of the children unattended to, yet, you spend all your energy producing and struggling to take care of the children. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Fine, the chairperson and the minister have got the point. That will be handled. 

MR NOMAN OCHERO: There is information –

MR MUTEMBULI: Madam Speaker, I would like to give information to my learned friend, hon. Noman that the law does not discriminate against unmarried persons, reason being that if your father dies, regardless of your age or sex, you will benefit. However, it is only protecting people who are married. That does not mean that those who are not married are not catered for. 

The only remedy that I can give is that if you are with your girlfriend that you have not yet married and want her to benefit, make a Will -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Counsel, what is protecting the marrieds are couples - when one of them dies - not the father.

MR MUTEMBULI: Here, we are talking about a couple. What I am saying is that if he wants the girlfriend to benefit, the only remedy he has is to make a Will. This law allows you to make a Will and give your property to any person. Therefore, if you have a person you are staying with, make a Will and give your property to that person. The law provides for that. 

4.57
MS MARY NAKATO (Independent, Woman Representative, Buyende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am in support of the honourable member who was speaking. I think the counsel may have misinterpreted him. 

I am here to defend cases where a man dies without making a Will. In most cases, even the church - When the church comes to bury, they only consider the legitimately married woman in church - we have seen this - and the other widow is left to suffer with the children. 

I want to applaud the committee that made this report but I think it is also humble and fitting to fix in that clause so that the rest of the other women outside the home are also catered for. Especially in our cultures, they say that you cannot count women for a man; they graze in their own way. Thank you. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I need clarification from my colleague; why would you think men must die first and not the women? Why are people saying men die first?

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I was giving information to the colleague, who gave me an opportunity. I agree with the holder of the Floor. Counsel, you observed that somebody can use a Will as a way out, but I can tell you that if the existence of Wills was able to cure problems, we would not need this law. (Applause)

Today, we are grappling with very many problems. Some people died intestate, meaning that you have died without a Will. There are accidents, fire and everything. Therefore, I want to agree with the hon. Ochero. This is our opportunity. Let us look at this law with a keen eye. Do not walk out, do not slumber. Leave your phone down and concentrate. This is a law that we needed before. Thank you. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when you look at this Bill, it is looking at spouses; a spouse with a Will and without. How do we handle a spouse who has left behind a Will and that one without? I thought that is the principle. 

Therefore, let us not bring in the concubines. If the men want, they can write a Will.

5.00
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for the report. 

The report that has been presented to the House today is a very popular one and this is a very popular Bill because it directly concerns our people and ourselves. 

When this Bill was considered, I think the committee did not envisage that there are other religions that do it in a way where parents/husbands die intestate. For example, in the Islamic way, there are percentages that are given in a situation where a man dies without a Will. 

As we are considering this law, we must bear in mind that there is a way Muslims do it automatically; there is no quarrel. As long as you die intestate, there is a way it is handled. Thank you. 

5.02
MS FAITH KUNIHIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to add my voice to the voices of the rest for the good Bill they have developed for us. My key interest in this Bill is the issue of children. I want to thank the committee for being able to capture the word “illegitimate” child.

The second thing that I want to thank the committee for is to capture the word “adopted” child. I believe that these two kinds of children should be clearly outlined in this Bill to make sure that they are taken care of. I do not know who calls children “illegitimate” because every child is legitimate. If I had the authority, I would remove the word “illegitimate” from the Bill, but I think that is the best way to describe this category of children in this Bill.

However, I would like to add a stronger voice on the “adopted child”. Several families have children that are adopted but probably, they have not been adopted legally. These children that have been raised up in families and are not adopted legally, what does the Bill say about them? Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kunihira, your fear is what the Bill is curing - legitimate versus illegitimate. Your issues are covered. 

5.03
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Thomas Tayebwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under Rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that since we have had the debate and we have the committee stage where we can even have more debate on concrete resolutions, I move that we close debate and the House moves to the committee stage.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It has been seconded by hon. Annet, hon. Okia, Chairperson of the Committee on Human Rights, the acting Leader of the Opposition, hon. Wilson, hon. Okwalinga, hon. Kunihira, hon. Lillian Paparu, hon. Jacob Oboth, hon. Idi and hon. Stephen.

Thank you very much, chairperson, for your report and members of the committee. I now put a question that the Bill entitled, “The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read a second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

5.05
Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Robinah Rwakoojo): Madam Chairperson, clause 1 is on the amendment of section 2 of the Succession Act. Clause 1 of the Bill is amended – 

(a) 	in paragraph (e), in the definition of “dependant relative”, delete the phrase “or substantially”. 
(b) 	by inserting immediately after paragraph (j), the following -

by inserting immediately after paragraph (m), the following - 

“’lineal descendant’ means a person who is descended in a direct line from the deceased person and includes a child and grandchild of the deceased and any person related to the deceased in a direct descending line up to six degrees downwards.” 

The justification: 

1. 	To restrict dependant relatives to only persons who are wholly dependant on the deceased person and not as proposed in the Bill. 

2.	To define who a “lineal descendant” is since the phrase is used extensively in the Bill and the principal Act without being defined.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I am not comfortable with this amendment; the deletion of the phrase “or substantially” largely because “substantially” now leaves the whole law to talk about those who are wholly dependant. 

In our situation, Madam Chairperson, leaving the phrase “substantially” helps to accommodate the fact that some dependant relatives may not be wholly dependant on that estate. Let us say an old mother has four children, depends, in part, on all those children. Therefore, I request that the phrase is left there substantially to accommodate this situation. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, when we were discussing this, we found that initially, in the Bill, they were talking about “wholly or substantially” dependant on the deceased. We thought substantial dependence would be difficult to prove. People may come up to burden the deceased’s estate so we thought those who had been wholly dependant on them - maybe like an old mother who has actually been living with you and who has been entirely dependant upon you - should be the person to benefit. I think it would leave a bit of confusion, if we left the word “substantial.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General, do you have something to say?

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I propose that the wording of this clause be left as it is. When writing these laws, we must be mindful of the nature of the society we live in. We are not that advanced to be wholly separated from our families. For example, I do not stay with my mother. She has five children and each of us participates in her upkeep. Someone pays rent, another takes care of something else; the five of us take care of her. If you change and remove “substantially dependant”, then that means that the question of anyone who is not “wholly dependant” on the deceased cannot participate in this estate. 

Madam Speaker, the exclusion of “substantially” actually restricts it to only those persons who do not have any other place of dependence, other than the estate of the deceased. Madam Chairperson, that is a very difficult one.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Can I hear from a lady?

MS OPENDI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to agree with the position of the honourable minister and the Attorney-General. When somebody “wholly” depends on you, it implies that you are taking care of this person completely. “Substantially” means that I may not - for example, look at a nephew or a niece that has parents. This child may go to the parents but “substantially” I am the one responsible for this child’s education.

Therefore, when we remove the word “substantial”, we shall lose out on those other people who do not wholly depend on a person, but substantially depend on the person. I do not see any confusion that this causes. I am of the view that we maintain the clause as it is in the Bill. We can go further to define what “wholly” and “substantial” mean, if in the opinion of the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, it is causing confusion. Let us define them but maintain them in the Bill. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MS RWAKOOJO: Madam Chairperson, I am requesting that you listen to information from hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo on this because he was vocal in talking about it. 

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. There are about two pieces of legislation that introduced a substantiality test; the Presidential Elections Act and the Parliamentary Elections Act. If you allege that there has been non-compliance with the provisions of the law, and you declare an election invalid, you have to prove that, that non-compliance affected the results in a substantial manner. 

The burden of proving substantiality is on the person who is alleging and claiming the benefits. Now, here you are talking about the estates of deceased persons and you are talking about people who claim they were dependant on the estates. You are placing on them -

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Fox, I do not want you to mix election petitions and this Bill. The substantiality in the election petition should be different from this one.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: I agree, Madam Chairperson. However, the problem is in the introduction of the substantiality test. What amounts to “substantially being dependant on the deceased person”? Is it 60, 40 or 50 per cent? It is ambiguous. We wanted to cure that ambiguity by removing it completely and stating what is obvious: if you were wholly dependant on the deceased person, then you are entitled to benefit.

Madam Chairperson, the other problem is this: you will have many relatives coming up to allege that they were substantially dependant on the deceased person and they will run in on the estate. That is the second evil we want to cure; by removing the substantiality test. Thank you.

MR BAKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am just giving follow-up information on Hon. Fox’s information. What happened is that we went to the field and people down there were even against the idea of dependence – that you bring people to your home, you help them and when you die, they partake of your estate.

We pay school fees for these and when they get holidays, they come and stay in our homes. When we die, they say, “We are substantially dependant on the estate”. That is the problem. We say, if it is wholly, it is fine, but “dependant substantially” – people will come from the villages to claim they are substantially dependant and claim a portion of the estate. That is the problem.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Maybe we could go by what hon. Sarah said – that we would have to define what ‘substantial’ is.

MR AOGON: I beg to submit and support the submission of the Chairperson, Committee on Human Rights - a very bright and intelligent personality.

Madam Chairperson, let me agree and say that it is very difficult for us to bring on board issues of dependants. Even if we try to say that we go ahead and qualify what ‘substantiality’ means in this law, it only opens a Pandora Box. That will give us a headache that we cannot manage. Let us agree and make this law directly so that it is very clear. Otherwise, we will have issues.

I also want to remind you that in society, people have had challenges, but even when the law is there, there is a way they do things quietly. People can administratively handle some of those things. We do not need to put everything in the law.

Finally, it is the reason I was trying to tell you that we should continue with the debate. Some people were rushing but these are the sticky issues. We needed to put an eye and debate properly before coming to this stage. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is not conclusive – what is wrong with you, Silas?

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chairperson, we are making a law to ensure that we solve a problem but not to cause more problems. If the two words – “substantially” and “wholly substantial” – are disturbing us, for purposes of English, why don’t we look for a simpler word? This is because you are now encouraging that as long as I am helping you partially, some others will come up and eventually there is going to be a problem. So, let us look for a simpler word –(Interjection)- I am suggesting “partially”. 

MR IDDI ISABIRYE: Madam Chairperson, I want us to know in whose interest we are deliberating. We are debating in the interest of all Ugandans, but specifically, the family members. 

If we go ahead and invite other people, it is going to cause more confusion just like hon. Kubeketerya has stated it. If we have found families that are stable and we make a law that invites relatives and extended relatives to come and begin sharing the property of the deceased, I think we shall have done them a disservice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. I have heard from many of you. Can I hear from the minister?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I concede.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Do you also concede on part (b)?

MR MURULI MUKASA: I concede. Let us go with the recommendation of the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13 

MS RWAKOOJO: Clause 13: Amendment of section 26 of the principal Act. 

Clause 13 is amended -

a) 	By substituting for the proposed subsection 2(b), the following -

“(2b) A person who evicts or attempts to evict a surviving spouse, lineal descendant or dependant relative who is entitled to occupy the residential holding or any other residential holding, commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred and sixty eight currency points or imprisonment not exceeding seven years or both. 
 
b) 	In the proposed sub-section 2(c), by substituting the words “joint tenant” with the words, “tenancy in common.”

Justification

To ensure that the principle of survivorship applies in the circumstances and ensure that ownership of the lineal descendants in the devolved property can be inherited rather than being extinguished upon death as is in the case of joint tenancy. 

Secondly, it is to enhance the interests of the surviving spouse, lineal descendant and dependant relative, if any in the residential holding of an intestate. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I accept. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that Clause 13, be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

MS RWAKOOJO: In clause 14, we move an amendment to section 27 of the Principal Act. Clause 14 of the Bill is amended in the proposed section 27 as follows:

(i)	In the proposed section 27(1), by substituting the words “principal residential property or other residential property” appearing in the proposed sub-section 1, with the words “residential holding or other residential holding;”

(ii) 	By substituting paragraph (b) with the following: “(b) where the intestate leaves no surviving spouse or dependant relative under paragraph (a) (1) or (2) capable of taking a portion of his or her property, the lineal descendants shall receive 99 per cent and the customary heir shall receive one per cent.” 

(iii) 	By substituting paragraph (g) with the following: “where the intestate is survived by a customary heir, a spouse or a dependant relative, but no lineal descendant, the customary heir shall receive one per cent and the surviving spouse or the dependant relative, as the case may be, shall receive 99 per cent of the whole of the property of the intestate;”

(iv)	In paragraph (e) by inserting, immediately before the word “capable” the words “other than a customary heir;”

(v)	By deleting paragraph (f);

(vi)	By deleting the proposed sub-section 8; and

(vii) By inserting, immediately after the proposed sub-section 8, the following: “where the customary heir is at the same time a lineal descendant of the intestate, the customary heir shall, in addition to his or her share as a customary heir, be entitled to share as a lineal descendant.”

The justification is to include a share of the customary heir in paragraphs b, d, e and f.

Paragraph (f) is redundant in light of section 32 of the Act, which allows the State to take the property where there are no relatives of a deceased person. 

To harmonise the language and nomenclature used to refer to residential holding occupied by the testator. 

To empower a customary heir benefit as a customary heir in addition to his or her entitlement as a lineal descendant, since in most cases, the customary heir is appointed from amongst lineal descendants.

To remove an absurdity, which had allowed the Administrator-General to share in the estate of an intestate while excluding the heir. 

To codify a customary practice, which exists in most cultures where a customary heir is appointed to succeed the intestate and is entitled to benefit from the estate of a deceased person.

To empower the surviving spouse to share in the trust created in the proposed section 27(2).

The proposed subsection 8 is redundant since all dependant relatives take an equal share in the property of the intestate.

For consistency and clarity, to refer to a deceased intestate rather than to a deceased since the provision deals with intestate succession.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, the amendment is accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 15

MS RWAKOOJO: Clause is about replacement of section 28 of the Principal Act. Clause 15 is amended in the proposed section 28 by inserting, immediately before the proposed subsection, the following: 

a.	All lineal descendants, spouses and dependant relatives of an intestate shall share their proportion of a deceased intestate’s property referred to in section 27(1), in equal share; and

b.	By substituting the proposed subsection 2 with the following, “a person aggrieved by the distribution of property under this section may challenge the decision of the administrator in a court of competent jurisdiction. 

Justification

To ensure equity between beneficiaries in sharing the portion reserved for each class of beneficiaries in section 27 in equal share; and

Two, to remove a lacuna in the proposed section 28 wherein provision was not made as to the manner of sharing the estate of an intestate by each of the beneficiaries referred to in section 27; and

To empower a person aggrieved by the decision of the administrator to challenge such a decision in a court of competent jurisdiction.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, the amendment is accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 15, as amended, agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aogon of Kumi Municipality, we are at committee stage, not at debate stage. You know the debate is now about the principles. Thank you. 

Clause 16

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put a question that Clause 16 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MS RWAKOOJO: Replacement of section 30 of the Principal Act. Clause 17 is amended as follows:

(a) 	In the proposed subsection 32, by inserting immediately after paragraph (b), the following new paragraph: “(c) the intestate is the one who caused the separation.”

(b) 	In the proposed section 33, by inserting immediately after the phrase, “court may” the words, “for good cause.”

Justification

1.	To expand the grounds upon which courts may allow a surviving spouse to benefit from the estate of a deceased person notwithstanding desecration of the surviving spouse from the intestate person to include other justifiable grounds since the existing provision is limited in scope and does not take into account other justifiable grounds like ill-health, education and employment;

2.	To allow a surviving spouse to benefit from the estate of the intestate if the intestate was the one who caused the separation, for instance, victims of domestic violence who may have sought refuge in shelters; and

3.	To grant court the discretion to determine, on a case by case basis, justifiable grounds upon which a surviving spouse may be allowed to benefit from the estate of an intestate notwithstanding the separation of the surviving spouse from the intestate.

The deletion of paragraph (b) is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of paragraph (a), which expanded the provision to cater for matters proposed in paragraph (b).

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I agree to the amendment. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to. 

Clause 21

MS RWAKOOJO: Amendment of section 36 of the Principal Act. Clause 21 is amended in paragraph (d)(i) -

(a)	by substituting for the proposed subsection (6) the following: 

“(6)Notwithstanding subsection (2), where a person making a Will is married or has children, the residential holding normally occupied by that person as a principal residence or owned by him or her as a principal residential holding or any other residential holding possessed by that person including the chattels therein, shall not form part of the property to be disposed of in the Will and shall be held by his or her personal representative upon trust for his or her spouses and lineal descendants subject to the rights of occupation and terms and conditions set out in the second schedule of this Act.”

(b) By Inserting immediately after the proposed subsection (6) the following new subsections - 
 
“(1) A person who evicts or attempts to evict a surviving spouse, lineal descendant or dependant relative who is entitled to occupy the residential holding or any other residential holding commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding 168 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding seven years or both.

(2) Where the residential holding or any other residential holding devolves to the lineal descendants under this section, the lineal descendants shall be deemed to be entitled to the residential holding or any other residential holding as tenants in common.”

(c)	By substituting for the proposed subsection (7) the following:

“(7) Subsection (6) shall not apply where the testator has made reasonable provision for the accommodation of a surviving spouse, lineal descendants or dependant relatives who are entitled to occupy his or her residential holding.”

Justification

1. 	To harmonise the language and nomenclature used to refer to residential holdings occupied by testator as used in section 26 of the principal Act, instead of as proposed in the Bill since the nomenclature used in the Bill is incapable of exact definition.

It should be noted that in succession, the phrase “residential holding” is preferred to “residential property.” Since the phrase “residential holding” broadly refers to the two types of residential holdings known to succession law which are the “residential holding” being that residence normally occupied by a person prior to his or her death as his principal residential holding or that residence, which is owned by him or her as a principal residential holding. There is, however, a third type of residential holding being the other holding possessed by the person prior to his or her death. 

2.	To provide for the manner of occupying the residential holding by the surviving spouse and lineal descendants as prescribed in the second schedule in the Act.

3.	To ensure that the principle of survivorship applies in the circumstances and that the ownership of the lineal descendants in the developed property, can be inherited rather than being extinguished upon death in case of joint tenancy.

4.	To provide for the devolution of the residential holding upon the death of any of the persons who were entitled to occupy it.

5.	To enhance the protection and security of occupancy for the surviving spouse and lineal descendants by creating penal sanctions against a person who evicts or attempts to evict the surviving spouse and lineal descendants.

6.	To remove the reference to section 26(i) since that section does not apply in the circumstances owing to its application to intestate succession while section 36 deals with testate succession.

7.	To expand the proposed subsection (7) to empower a testator to make provision for the accommodation of his or her beneficiaries, and to remove the requirement of providing accommodation at the same station in life since such a benchmark is subjective and difficult to achieve.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 22

MS RWAKOOJO: Replacement of section 37 of the principal Act. In clause 22 on the head note of the proposed section 37, substitute for the word “dependants” the phrase “dependant relative.”

Justification: Consistency with the body of the provision and entire Bill, wherein the word used is “dependant relative” and not “dependants.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to. 

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31

MS RWAKOOJO: Section 50 of the principal Act is amended as follows:

(a) 	In paragraph(c) by substituting for all the words appearing after the words “each of the witnesses must” the words “in the presence of the testator” signed and write his or her name and address on every page of the Will.

Except that it shall not be necessary that more than one witness be present at the same time.

(b) By renumbering the existing provisions as (i) and inserting immediately after the following: 

“Where a person attesting a Will does not write his or her name or address on a page of a Will as required in subsection 1(c), the Will shall be valid except that the page of the Will which does not bear the name or address of the testator shall, unless otherwise directed by court, be void.”

Justification 

1.	The proposal in paragraph (a) is to impose two obligations on the witnesses; to sign each page of the Will and write his or her name and address on every page of the Will instead of the proposal in the Bill which only obligates the testation to be by writing the witness’s name and address on every page of the Will, without the obligation to sign the Will.

2.	To provide for the validity of the rest of the Will where a page of a Will is not attested to as required in section 51(c).

3.	To allow court to deal with the validity of a Will, where a page or any part of a Will does not bear the name or address of the person witnessing a Will.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 31 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32 

MS RWAKOOJO: Replacement of section 54 of the principal Act. Delete clause 32. 

The justification is that the proposal to allow an attesting witness to benefit from the Will creates a conflict of interest and will affect the authentication of the Will, since the evidence of that attesting witness will not be trusted by court, since such evidence is likely to be influenced by the benefit to that person in the Will.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR MURULI-MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 32 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, deleted.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34

MS RWAKOOJO: Amendment of section 86 of the principal Act.

Clause 34 is amended in the proposed section 86(1)(a) by substituting for the words, “lineal descendant” the words, “son or daughter of a deceased person”.

The justification is to restrict a reference to a child in a Will to apply only to the biological and adopted children of the testator, since the word “lineal descendant” is broad and includes all persons who are descended in a direct line from the deceased person and includes the grandchild of the deceased and any person related to the deceased in a direct descending line up to six degrees downwards.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 34 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 34, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 35

MS RWAKOOJO: Amendment of section 87 of the principal Act.

For clause 35, it is substituted with the following:

“35. Replacement of section 87 of the principal Act”.

Section 87 of the principal Act is repealed. 

The justification is the proposal to substitute the words “illegitimate” and “legitimate” with “acknowledged” will maintain an unlawful distinction between the children, based on whether they have been acknowledged by their parent or not; a matter that was declared unconstitutional in the case of Law and Advocacy for Women in Uganda v. the Attorney-General of Uganda, Constitutional Petition 13 of 2005. 

The amendment is inconsistent with other provisions of the Bill which have removed any unlawful distinction between children, yet this provision attempts to maintain it. The provision will create practical challenges if a parent does not acknowledge his or her child, thereby resulting in absurdity, wherein a child may be disinherited, merely because he or she was not acknowledged by the parents, notwithstanding that the parent is the actual parent of the child.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 35 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 35, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 36

MS RWAKOOJO: Replacement of section 179 of the principal Act. Clause 36 is amended in the proposed section 179 by:

(a)	Inserting, immediately after the proposed subsection (3), the following: 

“Notwithstanding subsection (1), every donation of a gift made under this section, the value of which exceeds 25 currency points, shall be in writing”.

(b) 	Deleting the proposed subsection (4).

The justification is:

To require every donation of a gift made in contemplation of death of a value exceeding Shs 500,000 to be in writing. 

(c)	To delete the proposed subsection (4), which is redundant in light of the proposed subsection (3).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 36 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 36, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46

MS RWAKOOJO: Replacement of section 215 of the principal Act. Clause 46 is amended in the proposed section 215(2), by deleting paragraph (b).

The justification is:

(i)	A person who is not fit and proper cannot be given a grant to administer an estate. 

(ii)	The Administrator-General cannot supervise an administrator of an estate, since a grant of letters or probate places the administrator of an estate in the same position as the deceased person at law.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister?

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 46 be amended, as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 46, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to.

Clause 48, agreed to.

Clause 49, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 51

MS RWAKOOJO: Insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 50.

Immediately after clause 50, insert the following new clause: 

Amendment of section 244 of the principal Act.

Section 244 of the principal Act is amended by –

(a)	Numbering the existing provision as subsection (1); and 

(b)	Inserting immediately after the following: 

“(i) 	The application referred to in subsection (1), shall be made within one year from the date of death of the testator. 

(ii) 	Where a person named as executor in a Will does not apply for probate within the time prescribed in subsection (2), a beneficiary under the Will may, with the Will annexed, apply for letters of administration.”

Justification 

(i)	To prescribe a time within which to apply for probate. 

(ii)	To empower beneficiaries under the Will to apply for letters of administration, where an application is made for probate within one year from the date of death of the testator. 

(iii)	To ensure the just and timely administration of estates of deceased persons.

(iv)	To provide a remedy in situations where executors as appointed in the Will refuse or neglect to apply for probate.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I would like to seek some clarification. I am not trying to deviate from the principles of the law but these matters are getting planted in the law and so we will not have the time again.

I would like to find out something. In the event somebody is exiled for some reason and the person is not present to apply within the one year, what happens?

MR KALYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. With our legal system as it is now, you cannot be an administrator of an estate in Uganda, if you are not a resident in Uganda; whether by exile or by choice. Therefore, to answer your question directly, if a person is exiled within that time, then he or she cannot apply for letters of administration.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

MR AOGON: I know the minister is accepting it - 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The problem is that hon. Silas Aogon is looking at – Hon. Aogon studied history and so, he is looking at history. Yet, the Attorney-General is talking about the law. So, what does the law say about what you are asking?

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I appreciate your wisdom. Exactly, we are coming from the same angle. Honourable members, people get exiled, yet they are entitled to inheritance back at home. Since they cannot stay here for one full year, when they come back, they have nothing totally. That is my concern.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Has anyone from exile been rejected to return to the country? 

MR AOGON: I cannot say, “they are there or it is so and so”. Madam Speaker, these situations are real.

DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Aogon, that is already provided in another law. We are making a law for this one. The issue of return from exile is provided for in another law. I put the question that a new clause be inserted, as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause agreed.

New clause immediately after clause 51

MS RWAKOOJO: Insertion of new clause immediately after clause 51. Immediately, after clause 51, insert the following new clauses: 

(i)	Amendment of section 255 of the principal Act. 

The principal Act is amended by substituting for section 255 the following:

255 - Proceedings suspended if caveat is received.

(i)	A person who lodges a caveat under section 253 shall within 14 days of lodging the caveat, serve a copy of the caveat to the petitioner for probate or letters of administration.

(ii)	Where a caveat is lodged in respect of a petition for probate or letters of administration, the court shall suspend the proceedings in the matter, until the caveat has been withdrawn, lapsed or a suit for removal of the caveat has been filed and determined by court.

Insertion of section 255A

The principal Act is amended by inserting immediately after section 255 the following:

255A: Caveat and petition to lapse. 

(i)	A petitioner for probate or letters of administration in respect of which a caveat has been lodged shall, within six months from the date the caveat was lodged, file a suit for removal of the caveat. 

(ii)	Notwithstanding subsection (2), a person who lodges a caveat in respect of a petition for probate or letters of administration, shall within six months from the date the caveat was lodged, take proceedings or prove the objections contained in the caveat. 

(iii)	Where a person who lodges the caveat or petitioner for probate or letters of administration does not comply with subsections (2) or (3), the caveat and the petition for probate or letters of administration shall lapse.

Justification

It is to clarify on the proceedings that accrue after a caveat is lodged against the grant of letters or probate and to bring finality to caveat proceedings, by requiring the caveat to lapse after six months from the date of lodging of the caveat, unless proceedings are taken by the petitioner for probate or letters, or the caveator to remove the caveat or prove the objections in the caveat or upon an order of court, on petition by the petitioner, for letters or probate.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add another section to this due to the fact that where the caveat, as proceedings have not gone to court or otherwise, and after six months, the caveat lapses, there should be no other caveat after that placed by any petitioner.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Where are you framing it from?

MR KILYOWA KIWANUKA: The framing reads, “Where a caveat lodged under this section lapses, the caveator shall not lodge another caveat in respect to the said estate.”

MS RWAKOOJO: The committee has no objection.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that a new clause be inserted as proposed with the amendment from the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

New clause, agreed to.

Clause 52

MS RWAKOOJO: Clause 52: Amendment of section 258 of the principal Act. Clause 52 is amended as follows –

a.	In the proposed section 258(3) by inserting immediately after the words “two years”, the words “or any other reasonable time as determined by court.”

b.	In the proposed section 258(4) by –

i)	deleting paragraph (b); and 
ii)	Inserting a new paragraph immediately after paragraph (b) as follows: 

“An executor of the estate of a deceased person whose estate is entitled to receive pension until the pension has been fully paid”.

Justification

a)	To remove the exemption granted to estates managed by the Administrator-General since it will allow the Administrator-General to hold onto those estates in perpetuity, yet the grant of probate requires the Administrator-General to distribute the estate to the beneficiaries.

b)	To allow court grant additional time for expiration of probate beyond two years where it deems necessary in order to cater for exigencies that arise during administration, which may necessitate the administration of estates beyond two years as proposed in the Bill.

c)	To ensure that estates probate granted over estates receiving pension does not terminate until the pension obligations have been fully settled.

Mr MURULI mukasa: Accepted. 

The deputy chairperson: I put the question that clause 52 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 52, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 53

Ms rwakoojo: Clause 53: Amendment of section 259 of the principal Act. 

Clause 53 is amended as follows -

(a) 	In the proposed section 259(3) by inserting immediately after the words “two years” the words “or any other reasonable time as determined by court”;

(b) 	In the proposed section 259(4) –

(i) 	By changing the numbering of the paragraphs to alphabetical letters;
(ii) 	In paragraph (i), by substituting for the word “subsection” the word “section”;
(iii) 	By inserting immediately after paragraph (i), the following:

“An administrator in respect of an estate to which section 27(2) applies except that for cases falling under section 27(2), letters of administration shall remain valid only in respect of the trust created under section 27(2); or 

An administrator of the estate of a deceased person whose estate is entitled to receive pension until the pension has been fully paid.”

(iv) By deleting paragraph (ii). 

Justification

a)	To remove the exemption granted to estates managed by the Administrator-General since it will allow the Administrator-General to hold onto those estates in perpetuity yet the grant of probate requires the Administrator-General to distribute the estate to the beneficiaries.

b)	To allow court grant additional time for expiration of letters beyond two years where it deems necessary in order to cater for exigencies that arise during administration, which may necessitate the administration of estates beyond two years as proposed in the Bill.

c)	To cater for estates where some of the beneficiaries are lineal descendants by ensuring that the letters terminate upon the descendants ceasing to qualify under section 27(2) as well as those receiving pension.

d)	To correct a clerical mistake in the proposed paragraph (i). 

Mr MURULI mukasa: Accepted.

The deputy chairperson: I put the question that clause 53 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 53, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 54

Ms rwakoojo: Clause 54: Amendment of section 265 of the principal Act. 

Clause 54 is amended by substituting for paragraph (a), the following -

(a) 	By numbering the existing provision as “subsection (1)” and deleting all the words appearing after the words “civil procedure”.

Justification

(i)	The proposal to have either person before court in a contentious case either be the petitioner or defendant, causes practical challenges since the provision does not prescribe who will make this determination. 

(ii)	The proposal presupposes a typical suit yet this is not the case. Usually, when a person registers a caveat against the grant of probate or administration, a person aggrieved may apply for the removal of the caveat. In dispensing with this application, court may inquire into the contention, adopting the procedures laid out in the civil procedure laws and regulations.

(iii)	To expand the provision to provide a procedure for dealing with contentious matters before the High Court.

Mr MURULI mukasa: Accepted. 

The deputy chairperson: I put the question that clause 54 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 54, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 55

Ms rwakoojo: Clause 55: Replacement of section 268 of the principal Act.

Clause 55 is amended in the proposed section 268 as follows:

1.	In the proposed subsection (2), by inserting immediately after the word “deceased” appearing in the second line of the provision the word “person”;

2.	By deleting the proposed subsection (3);

3.	By substituting for the proposed subsection (4), the following:

“(4) Notwithstanding subsection (1), a person may, before the grant of letters of administration or probate, take possession of the property of the deceased person for the purpose of -

(a) 	preserving the estate of a deceased person;
 
(b) 	providing for the funeral of a deceased person;

(c) 	providing immediate necessities of the family of the deceased person;

(d) 	preserving a prudent management of the business of the deceased person, including preserving the goods of trade of the deceased person; or 

(e) 	receiving money or other funds belonging to the deceased person.”

4.	By deleting the proposed subsection (5);

5.	In the proposed subsection (6) by–

i)	Substituting for the words “intermeddle in” the words, “take possession of”; and
ii)	Substituting for the words “six months” the words “three months”;

6.	In the proposed subsection (7), by substituting for the words “intermeddles with” the words “takes possession of”;

7.	By substituting for the proposed subsection (8), the following:

“(8) A person who has reason to believe that the person who has taken possession of the estate of a deceased person pursuant to subsection (4) has caused loss or damage to the estate may seek redress from the Administrator-General or his or her agent.”

8.	By substituting for the proposed subsection (9) the following:

“(9) A person who intermeddles in the estate of a deceased person or takes possession of the property of the deceased person shall be personally liable for any loss occasioned to the estate and shall make good the loss occasioned to the estate.”

9.	By deleting the proposed subsection (10); and

10.	In the proposed subsection (11), by substituting for the words “intermeddles in the estate” the words “takes possession of the property.”

Justification

i)	To remedy an absurdity that has been created by allowing a person to intermeddle in the estate of a deceased person yet intermeddling is an offence.

ii)	To remove redundant provisions.

iii)	For better drafting.

Mr MURULI mukasa: Accepted.

The deputy chairperson: I put the question that clause 55 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 55, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 56

Mr rwakoojo: Clause 56: Replacement of section 270 of the principal Act.

Clause 56 is amended in the proposed section 270 as follows:

a)	By inserting immediately after the proposed subsection (2), the following:

“Where a surviving spouse, lineal descendant or guardian of a minor withholds his or her consent to the disposal of the property belonging to a deceased person, the executor or administrator, as the case may be, may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for redress.

Where the surviving spouse, lineal descendant or the guardian of a minor has withheld his or her consent, court may, if satisfied that the disposal of the property is beneficial to the estate or to a beneficiary of the estate, authorise the sale of the property, with or without conditions.” 

(b) 	By substituting the proposed subsection (3) with the following: 

“(3) The executor, executrix or administrator shall account for the proceeds of sale to – 

(a) 	In the case of a sale under subsection (1), to the beneficiaries; and 
 (b) 	In the case of a sale pursuant to subsection (2), to the court that granted the consent.” 

The justifications are to empower a person aggrieved by a decision to dispose of property belonging to the estate of a deceased person to apply to court for redress. 

Secondly, to empower court to grant consent to dispose of property belonging to an estate where consent is unreasonably withheld. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the good thing is that the Attorney-General is around. On the issue of timelines, isn’t it proper for us to institute timelines – when people stay for long with resources that are not theirs, they get tempted to utilise them. Can’t we put a timeline that you should account within a certain period? That is what I wanted to hear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It is provided for.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, I did not hear the number of days. 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. This is only introducing the amendment. In the Act, any person who carries an estate must account within six months and close the account within one year. You must have a statement in the court within six months and close within one year. That was not amended. 

MR MURULI MUKASA: It is accepted.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 56 be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 56, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 57, agreed to.

Clause 58

MS RWAKOOJO: Clause 58: Amendment of Section 272 of the principal Act. Clause 58 is amended as follows: 

(a) 	In the proposed section 272(2), by deleting the words “or letters of administration” “or administrator” and “or administrators” wherever they appear in the provision; 

(b) 	By inserting immediately after the proposed subsection (2), the following: 

“Where in an estate with more than one executor or administrator, a dispute arises between the executors or administrators or between the executor or administrator and a beneficiary of the estate, the dispute shall be referred for arbitration by the Registrar of the High Court or a Chief Magistrate. 

A person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar or Chief Magistrate under this section may appeal the decision in accordance with the law relating to civil procedure. 

The Chief Justice shall issue practice directives to regulate the arbitration proceedings undertaken by a Registrar or Chief Magistrate under this section.” 

The justification is: 

(i)	To restrict the provision to executors and not administrators since the latter are nominated by the beneficiaries and cannot delegate that appointment; and 

(ii)	To provide a mechanism for settling disputes between executors and administrators of estates.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose a minor amendment to this amendment under (b) paragraph (2), which talks about civil procedure. 

I would like to propose that we delete “relating to civil procedure” and simply say, “A person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar or Chief Magistrate under this section may appeal the decision in accordance with the law.” This is because civil procedure is restricted to another section of the court, and not so much with this one to do with succession. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Chairperson, I think civil procedure is still within the law. Are you in agreement with the minister that we delete the phrase: “in relation to civil procedure” to keep it within the law?

MS RWAKOOJO: We could say “with the law”, but when you come to civil procedure, it is more specific. Many laws fall back to that but there is nothing wrong with saying “according to the law” because it will still fall back to the civil procedure.   

MR AOGON: I would have loved to stay with the initial submission of the committee because I do not see a situation where we are going to handle a matter of civil nature under criminal law. Therefore, it would be better, in my opinion, to be clear and stay with the word “civil.” 

MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Appeals are a creature of statutes. The civil procedures are just rules. So, the moment you grant a person the right to appeal, then you determine the procedure that you are going to use to appeal. You are talking about magistrate courts. They have different rules of appeal, which are not provided for in the civil procedure rules. When you are appealing from a magistrate’s court, the high court will have a different rule and procedure. 

Therefore saying, “in accordance with the law” does not tie down to any specific space. I think it would be more inclusive and easier for us to deal with because then if you see further on, they are saying, “the Chief Justice may give practice directions.” Those practice directions are also used as rules of procedure but are not civil procedure rules. Hence leaving it “in accordance with the law” allows you the latitude to be able to operate. 

MR AOGON: Attorney-General that is beautiful. The last question is about the level of appeal. Should it be opened up to the Supreme Court, the final level? Or should we close it like we do with elections; that you stop at the High Court? 

MS RWAKOOJO: I do not see anything wrong with saying “in accordance with the law.” We could leave it at that. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that clause 58 be amended as proposed to delete the phrase: “relating to civil procedure rule” as suggested by the Attorney-General. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 58, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 59

MS RWAKOOJO: Clause 59 is amendment of Section 273 of the Principal Act. Delete clause 59. 

The justification is: 

i)	The proposal to require consent of the beneficiates as well as leave of court every time an executor or administrator dies will make the administration of estates very expensive and tedious. The surviving executor or administrator will have to seek the consent of the beneficiaries and leave of court before continuing to administer or execute the estate; and

ii)	The amendment is redundant in light of Section 187 of the Succession Act, which empowers a surviving executor to continue upon the death of one or more executors and contravenes the provisions of the Registration of Titles Act, especially Sections 134 and 192, which all recognise the principle of survivorship.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 59 be deleted as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 59, deleted.

Clause 60, agreed to.

Clause 61, agreed to.

Clause 62, agreed to.

Clause 63, agreed to.

Clause 64, agreed to.

Clause 65, agreed to.

Clause 66, agreed to.

Clause 67, agreed to.

Clause 68

MS RWAKOOJO: Miscellaneous amendments to the principal Act.

Clause 68 is amended by: 

 i)	Deleting paragraph (a)(i) 

ii)	In paragraph (a)(v) by deleting the words “lunatic and”

Justification

(i)	The proposal to substitute for the word “minor” for “infant” introduces a foreign word in the Law of Succession. The law on succession uses the words “minor”, “child” or “minor child” and not the word “infant” which is incapable of exact definition. 

(ii)	The amendment is also redundant since “a minor” means a person below 18 years of age, a definition that includes an infant.

(iii)	The deletion of the words; “lunatic and” is intended to remedy a conflict between paragraphs (a)(v) and c(ii) where the word “lunatic” is defined twice and differently thereby creating an ambiguity. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister -

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 68 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 68, as amended, agreed to.
 
Clause 69

MS RWAKOOJO: Insertion of sections 340, 341 and 342 in the principal Act.

Clause 69 of the Bill is amended in the proposed section 341, by: 

i)	Substituting for the headnote the following, “savings and transitional”.

ii)	Numbering the existing provisions as subsection (1).

 iii)	Inserting immediately after the following new subsections; “(2) A grant of probate or letters of administration issued to a person by a court of competent jurisdiction before the coming into force of this Act, shall remain valid for a period of three years after the coming into force of this Act.

(3) 	A grant of probate or letters of administration issued to the Administrator-General before the coming into force of this Act shall remain valid for a period of five years after the coming into force of this Act.
 
(4) 	A grant of probate or letters of administration referred to in subsections (2) and (3), may on application to court by the executor or administrator of an estate be extended for a reasonable period as determined by court.

(5) 	A Will made before the coming into force of this Act shall not be affected by the provisions of Section 50(c)”

Justification

To prescribe a time within which letters of administration and probate granted to estates prior to the commencement of this Act shall terminate. 

A consequential amendment arising from the amendments proposed in sections 258 and 259 to require the exercise of the powers of administrator or executor for grants made prior to the commencement of this Act to be within three years from the date of commencement of this Act.

To save Wills that are in existence at the commencement of this Act, from the strict application of the provisions of section 50(c) since such Wills can be deemed invalid, due to the new requirements for attesting rules proposed under section 50(c) which requirements were not in existence at the time of making such a Will.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Minister -

MR MURULI MUKASA: Accepted.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 69 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 69, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to.

The title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.30
THE ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, and the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.31
THE ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered a Bill entitled, “The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021” and passed it with many amendments. Particularly clauses 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 50, 51 right up to 73. I beg to report. 

I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has deleted clause 59. It has also inserted a new provision immediately after clauses 21, 51, 56 and 69. I beg to report further that there is no clause that has been stood over. I beg to report. (Applause)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2021

6.32
THE ACTING MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I move that the Bill entitled, “The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021”, be read a third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2021” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE SUCCESSION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2022”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Congratulations, honourable minister, the Attorney-General, the very able committee and very obedient honourable Members of Parliament. (Applause)

I thank you very much for this Bill. Before I finish, I want to hear from UWOPA.

6.34
THE CHAIRPERSON, UGANDA WOMEN PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. I also thank the Members for bringing this Bill because this Bill will go a long way in dealing with the challenges that the women and the children have been facing out there. (Applause)

You know that when the men would pass on and leave the women, most of the women would be sent away from their homes, even when they have children. Therefore, this addresses even the man because you will also be able – (Applause) – to get a share from what I would have invested if I leave this earth early and leave you here. 

I thank everybody for this Bill. We hope that His Excellency the President will assent to this Bill, because it is one of the Bills that were handled in the 10th Parliament, and certainly returned in the 11th Parliament. Thank you very much. May God bless you all. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The issues that were raised by His Excellency the President, have been addressed in this Bill. 

As hon. Opendi said, this Bill helps in resolving family issues in terms of heritage, especially when a spouse passes on. It really helps us. It removes all those challenges on the widows and the orphans. 

Once more, I thank you, the committee. You did a very good job, led by my own sister. Thank you very much, the Attorney-General and the minister. It is my prayer, Attorney-General, that you follow up on this Bill. We want it assented to, we, the women of Uganda and the boy-children. (Applause)

Can we hear from the chairperson?

6.37
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Ms Robinah Rwakoojo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very excited about the Succession Bill being passed because when I began working in the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs – where I began working after school – I began in the Administrator-General’s department. It has always been dear to me. 

I can see members of the Administrator-General’s department there. We worked closely with them in discussing this Bill. I thank the Attorney-General, and the honourable minister holding portfolio for the Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Thank you very much for cooperating with us as a committee. 

Thank you, my committee members. Your work was not in vain. Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, the staff of Parliament. Thank you very much. 

This is a worthy law. I know that it is going to make the lives of families in Uganda much easier. Thank you for entrusting me with this and God bless you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. We cannot go without thanking our friends in the Opposition. They were part of making this Bill. Hon. Sseggona was part of it, hon. Katuntu, the Shadow Attorney-General and the Leader of the Opposition; they were all part of it. We cannot go without saying, “Thank you”. We are very grateful. 

The House is adjourned to 2 o’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 6.39 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 9 February 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)

