Thursday, 7 February 2013

Parliament met at 2.35 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just three issues to communicate. 

One, is that on Wednesday, 13th next week, you are invited to have a consultative meeting here in the Chamber at 10 o’clock. It will last about one hour. We should have been in the conference hall, but it is undergoing rehabilitation. So, let us come to that meeting at 10 o’clock on Wednesday.


Secondly, members of three committees have been invited by the National Planning Authority to go and attend a half-day workshop on the final draft of Vision 2040, that is the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Committee on National Economy and the Committee on Budget. This meeting will take place on 15 February 2013 at the NPA headquarters. Please report there at 9.00 a.m. members of those committees.

Thirdly, a number of questions for oral answer are ready and they will be answered on Thursday. The following ministries are given notice:

    • The Ministry of Health question from hon. Majegere
    • The Minister of Health, question from hon. Dr Bayigga;
    • The Minister of Defence, questions from hon. Sempijja;
    • Minister of Defence, question from hon. Nabilah Naggayi;
    • Minister for the Presidency, question from hon. Nambooze; and 
    • Minister of Local Government questions from hon. Paul Mwiru.

So, the government side is given notice that those must be handled on Thursday next week without fail. Now, I will allow hon. Tinkasimiire to raise one issue. Two minutes only.

MR NZOGHU: Procedure.

THE SPEAKER: Under what rule?

2.41
MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE (NRM, Buyaga County West, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I move under rule 29 of our Rules of Procedure of Parliament, a petition to this honourable House, from the Members of Parliament from Kibaale District. Allow me straight away go to the petition itself.

THE SPEAKER: Come down; you have to lay it. You will have to lay it on the Table. Do not read the body, read the prayers.

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, I want to lay on Table a petition from Members of Parliament, on the proposed creation of Kagadi and Kakomero districts duly signed by myself hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire; hon. Robinah Nabbanja, the Woman MP for Kibaale; hon. Ignatius Besisira Buyaga East Constituency; hon. Mable Bakeine, Bugangaizi East; and hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, Bugangaizi West. I want to lay on Table, a copy of the petition.

Madam Speaker, in July last year, a Minister of Local Government moved a motion to create Kagadi and Kakomero districts this financial year, and 23 other districts, to be operational in subsequent years. Under your chair, you directed that the motion be handled in two weeks by the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, and report to the House. It is now clocking seven months down the road and we have not seen this report and yet in this financial year’s budget, we passed Shs 2.2 billion for the operationalisation of Kagadi and Kakomero districts.

We have come to learn that the Minister of Finance is trying to re-allocate these funds behind backdoors that were appropriated by Parliament for this purpose, and the petitioners have attached one, a copy of the petition; a copy of a letter from the Permanent Secretary; and a copy from the Minister of Finance to the Chairman LCV dated February directing the chairperson to try to re-allocate this money. 

Our prayers, Madam Speaker, are that: 

First, Parliament redirects the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to produce a report on the creation of Kagadi and Kakomero districts and other districts, and since we are ending the week, within next week. 

The second prayer is to restrain the Minister of Finance from directing the re-allocation of Shs 2.2 billion to go to repairs and maintenance of roads and that this money be preserved for starting Kagadi and Kakomero districts before the end of this financial year. 

We pray your petitioners and the petition is hereby signed below. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we note the petition and we commit it to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to handle expeditiously and report back to the House.

PETITION BY FORMER EMPLOYEES OF UGANDA ELECTRICITY BOARD (UEB) 
(IN LIQUIDATION) FOR NON-PAYMENT OF GRATUITY

2.48
MRS SSENTONGO NABULYA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay on Table a petition from the former workers of Uganda Electricity Board under rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.
 
The humble petition of Grace Karugaba and 467 others against the official receiver of Uganda Electricity Board and the Uganda Electricity Board in liquidation for non-payment of gratuity, presented by hon. Nabulya Theopista Ssentongo MP Workers.

They state that the petitioners are some of the former employees of the Uganda Electricity Board, who had worked for less than 10 years and were retrenched between 1998 and 1999. 

Whereas the petitioners were entitled to gratuity and retirement benefits under the Retirements Benefits Scheme under the board’s terms and conditions of service, they were denied part of their benefits. The petitioners have a constitutional right under objective 14(b)-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, do not read the arguments. Just go to the prayers.

MRS NABULYA: Okay. In that regard, your petitioners have learnt that there is actually no pending matter regarding their cause in court. Therefore, by this petition, the petitioners pray that Parliament investigates the matter to establish why the official receiver has not paid the petitioners their outstanding balance on gratuity and your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray and hereto your humble petitioners have appended their signatures. 

Allow me to lay on Table a copy of the petition. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and Members.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is noted and sent to the Committee on Natural Resources for scrutiny. Should it be Natural Resources or - Clerk, which committee should we send it to? This is under receivership. Okay, Committee on Natural Resources to handle expeditiously and report back in conjunction with the Committee on Finance. Let them work together with the Committee on Finance.

STATEMENT ON UNANSWERED ISSUES BY GOVERNMENT

2.50
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to first seek a clarification if hon. Aston Kajara is now the Leader of Government Business because we have not got communication.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received information from the Government Chief Whip that they were travelling from Entebbe from a Cabinet meeting, but the Minister of Finance had been left in Kampala to take charge until they arrive. That is why hon. Kajara is here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much. If that is true then I can give him this copy. Madam speaker and honourable colleagues, on 30 October 2012, I raised pertinent issues that are affecting this country, and they included, among others:

    i. The UN special report pinning down Uganda in its involvement in the M23 in DRC;
    ii. Killings of Moslem Clerics;
    iii. The arrest and detention of Opposition politicians in Police and safe houses; 
    iv. Kidnap of Ugandans;
    v. Preventive arrests; and
    vi. Corruption which is on the increase, among others.  

The Leader of Government Business tried to answer No.1 above, but the House demanded that he goes back and brings a complete report on what I had raised. To date, nothing has been done.

I have the same statement again here which I am going to lay on the Table.

There are other issues I want to raise for Government to clarify to this House and the whole nation, and these are: 
Coup threats

Of recent, His Excellency the President, the Minister of Defence and the Chief of Defence Forces have been quoted by the media issuing coup threats to Parliament. It would appear that the President and his Executive are planning to execute a palace coup against Parliament like it happened in Russia under President Yeltsin.

Ugandans are very much aware that this coup is possible considering that the utterances came from the highest office of the land.  However, they should be warned that we the people are empowered by the first Article of our Constitution, and we can never allow that to happen and be sustained.
 
We have read in the media that the President has given some explanation about the coup talk.  However, we are not convinced.  We wish to request hon. Crispus Kiyonga and hon. Aronda Nyakairima to explain to this august House what they meant by their statements on the coup. These statements have put us in bad light with friendly foreign governments, member states of the East African Community and the investors. But above all, they have created fear among Ugandans.

The Executive does not want this Parliament to do its oversight work and question the rampant corruption and other forms of abuses by Government officials. They are also using the coup threats to intimidate Members of Parliament and the general public, thus violating the Constitution they swore to defend. There is nothing in the Constitution that gives the Army the mandate to intervene when they think the politicians are not doing their work well. It is the voters to do that. On the other hand, the Constitution mandates the Army to protect our boundaries, but not to overthrow Parliament or any Government. This will be very counterproductive and destructive to the country.

We hope that we are not going back to the dark days of Uganda with a few Ugandans who want power at any cost.

Separation of Powers and the efforts by the President to control all the Pillars of the State

During the recess which ended on Monday, 4 February 2013, there were statements in the media attributed to President Yoweri Museveni. He is said to have threatened the leaders of this House. He warned and dared them to recall Parliament as requested by MP petitioners swearing that the House would only be recalled over his - the President’s dead body. 

It was also reported in the media when the President angrily referred to some Members of this House as idiots and fools.  Such is not a language of a Fountain of Honour. 

After all those public nasty utterances, the Executive then went into over-drive and began calling those who had signed the petition, ordering them to withdraw their names. It is not the work of the President or any other party or Government official to decide how a Member of Parliament votes on this.

We legislate here and vote first and foremost in the national interest, then in the interests of our constituents, the party and ourselves, in that order. Calling or recalling this House is the work of the Speaker, and the Speaker only, not the President.

It is very wrong for the Executive to gag the Members of Parliament on how they should discuss national issues in the House.

MPs are voted by the people of Uganda and not the Executive. They have the interests of Uganda first not individuals in Government. We, therefore, request that the Executive should stop intimidating Members of Parliament as this will not be different from the past regimes; democracy is very vital and important. The Executive should do their work and let the other arms of the state do their work as spelt out in the Constitution.

Removal of the national budget from Parliament

We have also read in the media that while in Kyankwanzi for their retreat, our colleagues on the opposite side of this House, that is the NRM, resolved to remove the work of the national budget from Parliament and give it to the Parliamentary caucus. If that is true, it will be very unconstitutional. The work of appropriation or sharing out the national cake is the work of the whole Parliament; no party caucus has such power.

What would have been done is to assess whether the resources that have been appropriated have delivered the desired results.

All ministers are NRM and failures in their respective ministries clearly show that many of these ministers cannot deliver. Year in, year out Parliament appropriates money to the ministry, but little is done on the ground. 
The media as partners in development 

The media is our partner in development. It is through the media that we the Members of Parliament and politicians easily reach the masses and market our messages for development. It is, therefore, worrying and dangerous to the building of democracy in this country, when sections of the state and Government start gagging the media and stopping them from doing their work.

There is a growing trend where persons thought to be holding strong dissenting views on Government are not allowed any space or airtime in the media. Some media Houses are facing threats of closure from Government if they do not stop publishing critical materials about the powers that be. 

Even here in Parliament, some journalists have been banned. For what crime? For how long? Why can’t we just put our position to the public through offensive newspapers instead of punishing the journalists so harshly?

I demand that the Government clarifies on these issues so that the fears of our people are put to rest. I thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you Leader of the Opposition. I will just react to one area; I think on the issue of the journalists at Parliament. I invite you to discuss with the Public Relations Officer; Parliament is not a market, it has got rules and guidelines. The PR officer will answer you on that one. I think we need to appoint time to meet.

3.02
MINISTER OF STATE FOR PRIVATISATION (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you Madam Speaker.

MR LUKYAMUZI: Rule 69

THE SPEAKER: What is it about?

MR LUKYAMUZI: Point of procedure takes precedence over any matter.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, procedure under what?
 
MR LUKYAMUZI: Under what is happening right now.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ken, please resume your seat. I have allowed him to speak.

MR KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that we have just had a Cabinet meeting and we are reconvening in Kampala. But, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Leader of the Opposition to have raised these issues, which were unanswered.

In respect of the issues which were raised on 30 October 2012, in this Parliament, in particular, the UN special report pinning down Uganda in its involvement in the M23 in DRC - killing of Moslem clerics; arrest and detention of Opposition politicians in Police; kidnap of Ugandans; preventive arrests and so forth; plus corruption which is on the increase.

The Leader of Government at the time tried to answer question number one, but the House demanded that he goes back and brings a complete report on what was raised. I want to state that the Leader of Government business is prepared to give a detailed report on all these issues, which will allay the fears of Members.
It is necessary now that he gives a detailed report on all these issues because they are important and concern Ugandans. They cannot be raised and answered now. So, the Leader of Government business will at an appropriate time give a full report on them.

Regarding the issues raised now, they are four in number - about the coup, separation of powers, removal of the national budget from Parliament, and also the issue of media as partners in development.

We have just received these issues raised; it is my humble prayer that we give Government time to prepare appropriate answers, which will allay the fears of Members, especially the issues attributed to His Excellency the President and the Minister of Defence. A preparation of the answers will, therefore, be made. 

The issue of the budget is also very important to this country and we know the process of the budget; while the issue of separation of powers is imbued in our Constitution. I want to assure the House, even before this statement is prepared, that there is no planned coup by anybody.

The NRM Government came to usher in democracy in this country and we abide by the rule of law; we cannot be the same people who were responsible for promulgation of the Constitution be the same people to overthrow such a Constitution.

Madam Speaker on behalf of Government I wish to pledge that we are going to study all these issues as raised, and we shall give a comprehensive answer to all of them one by one. I thank you Madam Speaker and honourable members.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition are topical, and I think they are issues that the country wants answers to very quickly. So, I think we need a timeframe.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker we appreciate that these issues are very important to the country, and we are prepared as Government to issue a full statement within one week.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT ON THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT ON THE FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF UGANDA INVESTMENT AUTHORITY FOR THE PERIOD 2002 TO 2011

3.09
MR PATRICK AMURIAT (FDC, Kumi, County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, I thank you for this opportunity to present a report on the performance of Uganda Investment Authority (UIA),for the period 2002 to 2010. On the onset, I would like say this amounts to 10 reports condensed in one. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, we are proceeding under the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. As the Standing Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises, we examined reports of the audited accounts of UIA in the context of the autonomy and efficiency, sound business principles, and prudent commercial practices.

The committee wishes to present its findings and recommendations to this august House for consideration and approval. The methodology is stated there and I will only present a brief on the background.

Uganda Investment Authority was created by the Investment Code Act Cap. 92 of the laws of Uganda with a vision of making Uganda the leading investment destination; and a mission of promoting and facilitating investment projects; providing serviced land; and advocating for a competitive business environment.

The authority has a ten-member board with the Executive Director as the Board Secretary. The Board works through four key committees, which are on finance and administration; audit; national industrial parks planning; investment promotion/public relations; and a committee on land issues.

Under the law of the land, UIA is mandated to:

    1. Promoting, facilitating and supervising investment in Uganda.
    2. Receiving all applications of investment licenses for investors intending to establish or setup business enterprises in Uganda.

    3. Recommending to the Government national policies and programmes designed to promote investment in Uganda.

    4. Providing information on matters relating to investment in Uganda.

    5. Assisting potential investors in identifying and establishing investment projects, determining the terms of conditions, which will be imposed in relation to the operation of a business enterprise.

    6. Providing first-hand information on investment opportunities in Uganda.

The next few paragraphs indicate the performance of the UIA in relation to the promotion and facilitation of new investments. 

I will invite Members to read that particular section on their own and on employment creation. I will also invite you, honourable colleagues, to take time and read that part of the report. I will now go on to our general findings and recommendations contained on page 6.

The committee in the course of considering the report of the Auditor General discovered some issues on the performance of UIA.

    a) Political leadership of UIA, whereas the UIA is currently under the political leadership of the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development; key activities that authority was implementing seem to be the domain of the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. Such activities include the industrial parks, Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) development and promoting investment for exports in addition the mandate of the Ministry of Finance Planning and Economic Development should ideally be to provide resources and monitor effective utilisation of resources, but not to do implementation.

We, therefore, recommend that Government should transfer political leadership and supervision of UIA from the Ministry of Finance to that of Trade for effective guidance, supervision and oversight.

    b) Industrial parks policy, 

Whereas the Government through UIA has acquired chunks of land in most parts of the country for the creation of industrial parks, there was no policy or law guiding the process. This scenario has left the authority with a situation of using cheats and directives from senior political leaders as a basis to purchase as well as allocate the land.

This kind of arrangement for development of industrial parks can be a subject of abuse and corruption, as well as lack of transparency and equity in the distribution of benefits from such parks across the country.

It was noted that UIA was being used in some cases as a conduit for purchasing of land from specific individuals or persons who are highly connected to Government officials, since adverts soliciting for land in some districts were never published.
We recommend that Government puts in place an industrial parks policy and all the enabling legislations to operationalise the said policy.

c) Purchase of land at Kashari, Mbarara, 

The committee established that there was a suspicious transaction involving UIA being in the process of purchasing land in Kashari in Mbarara for industrial purposes without following due procedures. The accounting officer responded that UIA management received from Ms Grace Akello, the then Acting Principal Private Secretary (PPS)of his Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, informing the authority that there was land in Kashari to be bought by UIA for industrial purposes. 

The land belonged to one Mr Taremwa measuring 150 hectares; the Government valuer was engaged and valued the land at Ushs 488 million. Likewise, the board of the Uganda Investment Authority found that the evaluation committee which carried out a due diligence verification of the land in question, and reported that the land was not suitable for an industrial path, but agriculture. However, the Acting Executive Director, Mr Tom Buringuriza, wrote to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development asking for money to purchase the land. There was no evidence that the board had authorised the Executive Director to proceed with this transaction. 

A review of documents revealed that the requested funds were transferred  from the Ministry of Finance to the Investment Authority on the same day the request was made and procurement proceedings were initiated. It was evident that this transaction signalled elements of abuse of the process of developing industrial parks emanating mainly from lack of a policy and legal framework to guide the process. 

The committee noted as follows:

i. 	The Government had already acquired land provided by Mbarara District Local Government for an industrial park and which was still under developed.

ii. 	The Uganda Investment Authority strategic work plan revealed that there were no plans whatsoever for the purchase of the said land or any other industrial land in Mbarara District. The proposed purchase of the land was, therefore, imposed on the Authority. 

iii. 	The purchase of the land did not receive the required approval of the UIA Board, but was rather informed by a letter from State House and a letter informing the Executive Director of UIA of the funds, having been provided for the purchase of the lands and asking him to reinstate it for the same purpose.

iv. 	Further scrutiny revealed that the technical team (the UIA Land Division) providing technical assistance to the Acting Executive Director in procuring the land was headed by a non-qualified person with no knowledge of procurement, management, land management or surveying, but rather qualified as an industrial chemist.

We recommended, therefore, as follows:

    i. The Uganda Investment Authority should streamline and follow procurement and other procedures when purchasing land for industrial parks. The Ministry of Finance must desist from ring-fencing funds for industrial parks and directing UIA on which land they should purchase.

Lack of a mechanism for monitoring registered investors

Whereas UIA had been reporting that the country had registered a series of investment projects across sections in the economy, posting high levels of employment, there was no evidence that such investments had actually taken off and created the projected levels of employment. 

The Authority explained that they were unable to effectively track the investment projects and employment levels due to inadequate resources, financial and human. Thus, it was difficult to confirm if the planned investments that were reported by the Authority during the period that was reviewed translated to the targeted employment figures. 

We recommend that the Authority should create a strong monitoring and evaluation system or unit that must follow up all the licences it issues to investment projects to ensure that such projects create the projected jobs for Ugandans. 

National Small Medium Scale Enterprises (NSME) Policy

The mandate of UIA was expanded to include the development, coordination implementation and evaluation of the National Small Medium Scale Enterprises policy for Uganda. Despite Uganda implementing a private sector driven approach to development, it was alarming that it did not have an NSME policy. The Authority explained that they had developed a draft NSME policy, which was awaiting the approval of Cabinet. We, therefore, recommend that Government should put in place that policy to guide, coordinate, monitor and develop growth and performance of micro, small and medium-scale enterprises in Uganda.  

Governance and management of UIA

A number of positions at the board and senior management level had remained unsealed during the period reviewed, some board members were elected to Parliament or appointed by His Excellency the President, and one passed on, unfortunately. By the time of considering this report, UIA did not have a full board and there was no indication that the Ministry of Finance would constitute a full board soon. 

In addition, six senior management positions remain vacant, covering critical areas such as land developments, industrial parks, ICT and legal which are indeed vital in the operations of the Authority. In accordance to the investment code, it is the mandate of the board to ensure that these positions are fulfilled and are functional. UIA explained that a number of the positions had persons running them on acting basis. The committee noted that the positions were vacant by virtue of running them on acting basis. The committee noted that the positions were vacant by virtue of staff resignations, a clear pointer to weak human resource management practises in the Authority. 

We recommend that the Ministry of Finance disbands the board of the Authority and subsequently restructures the entire institution with a view to ensuring that it is properly managed and it achieves the mandate it was created for. A new organisational structure should be created and all positions subjected to competitive recruitment. 

Appointment of the Chief Executive Officer

Upon expiry of the contract of Prof. Maggie Kigozi as the Executive Director, UIA engaged a company, DAMA Consultants, to help in the recruitment of the new Executive Director to replace her. The minutes of the 22nd UIA Board of 26 October 2010, recommended that the recruitment exercise should take off immediately. 

Dama Consultants issued a report on recruitment in September 2011, in which one Mr David Ogong emerged with the highest mark of an average of 70.5 percent after all panellists’ marks were considered. However, the board refused to appoint Mr Ogong, and instead appointed the Deputy Executive Director as an acting Executive Director. The main reason for declining to make the appointment was that none of the persons had made a 75 percent watermark, which the board determined after DAMA Consultants had submitted their reports. The 75 percent mark was not part of the terms of reference that DAMA Consultants were given; in addition, the board explained that an ideal Chief Executive Officer should be a person who can work well with His Excellency the President of Uganda. 

The position of Executive Director was re-advertised and by the time the committee issued this report, no substantive person had been appointed. This, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues has been overtaken by events. This report was prepared in October last year. I understand we now have an Executive Director in the person of Engineer Ssebowa, who previously was with the Electricity Regulatory Authority, and I don’t know what circumstances led to his departure from ERA. We will find that out. 

Irregular payments to Dama Consultants –(Interjection)– no, the recommendation was for the Chief Executive to be urgently recruited. This has been done. 

Madam Speaker, the UIA paid UShs10 million to M/S Dama Consultants for the recruitment of the Executive Director without the user department certifying the work as was specified in the contract. The UIA Acting Director Finance then, a one Ms Kabuchu stated that when the invoice for payments of 40 percent reached her desk, it lacked the necessary contract documents and she referred the matter to the user department on 29 November 2011. The Deputy Director Human Resource explained that she took the invoice to the Acting Executive Director without any comments since she had not seen the output of M/S Dama Consultants. Thus, the Finance department made the payments after the Acting Executive Director informed them that he had received the report from the consultants, but it had not been routed through the chairperson of the board.

We recommend that UIA should make sure that for every contract, a contract manager must be appointed to manage it. The situation in which UIA managed the M/S Dama Consultants should not be repeated. 

    (i) Appointment of the Deputy Executive Director

Mr Tom Buringuriza, the current Deputy Executive Director was a member of the board at the time of his recruitment. The persons he competed with petitioned the then State Minister of Finance (Investments) Prof. Kiwanuka, alleging foul play. He was interviewed by his colleagues in the Board where he emerged top with an average of 68.83 percent. The former Minister of State for Finance in charge of Privatisation, hon. Semakula Kiwanuka, advised the Chairman of the Board to seek the opinion of the Solicitor General as to whether this did not tantamount to a conflict of interest. There was no evidence that Tom Buringuriza resigned from the Board or declared his interest at the time of the recruitment process. Clear evidence showed that he continued receiving allowances as a board member during the period when recruitment and selection was conducted.

We recommend that the wrongful appointment of Mr Tom Buringuriza be reviewed with a view to having a transparent process that can attract the right candidate on merit.

(j) Misuse of the Authority assets and resources

Mr Tom Buringuriza, who was substantively appointed as the Deputy Executive Director, and who was also appointed by the Board as the Acting Executive Director, had been sent on forced leave pending disposal of his petition to the Inspectorate of Government that the Board declined to select him to become the new Executive Director. 

However, it was discovered that while Mr Tom Buringuriza was on forced leave, he remained enjoying all his benefits as the Acting Executive Director despite the appointment of another officer to act as the Executive Director. When asked during the meeting, the former Executive Director, Dr Maggie Kigozi, agreed that it was a practice that was established during her tenure at the Authority.

We recommend that the accounting officer of UIA computes and recovers all operational benefits accrued to officers while on leave.

(k) Kiwanga-Namanve Electricity Wayleaves Compensation

The board approved Shs 6 billion for compensation of properties on the Kiwanga-Luzira route. However, the committee discovered that the money had been used up and only a quarter of the corridor had been compensated.

The accounting officer reported that the compensation was required to allow for power extension from Kiwanga to Luzira via Namanve. However, due to an urgent need to address an increased demand for power at the Namanve Industrial Park, more compensation was required for power to reach factories like Roofings (U) Limited. As a result, Umeme did the evaluation for wayleaves of Kiwanga-Namanve to the tune of Shs 2.2 billion. UIA engaged Multiconsults which designed the power line from Namanve to Luzira, costing it at Shs 4 billion. This brought the total to Shs 6 billion. The new amount was approved by the board in late 2011. A government valuer was tasked to re-validate the amount and he approved it as presented.

The Ministry of Finance had budgeted for UShs 7.5 billion for the same purpose, but provided Shs 6 billion required by UIA for the project.

The committee recommends a value-for-money audit for this project.

Audit Queries of the Auditor-General’s Reports on the Uganda Investment Authority

This section of the report addresses how the committee considered the queries of the Auditor-General raised on the operations and performance of Uganda Investment Authority. The queries are presented beginning with the most recent (2010), where the Auditor-General queried similar issues over a number of years. Such queries were integrated to make the report shorter. 

The committee findings, observations and recommendations are presented as follows:

    (a) Absence of an internal audit function 

The Auditor-General reported that UIA did not have an internal audit function from July 2009 until December 2009. The organisation’s structure had only one approved position of a Director, Internal Audit. Given the size of the entity, coupled with the level of activity taking place, the audit unit was grossly understaffed. The UIA management explained that the Authority was carrying out a restructuring exercise and that the new structure would take into consideration the importance of the internal audit function.

Observation

The internal audit function is very crucial in the management, control and evaluation of the activities and operations of any organisation. The function helps in detecting and preventing fraud, testing internal controls and monitoring compliance with established policies and Government regulation. The UIA had been receiving funding from both Government and development partners to run various activities. Such funds are exposed to various risks without a functional internal audit function.

We recommend that the UIA recruits and facilitates the internal audit section to execute their work with the necessary independence and autonomy they deserve. Alternatively, the Authority may consider outsourcing this function.

    (b) Staff Gratuity (2010)

The UIA had an internal contributory scheme where employees contribute 5.7 percent of their net salary. In the June 2009 report of the Auditor-General, it was pointed out that the Authority did not have an account on which the gratuity funds were deposited. At the end of the financial year 2010, UIA had accumulated arrears totalling to shs 350,739,991 and that in the absence of a separate bank account there was a possibility that staff contributions might be diverted to finance other activities. Indeed, the employees took long to receive their gratuity payment and it was only after the committee intervened that this happened.

The management of UIA explained that a process of streamlining the management of staff gratuity had been initiated. They reiterated that the problem arose from a stagnant budget for the wage bill, which stood at Ugshs 1.9 billion for a period of three years yet the number of staff had increased, pushing the wage bill to Ugshs 2.8 billion. While gratuity had been at 11.5 percent, the board had increased it to 20 percent, creating a shortfall of Ugshs 0.9 billion.

Observation

It was evident that the board increased the percentage of staff gratuity by over 90 percent before securing the funding contrary to established public finance and accountability legislations. Besides, continued management of staff gratuity without creating a separate account raises questions of safety and vulnerability of the funds, with a likely possibility of diversion to other activities.

The committee recommends that UIA should consider opening and operating a separate account for staff gratuity funds, in any case not later than three months from the date of adoption of this report. The Authority should find funds for the staff gratuity funds from the internal operations or the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development.

    (c) Sale of Plot 28 Kampala Road (2010)

The UIA disposed of its building on Kampala Road to Biplous (U) Ltd at US$ 1,720,000. However, the bidding process, valuation criteria, negotiations approach and value-for-money got from the sale was in question. 

It was observed that bid security was used to erroneously eliminate other firms that competed, yet it was not a mandatory requirement. The valuation report was not signed by all the committee members. Although two firms had qualified for direct negotiation, only one was called and the contract awarded. The other company was Estate Link Limited and had offered US$ 2 million.

The main reason for the disposal of the building was to enable UIA to build its own home. However, by June 2010, UIA had not taken appropriate steps yet it had paid rent to the tune of over UShs 416 million in the period audited.

Our observations are as follows: 

It was evident that UIA did not meticulously manage the process of land and building at Plot 28 Kampala Road. 

The advantages of effective competition were ignored leading to failure to realise value-for-money. 

The Authority manipulated the process of sale by denying a bidder with a better offer the chance to negotiate. This led to a loss of US$ 280,000 because the process was not transparent.

In addition, the proceeds of the sale are kept in Bank of Uganda in an account, which was not interest-bearing thus exposing the value of the money to erosion. Further, the UIA continued to rent office premises and had not started construction of its office premises as envisaged.

Management informed the committee that purchase of a home for UIA required approximately Ugshs 7 billion, therefore, requiring an additional Ugshs 3 billion from the Ministry of Finance. This is albeit UIA already having an incomplete office building at the industrial park only requiring completion.

Management informed the committee that it realised, after beginning work on this particular building, that the area was not suitable for offices and inconvenient to investors. 

We recommend that UIA’s argument that Namanve Industrial Area was not suitable for offices is unfounded. UIA should instead fast-track the completion of construction work at their incomplete office block at Namanve, and avoid paying huge bills in rentals as their money lies in the bank without any interest accumulating.

(d) Irregular procurement processes on construction of Bweyogerere Industrial Estate.

    (i) Nugatory expenditure 

The procurement was advertised twice raising unprofessional behaviour by UIA staff who issued priced bills of quantities to some bidders. I want to emphasise that, they issued priced bills and these are indicative costs to some bidders, making the Authority to cancel the procurement process after a complaint was raised. This led to the Authority incurring a re-advertising cost of over UShs 2.7 million. This cost could have been avoided if the procurement team conducted themselves professionally.

    (ii) Evaluation reports 

A review of the procurement file indicated that two evaluation reports were issued; one dated 5 February 2010, and the other 13 January 2010. It was noted that the evaluation reports all refer to different best evaluated bidders. Whereas the one of 13th January referred to Spencon as the best evaluated bidder, the one of 5th February indicated Omega to be the best evaluated bidder. Weaknesses in the procurement process resulted in nugatory expenditure and a second evaluation.

The committee was informed that this contract - which is referred to there - was managed by the ED with limited consultation with the Board, and that there had been a sharp disagreement between the Board and management over the design, cost, process, procedure and procurement of the contract.

The Board chairman, Mr Patrick Bitature, informed the committee that the former Executive Director, Mrs Maggie Kigozi and Mr Arthur Bwire, often took decisions without consulting the Board on this particular contract. The Board was not satisfied with the performance of management in handling this project. When the committee met with the former Executive Director, she informed the committee that her actions were based on goodwill and that sometimes decisions had to be taken immediately for work, to begin before getting the Board informed.

We observed that it was evident that the officers who managed the procurement process were either negligent or fraudulent and exhibited lack of professional integrity as shown in the weaknesses of the procurement.

The UIA Board and management had not taken disciplinary action against the said staff neither were the nugatory expenditures of over UShs 2.7 million recovered from them.

We recommend that UIA Board and management should take disciplinary action against the staff who executed the irregular procurement and indeed we enjoin Government in this because some of these people are out of office as we speak. The UShs 2.7 million and other monies should be recovered from them. In addition, the Board or any member of the Board at the time of this expenditure should be relieved of their duties immediately.

(e) Unapproved contract variations of UShs 55 million 

A local firm was awarded a tender for consultancy services for engineering, design, construction and supervision of Luzira industrial estate at a contract sum of over UShs 88 million. During the execution of the contract, the contractor submitted a variation bill of UShs 55.8 million, an equivalent when translated to 67 percent increment from the original cost.

Even though the transaction had not yet been concluded nor paid for by the time of the audit, UIA went ahead with works and payments to the contractor. The accounting officer attributed the rush to pay, to an urgent requirement to tarmac the Luzira industrial park and that the works were done in two phases due to financial constraints.

The total project cost was approximately UShs 1 billion. Phase I was for a distance of 1.7 kilometres, which was estimated to take two months. Phase II was for two kilometres, which was estimated to take four months. The contract was supposed to be supervised by Technology Consults. An extra six months arose out of the need to re-align the power line, change designs and pay for quality tests, which caused the variations.

The contract manager reported that the Contracts Committee issued a retrospective approval subject to same retrospective approval by PPDA.

Observations

It was irregular for UIA to vary the contract by 67 percent contrary to the procurement laws that provide for only a 15 or 25 percent variation. Retrospective approval by the Contracts Committee, which was subsequently rejected by PPDA was a sign that the Contracts Committee was either negligent or incompetent.

The fact that UIA proceeded to make payments depending on the varied contracts despite a warning by the Auditor General was a case of indiscipline and abuse of office. 

We recommend that UIA Board and management should take disciplinary action against the officers who initiated and sanctioned the variation without adhering to the procurement regulations.

The government anti-corruption agencies should investigate the public officers who iniatated and sanctioned the contract with a view of possible prosecution.

    (f) This appeared in 2009/2010 - Luzira Industrial Park roads phase II

 A sum of UShs 486 million was paid to a construction firm on presentation of Certificate No.1 for work done in respect of Luzira Industrial Park Road phase II. This was in addition to UShs681 million paid in respect of Certificate No.1. They first entered into a contract with UIA at a total contract sum of over UShs 2 billion. 

A review of the contract agreement revealed that under Article 4, the contract price or such other sums may be paid to the contractor in the proportion of 90 percent in US dollars and 10 percent in Uganda shillings. 

At the time of signing the contract, the exchange rate stood at UShs 1,723 to a US dollar. Whereas the contract sum should be specific, the clause to have the payments made in foreign currency as opposed to Uganda shillings was meant to vary the contract price, which is against PPDA regulations on contract price. 

At the time of the payment of Certificate No.2, the exchange rate was UShs 2,200 to a US dollar. The increase in the exchange rate resulted into a loss to the Authority. UIA acknowledged the anomaly and stated that the practice of executing contracts partly in Uganda currency and partly in foreign currency was stopped forthwith. 

UIA also explained that there was no procurement unit at the Authority prior to 2009, to guide effective management and procurement processes. The contracts committee then, lacked adequate procurement skills to execute contracts. 

The committee observed that UIA staff caused loss of public resources as a result of signing an unfavourable contract. There was no evidence that the officers who checked and authorised this contract were disciplined by the Board and Management of the Authority. 

We recommend that UIA staff, who checked and authorised this transaction, should be subjected to disciplinary action and funds lost should be recovered from the culprits. 

(g) UIA utility bills

For the entire financial year, UIA paid over UShs 26 million in respect of electricity bills and UShs 8.7 million for water bills. It was noted that while UIA was sub-metered on the main meter, which it had no access to, the meter readings for reconciliation purposes was only done by the property manager. 

Payments were made direct to the property manager’s account with Umeme Ltd instead of the account of UIA. Similarly, the water bill was equally apportioned amongst the four floors on the building disregarding issues like the number of occupants and the frequency of usage. There was a possibility of over payments of utility bills in favour of the property manager. 

The accounting officer reported that efforts to obtain a separate meter from Umeme Ltd failed. However, the UIA Accounts staff were assigned to track and record meter readings on a weekly basis. 

Observations

UIA paid about Ugshs 26 million per annum for electricity supplied which was approximately UShs 2 million per month. This was quite high and given that UIA did not have separate meters, there was a possibility that the Authority met the bills of other tenants or the landlord. The CID investigated the matter and found that the meters were making accurate readings. 

Recommendations

We recommend that UIA should pursue Umeme Ltd to secure a separate meter to avoid subsidising the landlord and other tenants. 

h) Items written off from assets register

Verification of the financial statements of UIA for the period ending 30th June, 2009, revealed that an item of asset register worth shs 431 million was written off from the assets register. The following was, however, noted: 

    1. The assets referred to was a result of the cost incurred to compensate bonafide occupants of land in Masese. 

    2. After incurring this cost, UIA gave away the land for free to BIDCO leading to a write off in the financial statements. 

    3. There was no Board approval sought for the write-off. 

UIA explained that Government of Uganda entered into agreement with BIDCO to provide land to the company for investment, which was identified at Jinja and Kalangala. Government of Uganda requested UIA to facilitate the transaction of the land at Jinja which is about 20 acres. 

The land at Jinja had bonafide occupants and so an assessment was done by the Chief Government Valuer before UIA requested for money from the government to compensate them. UIA was, therefore, a conduit in the transaction to facilitate the leasing of the land. It was an error to record the transaction in the books of accounts. The accounting officer regretted the error and apologised. 

Observation

An unauthorised write-off of assets distorts their fair value disclosure in the financial statement. 

While UIA may have been a conduit for Government, the money was provided to it for the purpose and, therefore, had to be declared by the Authority as received from the Government. 

Recommendation

The government should review and streamline investment policies on land acquisition and utilisation for both foreign and local investors. 

i) Non-compliance with procurement regulations

The Authority through procurement reference No... (in the report) contracted Toyota Uganda Limited to supply two units of Toyota Land Cruisers and two LPOs were issued in respect of this transaction; one, date 23 October 2008, and the other 27 October 2008. The following issues were noted:

Pre-financing supplier

A review of payment information revealed that over Ugshs 106 million, that is, the equivalent of US$ 50,515 being 40 percent advanced payment, was made vide EFT on 23rd October 2008. This was in accordance with the terms and conditions of the supply as submitted by the proposed supplier. The fact that the payment was processed and made prior to concluding the procurement process amounted to pre-financing. The payments were made without any advance performance bonds or advance security. 
Section 2 of the terms and conditions of the contract provide that the payments were to be made in two instalments; 40 percent advance payment and the balance on collection of the vehicles at Toyota Uganda Limited showroom.  

However, all the payments were made and completed before delivery of the vehicles, which was done on 9 March 2009. 

Two LPOs were issued for different amounts making it difficult to confirm the contractual amount the advance payment was based on. 

At a later date, UIA carried out verification after the “procurement,” that is, whereas in the communication to the firm accepting its bids, the Authority clearly indicated that the transaction was in respect of two Land Cruiser Prado vehicles. 

M/s Toyota Uganda Limited in its acknowledgment letter dated 23 October 2008, deviated from its original offer and instead made a counter offer of supplying one Land Cruiser and one Fortuner. There was an excess payment by UIA in regard to this transaction.  The LPO numbers are quoted there (in the report) dated 24 October 2008, indicated the total price for the two delivered vehicles as being over Ugshs 252 million. However, a reconciliation of payment information revealed that Ugshs  271,966,789 was paid thus occasioning an overpayment to the supplier of over Ugshs 19 million. 

UIA explained that Toyota Uganda Limited offered alternative vehicles which were in stock at the time of acceptance of the offer, but that the original position was later reverted to and the issue was resolved. The Land Cruisers were procured at the agreed price.

Observations

It was evident that there was ill intention in changing the specifications of the vehicles purchased from Toyota that led to an excess payment of Ugshs 19.7 million. Further, PPDA regulations were breached through pre-financing, contrary to regulations 249(1) and 249(2) of PPDA. 

Any change in specification, as done by Toyota Uganda, amounted to a counter-offer, which cancelled the first one. This change, under section 261(2) of PDDA regulations, requires either approval of the contracts committee or a repeat of the procurement process. Acceptance by UIA without subjecting the transaction to competition denied the Authority advantage that could have accrued from competitive bidding. 

The committee recommends that UIA should recover the excess payment of Ugshs 19.7 million from Toyota Uganda Limited. 

The UIA board and management should take disciplinary action against the staff who irregularly procured the vehicles. 

Unreconciled items in UIA Bank Accounts

Reconciliation statements for the various accounts of UIA reflected that transactions dating as far back as June 2006 were outstanding, implying that there were no reconciliations being made from the previous periods. Similarly, uncleared payments in the bank were not credited in the cashbook while other direct transactions in the bank remain unadjusted in the cashbook. 

UIA explained that the lack of reconciliation of the books was because of the absence of staff in the finance department. The officer in charge of reconciliation left the institution and it took time to replace him. However, the situation had improved with the appointment of a new Director, Finance.  

We observed that failure to reconcile accounts implies that the financial statements that UIA produced were inaccurate creating a difficulty for stakeholders to rely on them for decision-making. Further, it can be a signal that fraud may be perpetuated in the Authority. 

We recommend that UIA should regularly conduct bank reconciliations to avoid risks, exposure to fraud and error.

(k) Inspection Reports 

Report on the Mbale Industrial Park

UIA acquired land in Mbale in June 2000 from Bugisu Co-operative Union at a consideration of over UShs 3 billion. The land stretches over two villages, namely: Doko-Nsambya and Masanda villages. The land extends to Tirinyi Highway in the north and continues southwards bordering Mbale Industrial Area to the east and a murram road to the west. 

The committee visited this piece of land. 

At the time of acquisition of this land, it had some squatters whom the vendor agreed to help UIA resettle. 

The Auditor-General reported that an audit inspection of the industrial park indicated that:

    1.  There were over 100 families still settled on the land. The committee verified this. 

    2. Thirty two families had sued UIA for compensation before vacating the land.

    3. An evaluation report by the Government Valuer for compensating the settlers was released in January 2010, and it put the required amount of funds to over Ugshs 3.5 billion. 

The Authority paid for the land and the title of land measuring 619 acres was issued in favour of UIA. The Authority has asked the government to help compensate the squatters to a tune of over Ugshs 3.5 billion.

We observed that there was no evidence that UIA handled the procurement of this property with the necessary due diligence. One of the cardinal principles of a good contract for sale or purchase of land is vacant possession, which was not realised. In this case the Authority negligently ignored the presence of other interests in the said land at the time of concluding the contract with Bugisu Cooperative Union (BCU). In effect the Authority is set to lose over UShs35 billion to secure the land whose purchase price was just over shs 3 billion, bringing it to a total consideration of Shs6.6 billion. 

The committee recommends that the board and management must discipline staff who negligently handled the purchase of land from BCU. The government should work with BCU to provide UIA with Ugshs 3.577 billion to compensate the squatters so that the land is made available for investment purposes and escalation of compensation costs due to inflation and time value of money.  

(l) Unclear investment of Ugshs 8.5 million included in UIA’s non-current assets in an investment by associates to over Ugshs 8.5 million. However, the Authority could not show evidence of the nature of investment and expected returns, which would arise from there. The UIA explained that it was counterpart funding for the Uganda Business Information Network supported by a UNIDO project in the Ministry of Tourism, Trade and Industry. 

We observed that it was wrong for UIA to have unexplained figures in the financial statements given that various stakeholders use the information for decision-making. However, UIA later explained the nature of these funds to the satisfaction of the committee.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that this query be dropped. 

(m) Rental payable by UIA to M/s ANUPAM. 

An outstanding balance of over US$ 131,000 as rent payable was not reflected in the Authority’s credit cards balance as the year ended. This meant that the current liabilities of the Authority were understated for the period ended 2006. Besides, M/s ANUPAM Soft Global Limited, the company that was contracted to set up a software development and hardware assembly plant with a training wing for at least 120 Ugandans, did not achieve the objectives of the MoU. 

The UIA explained that M/s ANUPAM was identified as one of the agencies to promote information technology in the country, and the funds in question were their contribution to rental dues to the contracted company. 

The committee observed that while UIA had an MoU with M/s ANUPAM Soft Global Limited for the setting up of a computer assembling plant in Kampala, that would, among others, provide training to Ugandans, the project never took off. Hence, the Authority lost its contribution to the project as per the report. 

The committee recommends that UIA should conduct due diligence before committing public resources to any project. Besides, it must update its books of accounts to reflect the over US$ 131,000 in rent payable.

(n) Sale of industrial park land in Luzira

The Uganda Land Commission titled 63 acres of land in Luzira in favour of UIA for investment purposes. After the Authority acquired legal rights over the land, it set up a land issues committee which reduced the value of the land to below that set by the Chief Government Valuer, causing financial loss to the Authority. Besides, M/s Engen, which was not originally on the approved list of land bidders, was allocated 4.9 acres of land at UShs 117,600,000. 

The UIA explained that that land was allocated upon receipt of a Presidential directive. The UIA board reduced the price as an incentive to attract investors. Further, UIA stated that while it was true that M/s Engen was not on the approved list of land bidders, there was no procurement department at the time. The UIA worked with the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development and the Solicitor General to conduct any land business. When the request from M/s Engen came in, the UIA board, after consultation, allocated it five acres of land to construct a trans-shipment centre.

Observation

There were no systems and clear guidelines which UIA used to allocate land. It depended on Presidential directives without any mechanism of proper due diligence. It was possible that most of the investors allocated land could have been speculators who were targeting commission from the real investors later. This could be the reason why there has been slow progress in the development of the industrial parks. 

The committee recommends that the government puts in place a policy and legal regime which will streamline how industrial parks are developed in the country. 

(o) Payments to Luwum Village Council

A sum of Ugshs 1.6 million was paid to Luwum Village Council as contribution to UShs 16 million that was required to tarmac roads. However, this work had not been undertaken at the time of the audit. The UIA explained that this was a corporate social responsibility provided to the village and that the road was eventually worked on.

We observed that UIA made this transaction without it being among the planned activities for the period under audit; meaning that another budget line was encroached on. There was no evidence provided on the existence of a policy governing corporate social responsibility at UIA. In other words, this expenditure was not backed by any established policy and regulation. Therefore, the accounting officer acted erroneously. 

We recommend that UIA immediately recovers Ugshs 1.6 million paid to Luwum Village Council from the accounting officer who authorised the transaction. 

(p) Double payment

This was observed in 2005. 

Two claimants were paid a sum of Ugshs 11.4 million for the same piece of land in Masese resulting in double payments. The UIA explained that the payment was in respect of the land at Masese, which was valued by the Chief Government Valuer and payments were made basing on the valuer’s report. The UIA claimed that they were misled by the Chief Government Valuer. The anomaly was addressed afterwards and the compensation was made to both the tenant and the squatter on his land. The issue was also reported to the Inspector General of Government, but the IGG has never reported back to the Authority.

We observed that it was erroneous for UIA to blame the Chief Government Valuer for the double payment. The duty of the Chief Government Valuer in the transaction was to attach value to the property and not to attach it to any individual. It was the duty of UIA to establish the ownership of the land before asking the Chief Government Valuer to carry out the valuation. We recommend that the accounting officer who authorised the payments refunds the money.

(q) Cash shortage 

This was contained in the report of 2005. 

A cash shortage of over Shs 8 million was discovered in the UIA financial records during the period reviewed. It was explained that the shortage was occasioned by a front desk officer, Mr Joseph Sagara, who used to receive small revenue collections on behalf of UIA at the head office. A decision was taken to recover the funds from his salary. The funds were recovered from the officer, Mr Joseph Sagara. 





We observed that it was verified and confirmed - we actually received his payslip that Ugshs 8,353,000 was recovered from Mr Joseph Sagara through monthly deductions from his salary payments. 

The committee recommends that this query be dropped. 

(r) Irregular payments to M/s Pageya Enterprises Limited 

It was queried in 2009. The Auditor General reported that Ugshs 16 million was paid to M/s Pageya Enterprises Limited being the last instalment of the agreed amount of Ugshs 64 million, to construct a housing unit for the relocation of prison staff on Plot 2, Third Ring Road, which was allocated to M/s Surgipharm.

There was no formal contract between UIA and Pageya Enterprises Limited for the contract works done. The basis of the payments could not be established. There was no competitive bidding for the job as required by PPDA rules and regulations. UIA contracted M/s Pageya Enterprises Limited without board approval. The expenditure was irregular.

The UIA explained that the query was in respect to prison land which was allocated to UIA with an understanding that the Authority would work with the Prison department and construct similar premises on the adjacent prison land to relocate staff. The Prison department procured a contractor and UIA was supposed to pay the contract sum aforementioned. 

The committee observed that while M/s Pageya Enterprises was on the list of prequalified contractors of the Prison department, there was no MoU signed between UIA and Uganda Prisons with regard to this transaction. Besides, the amount involved would have required competitive bidding and not hand-picking a single contractor from the pre-qualified list of firms. It was difficult to confirm whether the transaction realised value-for-money due to lack of competition.

We recommend that UIA strictly adheres to the procurement regulations when executing any contract. In cases where the Authority works with other Government entities, an MoU should be signed stipulating the role of the other party.

(s) Procurement of legal services

The Authority illegally procured the services of one Mr Dushabe Murego Herbert and paid him over Ugshs 114 million in 2001/2002 and over Ugshs 55 million in 2002/2003 for legal services. It was explained that Mr Dushabe was hired to manage Namanve Industrial Park, and advice was sought from the Solicitor General; and that UIA board recommended the candidate for the job because by the time of appointment, the PPDA regulations were not in place. 

Observation

Whereas the PPDA law and regulations were not in existence at the time this contract was concluded, there were procurement regulations which required UIA to competitively procure legal and any other services.

We recommend that UIA strictly adheres to the procurement regulations when executing any contract.

(t) Wasteful expenditure of over Shs 146 million. 

A contract that was awarded for the design and supervision of the construction of South B Estate Road of Kampala Industrial Business Park was terminated after a sum of Ugshs 146 million had been paid to the contractors. This transaction was executed by the former Executive Director and Director of Finance; Prof. Maggie Kigozi and Mr Joel Byaruhanga, respectively. 

The committee observed that the committee did not get any evidence that this contract was fulfilled by the contractor in any part before it was terminated by the Executive Director and the Director of Finance UIA. No Performance reports were produced by the accounting officer and it would, therefore, appear that the Ugshs146 million was paid for no work done. 

The committee recommends that that accounting officer recovers the Ugshs 146 million lost in this transaction.

The committee would like to note with concern the extremely weak procurement, administrative and managerial systems at the UIA. Of great concern is the seemingly collapsing system of controls and excruciating political interference in the management of the Authority’s affairs by the Executive arm of Government. 

The committee, therefore, proposes drastic reforms including:

    1. Disbandment of the current board and replacing it with a new and demonstrably effective board;

    2. Reconstitution of the sensitive top management of UIA using a professional recruitment and selection process;

    3. The Executive needs to stop interfering in the internal management of the Authority and allow it to run its affairs professionally;

Without the required reforms, UIA is bound to negate on the primary reason for which it was created and that is the promotion of investment in Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, permit me to thank the committee members of COSASE for a hard job done, and to thank you and the honourable members of this House for the indulgence you have given us in allowing us all this period of time to present this report, of course considering that this is a ten-year report.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move that this report be adopted by the august House, and I thank you. 

I would like to lay on Table the original version of this report accompanying that document; and permit me also to lay on Table all the minutes of proceedings that led us towards the production of this report. I beg to lay.

I would also like to lay on Table all the correspondents that we undertook during our investigation and the responses that we got. I beg to lay.

Finally, I beg to lay on Table a dossier that gives information about the Authority and annexures that contain the organisational structure, staffing at UIA, strategic business plan, plan of operations, district focal points, financial statements, financial management letters, fixed assets register, lists of land, vehicles and UIA projects, and copies of manuals, finance and human rights manuals, and IT policy. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay and I thank you very much for your kind attention. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much honourable Chair and the members of COSASE. I had allotted one hour for presentation and debate, but since it is covering 10 years, I will permit 30 minutes for debate and the last 15 minutes will be for the Minister for Trade and the Minister for Finance. 

As usual, the members of the committee will not contribute. Lets us start with hon. Kaabule – no, members of the committee will not contribute.. 

4.23
MS EVELYN KAABULE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luuka): I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

First, I am wondering why it has taken eight years for the Auditor-General to really come up with this report, because if it takes all that long, how are we going to really sections? I thought that we could get reports within a short period of time so that we rescue some of –

THE SPEAKER: Information from the committee. 

MR AMURIAT: I thought that I should make an intervention at this point. Actually, it is wrong for us to fault the Office of the Auditor-General. The Auditor-General has religiously produced these reports year in, year out. We should fault ourselves as Parliament. What COSASE is faced with at the moment is a huge backlog. Some of the entities we are considering, we have audited accounts and reports from the Office of the Auditor-General for the last fifteen years, and they have never been considered. So, we need to put in a lot of effort.

I want to inform this House that in our docket as COSASE, we are confronted with over 140 entities which is an enormous amount of work; and you know that with a backlog of over 10 years, you can trust how much effort we have to put in order to overcome this backlog.

MS KAABULE: I thank you so much for that information. In that case, I think I will task the House to really come up with recommendations on how we can go about this.

The lack of an internal audit function in such an entity - I am wondering how the board can work without an internal audit for that period because all these problems that we are seeing here - many of them were caused because of lack of that function, which is a very important function in any organisation.

In 2009, I remember that there was an advert by UIA for consultancy services to carry out an organisational audit. I am wondering what happened to that audit because if that audit had been carried out, I believe that most of these things to do with governance and management would not have occurred.

We have something on gratuity. You are giving a recommendation of opening up an account. Where has this money been kept? Has it been earning interest, because it is the workers who are suffering?

So, my recommendation would be that UIA should not only open a separate account, but should give employees a statement showing how much each of the employees is earning plus the interest, because I know that this money was used by someone somewhere, and so we need to know where this money was and how the employees are going to benefit?


Lastly, your recommendations are mainly targeting recovering money from the officers. But where was the board? There is somewhere on page 16, where you are saying, “The board and management should punish the responsible officer.” But it is the board and management that are responsible for contract variations. So, how is the board or management going to punish itself? I am suggesting that we have the IGG to intervene, investigate all these cases and prosecute all the responsible officers. I thank you. 

4.26
MR STEPHEN BAKKA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I thank you Madam Speaker. I rise to make a contribution to this report. But first of all, I thank the chairman for the job well done. I am raising issues on page 22, on the sale of industrial park land at Luzira. 

It is true we have speculators who have gotten into the habit of rushing to acquire this land that has been identified as an industrial park. Their mission, as the committee says, is to acquire this land, hoard it, and then sale it to investors when the time comes at exorbitant prices. 


I agree with the committee that we need a law and a legal framework to regulate how industrial parks can be accessed by investors who would want to acquire land in that area. Most of what this report talks about is a post-mortem. The future of this country is in these industrial parks. 

Therefore, we need to take this recommendation very seriously such that an investor can know how land can be acquired, and Ugandans should also know how it is acquired. I have been seeing these plots being developed, but I don’t know how an investor acquires such land. Some of us are investors, but you only see –(Interjection)- we are investors. I am a very serious agriculturalist and I can put up a small-scale industry to process what I produce, but I don’t know how to acquire that land. 

So, I agree with the committee and urge this House to take up the recommendation that is on page 23, that Government should put in place a policy and legal regime that will streamline how industrial parks are developed in the country, but also how they can be accessed by serious investors. I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for a job well done.

4.29
MS LYNDAH TIMBIGAMBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In the same way I thank the honourable chairperson and the committee. 

It is true the country is losing a lot of money, and most especially on rent for Government institutions. This was discussed in our last session and it was discussed at length. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that this be handled, probably here and now; that a resolution be taken that institutions stop wasting big sums of money on rent such that we can save it for other investments. 

I also want to know why we have few staff in UIA and other institutions in the country. Why do we have to use this as an excuse and yet we have very many graduates; honourable members can bear me witness. Very many of them are on the streets. Why do we have such an excuse that we don’t have staff, and that is why we had that gap.

I also want to comment on the board. The committee made a statement on the board, that it has taken 10 years. It is like a landlord giving tenants time to stay on that land. Madam Speaker, I request that action be taken on the board, as the committee has recommended such that we can have something running. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: We will have hon. Opolot and then hon. Wamakuyu, hon. Ogwang and hon. Bakaluba. We have three reports. Those who don’t speak on this report will speak on the next two reports. Honourable members, not everybody will speak on everything.

4.32
MR JACOB OPOLOT (NRM, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Through you, I want to thank the Committee on Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE), for the report they have delivered.

On page 24, the committee reports on the observation on cash shortage, and this is the Auditor-General’s report 2005. I may be speaking well aware that this is after quite some time, but when I look at the recommendation of the committee, it is to the effect that the query be dropped, and yet at the same time, they acknowledge the fact that someone caused loss of funds amounting to 8.3 million and it is claimed that a refund was made and this was verified. 

Madam Speaker, I wonder what this suggests. That when I occasion a shortage or a loss of funds and I am able to pay back, I should be left to walk free. I am saying this in light of the fact that when I look at the person said to have occasioned this loss, I ask myself the question, how was he able to pay the money? Over what period of time? Because it is also possible for someone to just play around with internal gymnastics and balance up the figures. But still, it is also possible that this person was an agent of some other top executives in the same organisation and, therefore, they were able to facilitate him to repay the money.

But, Madam Speaker, coming back home, you know very well that we have our very own who is said to have mismanaged some money and paid back but where is he? And why are some of these being asked only to pay back and are left to continue with life normally?

I, therefore, feel that the committee should have said something more to this other than just giving somebody a leeway to steal more money, simply because it can be recovered from the salary and the payslip will confirm.

Madam Speaker, I am, therefore, not satisfied with the recommendation from the committee. I would appeal that more consideration be given for another punishment on top of that. Thank you very much. 

4.35		
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Youth Representative, Eastern): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you so much. I want to go to page 10; the appointment of the Deputy Executive Director. If you look at the committee’s recommendation; the committee recommends that they want the wrongful appointment of Mr Tom Buringuriza reviewed. 

In my opinion, how do we review a person - if you look at your own findings - where there is a conflict of interest? Why don’t you recommend that the IGG investigates and relieves the Deputy Executive Director of his position because there was a conflict of interest. That is my first observation. 

Secondly, I want to agree with the recommendation of the committee on page 6. If you look at the corruption which has been happening in Uganda Investment Authority, I don’t see how Ministry of Finance can convince us that they can supervise Uganda Investment Authority. I would pose a question: Was the ministry aware of what was happening in Uganda Investment Authority? If you were aware, then why should you continue thinking that you can be able to supervise such a government agency? 

If you look at the sums of money that have gone here, I don’t know whether you look at this country – it’s like the very money you realise, is the same money you people are finishing amongst yourselves. 

I want to state that the Ministry of Trade - Madam Amelia help us; at least I know because you were once my supervisor and I trust you. 

Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I think we should resolve that the recommendation of the committee stands. 

I have not heard anything about Namanve, specifically the industrial park. The rot which is in Namanve - I am aware that the big fish are the ones who hold this land. A few individuals who would love to develop the land do not have access. 

I am not seeing anywhere in this report – Mr Chairman, I had a document, and Madam Speaker, one time I came to your office - I had a document where some individuals who had been given land by Uganda Investment Authority had found two people who had grabbed the land from them and they were refusing them to develop this land. Let us be honest. 

Madam Speaker, I would request an audit or a committee goes to investigate on who owns which property or land within Namanve Industrial Park because the real developers - the people with genuine money to invest and create jobs for the young people have been left out. It is only a few people who have bought the land who have the advantage to utilise this land. And it is disturbing that the Deputy Executive Director is involved in all these dubious activities on the land in Namanve Industrial Park.

So, Mr Chairman, why didn’t you bring out issues about Namanve Industrial Park here? And to my party and Government, remember we pledged to create industrial parks in these areas. I represent the youth, but where are the jobs for these young people?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, clarification from hon. Dr Francis Epetait.

DR EPETAIT: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the colleague for giving way. He has alluded to the fact that he came to your office with a document and that there are some people who own land in that place. Now that we are debating this report, wouldn’t it be very helpful to have that information availed to us? If it were possible, we would access such a document to help us come to the same page on that matter rather than keeping it cagy. So, may I find out whether it is possible to get that information from you?


MR PETER OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I will avail that document because I already have copies of it. Even at one time I tried to share its content with my brother hon. Amuriat. I will avail copies when given permission. I will bring them and lay them on Table.

MR AMURAIT: Can I just give some information to the House, Madam Speaker. It is true we haven’t spent a lot of energy on the Kampala Industrial Park because the Auditor-General produced a value-for-money audit report. This is not the last time we are talking about the Uganda Investment Authority. We will certainly come back to it after doing our work on the value-for-money audit report, which we are soon commencing on. So, we will welcome you to bring to us whatever information you have, as a committee. Please feel free to just send us information as a whistleblower if you fear to expose your identity; we will receive everything in our office.

MR PETER OGWANG: Thank you, chairman of the committee. Madam Speaker, there are individuals who are involved in this matter and are willing to come and testify before the committee in an effort to expose the rot in Namanve Industrial Park.

4.40
MR IGNATIUS WAMAKUYU (NRM, Bulambuli County, Bulambuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and the chairman for presenting that good report. In terms of performance, and as the chairman of the committee has said, there was a huge investment. Government borrowed money to invest in that Namanve Industrial Park in terms of infrastructure and this money was in dollars, but I don’t see it reflected here. And as the chairman of the committee said, it has to be reflected in the value-for-money audit. There was a World Bank loan that this House approved.

 As Members alluded, the issue of allocation of plots in Namanve – I don’t know the criteria that was used to allocate these plots. We know some people who have have plots in Namanve and are now stuck with them. They can’t sell them. Actually, I have heard that some of them are now willing to sell five acres of land at just Shs 50 million –(Interjections)– yes, five acres because the person is stuck and has not invested anything; they just want to get rid of that land. We need to understand the criterion that was used and to review the allocation of plots in Namanve Industrial Park.

On page 20, the committee talks about the Mbale Industrial Park. It is true that Government paid money to Bugisu Co-operative Union because they had a problem to solve. But again, the same Government compensated the squatters more than it paid to the owners. Government paid to farmers Ugshs 3 billion, but it is now paying Ugshs 3.5 billion to squatters. Who are these squatters?

We agreed that when it comes to compensation, the Union identifies the beneficiaries and not Government. But as of now, many people are speculating while others have sold out their investments – I have heard of a man called Siraji who has been operating a small – he sold it to some Arabs at Ugshs 600 million yet that is Government land. So, there are many speculators.

It is Busigu Cooperative Union farmers to determine which squatters Government should compensate, but not Government. That is why there are many speculators and squatters. As of now, we don’t know how long the list is. One time they said they had verified that list of beneficiaries, but we are still wondering who those beneficiaries are.

Otherwise, on the issue of the lack of an internal control system, and many other aspects of finances – I don’t know how we are going to handle that.

On the issue of rent with Government leaving its own house to go and pay for rent elsewhere – I don’t know what is going on in this country. This plot on Kampala Road has a good building, and initially, Uganda Investment Authority operated its offices from there. I don’t know why they shifted to the new place. What was the problem? Honourable minister, why did the Authority leave its premises to go and rent an expensive building, and who is the owner of that building? Can we have a look at a  copy of the tenancy agreement? Thank you.

4.45
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the chairperson and the committee for a good report presented.

I would like to make comments in respect to pages 6 and 7, where the report talks about the purchase of land at Kashari in Mbarara. It is indicated in this report that actually, Uganda Investment Authority did not need this land. They were simply told to go and buy a piece of land. 

Madam Speaker, is it now a matter of writing? Should I also start writing to instruct the Uganda Investment Authority to just go and buy land? Worse still, the Authority had another piece of land in Mbarara, which was still available for development.

As a result, Ugshs 488 million was spent by the accounting officer. Surprisingly, on the day when the board was saying the Authority did not need that land, the accounting officer went on to write a request, and the money was transferred from Ministry of Finance to the Uganda Investment Authority account on the same day. I thank the committee for doing a good job, but I feel that this recommendation is so weak. 

I would like to amend this recommendation, in addition to what the committee has recommended that the accounting officer be made to refund the amount to the tune of Ugshs 488 million and be investigated further for his actions with a view of possible prosecution. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us hear from hon. Bakaluba Mukasa.

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, I thought I still have some time.

THE SPEAKER: Oh! I thought you had finished your submission.

MR KYOOMA: No, thank you. About the appointment of the Chief Executive Officer as reported on page 9, I would like to say that it is really disturbing. How could someone who scored 70.5 percent having hired a consultant to conduct the interviews, fails to get the job and instead you appoint the acting officer to that post?

Madam Speaker, there is information that the one who is currently CEO had been interdicted from another Authority. Is that right? What did he score? I think we have a duty to make sure that we put right some of these things –(Member timed out.) 

4.48
MR PETER BAKALUBA MUKASA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for this wonderful work. I think we need to call a spade a spade. This is becoming too much. When you read this report, it reports about the Presidential directive; and about State House letters. We have seen situations whereby letters have been denied, as not coming from the State House even when there is a signature of His Excellency the President. What are we going to do and what recommendations can we give in this kind of painful scenario? We are losing a lot of money – in billions. Ugandans are suffering; there is a lot of poverty, but this Government in which I am serving, the party in which I belong –(Laughter)– has become very sore. 

When it comes to the Namanve Industrial Park, it is true, the people who were allocated this land really leave a lot to be desired. People are getting plots using chits from State House - from the President. They are speculators, briefcase middlemen who are just waiting to eat “enjawulo” and profit after some time. Whenever I pass through Namanve, I feel like crying. They had told us that they were going to extend a railway line there and a flying base, and that it would be the biggest container terminal in the whole of Africa, but today, I only see bushes and maize being planted. It is a shame -(Laughter)- and you hear of big names of ministers and people in Government who were allocated that land and they are now selling it under the tables and getting “enjawulo.” This is very bad. (Applause)

What kind of prayers do you expect from us to topple this country? I think that is why we are now anticipating a takeover from you people. But we should be very careful. We have to be accountable for this country because Ugandans are crying. I thank you very much. 

4.50
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely support the report of the committee, especially the mandate of the investment authority. I would like to see a stronger and more proactive Authority that sets up industries whereby Ugandans can get jobs, but this today’s investment authority, which is being talked about in this report, is really disappointing and definitely, we need to find a solution to this. 

Whereas I agree with the recommendations of political guidance in the political leadership of this committee report, we need to look at the Investment Act and maybe come up with a proposal to amend this code because that code gives the Minister of Finance the authority to run the investment authority. I, however, entirely support that this investment authority should come under the Ministry of Trade and Industry because the industry is mentioned under the mandate of this ministry. 

Whereas I agree with some Members who say that the State House Executive should stop interfering in this matter, however, Article 99(4) of the Constitution states, “….the functions conferred upon the President by clause (1) of this article may be exercised by the President either directly or through other officers subordinate to the President.” So, we should sometimes expect the guidance of the Executive. Whether we want it or not, it is right here in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Therefore, we should respect the Constitution. It is true, we can guide the Executive, but we should also respect what is enshrined in the Constitution and allow the Executive to carry out its function. But this does not condone the wrongdoings of some officers in these bodies. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.53
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. However, the Uganda Investment Authority is a dead Authority. If the committee had taken time to go and visit them at their headquarters, you would find that there is no work going on there. Even the industrial parks that you are talking about - they do not understand what it means because they think it is a matter of buying and allocating land and saying, “This is a park.” 

Government has to design a park, put roads, put water, electricity and telephones, and the licensing also has to attract investors to that park. There has to be insinuators that pull investors to come and invest in that park. It is not a matter of buying land and saying this is gazetted for an industrial park. There has to be Internet; we are now in a different era. There has to be a body that is supervising the industrial park.

The Uganda Investment Authority does not understand the dynamics of running an industrial park. We are now wasting time saying we have one in Mbarara, one in Namanve; how are we going to create jobs for the very many youths that are coming up? How are we going to make sure that Uganda is an attractive country? We have very many problems that the investment authority should be able to solve; whether we transfer it from one ministry to another ministry. What we have to do is ask ourselves: “Since it was inaugurated, where are their achievements?” 

I have chatted with the chairman of the board, Mrs Maggie Kigozi, and the previous director, and all they want is to present papers abroad. Even when you open their website today, you will find that they are really unserious. 

I recommend to the House that we review the Uganda Investment Authority as a body completely and either overhaul it or create a new body and put our country back on course to attract investors to the country. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.55
MS MONICAH AMODING (NRM, Youth): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join other colleagues in thanking the committee for the work that I think was very good and quite detailed. 

In my view, the Uganda Investment Authority, like other Members have said, is a dead body. Every year, we see statistics that say 400,000 youth graduate from the universities and other tertiary institutions. However, about 18 percent only are able to get jobs and of course, that is my portfolio and I will not stop talking about it. I believe, the investment authority is very passionate about creating jobs. It is only about creating jobs and it is not about monitoring the type of jobs that have been created, but the type of activities that these so-called investors engage in after they have got a licence of doing business in Uganda. 

Otherwise, how do you explain an investor who leaves his country such as South Korea and comes to Uganda as an investor, and will go to my village deep down in Omagoro and buy groundnuts, and start the exportation business right from my village back to South Korea? Where is the value-addition along the way? Where are the jobs we are talking about? Where are the middlemen in between there? Where are these people who are employed by such an investor? 

I have also noticed in our engagements that these people get investment contracts or whatever they are given but they deviate from what they have agreed with Government to invest in. So, I would like to agree with what the committee says that we need a monitoring unit that monitors from the day these people start to work and what they are doing in the country because I think they are just adding more burdens on to the unemployment problem. They are not addressing it, and they are not alleviating it, but they are adding more weight on the employment sector in this country.

Madam Speaker, I am always saddened whenever any issue on mismanagement and handling of public funds is raised on the Floor of this Parliament. I feel like weeping for Uganda. I feel like crying. I am about to reach that point of weeping every time because it seems that everywhere we look is sick – every part of our country is sick. I think as a Parliament, we need to reign in on the public institutions. This is not one of them. I see lots of money going, this and the other – people are just in a bonanza of public funds. I applaud Parliament for the work we have done so far. We just need to reign in harder on these public institutions to ensure that this money is not mismanaged –(Member timed out.)

4.58
MS JESCA ABABIKU (Independent, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have carefully listened to the report. Absence of policies and non-compliance to procurement procedures are a clear reflection of poor planning and intended tendencies of corruption.

We know the level our country has reached. Therefore, I propose that we dedicate this year for focusing on policy. Where we have gaps and lack of policies, let us prioritise that. In the governance of this country, we have both politicians and technical officers and the implementers are keenly concentrating on the loopholes the politicians have; ours is “eyes-on” and not “hands-on” and the loopholes that we have in the policies are highly manipulated by the technical officers. So, let us prioritise having these policies in place and have a time period pegged to them.

On the issue of non-compliance, where we have irregular procurement procedures, awards and payments, I am not convinced about the recommendation that those who have received the salaries or the benefits should be punished. This is because we have technical officers responsible for the payment of the salaries. I would propose that both sides get disciplined – the technical officers who allowed the salaries go to the staff who had been disciplined also have their share of the punishment. If we leave the technical officers to operate in the manner that they do, then at the end, it is the government to suffer.

There was the issue of the SME policy. As long as we do not protect our business community; those who have taken the initiative to rise to a certain level, the discrimination and the gap between the rich and the poor shall be promoted. Therefore, I propose that we take time to see to it that this policy is in place. Thank you.

5.01
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the second report that has come to this House on Uganda Investment Authority. In the last Parliament, we produced a report with similar recommendations and I thought the second report would have shown improvements. However, I am disappointed that the same minister who was there in the last Parliament is still the minister in charge. These are the same recommendations we put forward, but nothing has changed. 

I am very much disappointed that the same man – the deputy executive director – whose discontinuation we had recommended at that time is still at his job. I am disappointed because even the board interdicted Tom Buringuriza from the office and the man ran to the IGG. Within no time, the board decided to reinstate him. What type of organisation is that? Right now, the committee here has stated that we need restructuring of that institution – we needed it yesterday; but I am very disappointed. How do you allow a person like Tom Buringuriza to restructure himself – the person who was part of the mess? How do you give a person like Frank Ssebowa, whom we interdicted on our recommendation in ERA to head UIA without even doing interviews? What do you expect to achieve? 

Madam Speaker, there is a letter here – because in the conclusion of the committee’s report they say there is interference by the Executive. There is a letter here written by Dr Ajedra Aridru, the Minister of State for Finance to the Executive Director of Uganda Investment Authority, instructing him to do the restructuring, but it goes ahead to say Tom Buringuriza should head the restructuring exercise. What type of management is this – micromanaging? Is it because they do not trust Ssebowa because of the way he came in there or there is a reason they trust Buringuriza who had been interdicted and has found his way back? 

Madam Speaker, I will lay this letter on the Table, but let me first read it for you. This letter is dated 25 January 2013 to the Executive Director, Uganda Investment Authority. 

“Restructuring of Uganda Investment Authority;
 
Reference is made to our meeting of 23 January 2013 where inter alia, we discussed the above captioned matter. Having consulted with my senior colleague, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, it was agreed that you urgently undertake the restructuring exercise of Uganda Investment Authority to make it more efficient as discussed during our meeting with you. The core areas should be made directories as follows: Investment promotion and facilitation, SME including one-stop centre, infrastructure development of the industrial parks, finance and administration comprising human resource, information technology and accounts sections, legal department of Uganda Investment Authority. 

In this regard, I propose that Tom Buringuriza should be the team leader for the exercise since he has institutional memory of Uganda Investment Authority. You are requested to expedite the exercise and give briefs to this office on a monthly basis.” -(Interruption)

MR LWANGA: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. I just want to give information – information which I thought we had in this Parliament at one stage, about Engineer Ssebowa. 

I remember when it was discussed here at that time, it came to light to a certain extent that Ssebowa had been interdicted because he stood in the way of the minister then –(Interjections)- the minister at that time was the Minister of Energy. And you remember, even the board, I think, disagreed.  So, I think it will be nice that we go deeper into that issue and try to find out exactly what happened. Thank you.

MR OKUPA: I had earlier stated that in the last Parliament, I was a member of COSASE. From our investigations, there were also issues of misappropriation of funds. That could have been another reason, but there was also the issue of misappropriation of funds in ERA.

So, on 31 January 2013, Engineer Frank Ssebowa writes, following the instructions, directing Buringuriza to take charge as had been instructed by the minister. Is this how we are going to operate? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use one more minute.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. What is happening in Uganda Investment Authority has disheartened a number of staff. Last year, over six employees resigned – professionals; this year, there are two members of staff who have left – just the beginning of this year, namely, Charles Nyakwebara, who was in charge of physical planning; and Jolly Murungi, investment executive. They both resigned because of the confusion in the Authority.

So, the issues raised by the Jinja MP about the industrial park policy – it is not there. At that time, we recommended to the Authority to put an industrial park policy, but up to today, they have not implemented it. Do not take our recommendations for granted. Please, we need an overhaul in this institution, if we are to save Uganda. Thank you.

5.07
MR ANDREW ALLEN (Independent, Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the committee chairperson and members for this report. I want to highlight one of my concerns related to the purchase of land in Kashari. According to the information laid on Table by the committee in this report, the UIA wanted to buy land for the industrial park. However, according to the committee, when they carried out an evaluation, they found out that the land was unsuitable for an industrial park but for agriculture.

Now, the UIA went against the recommendations of the committee and went ahead to request for funds without authority from the Board. The Ministry of Finance went ahead and released these funds without any authority from the Board.

Logically, there is a conspiracy between the Ministry of Finance and the Executive Director in trying to purchase land illegally, which is very wrong. In my thinking, it is actually stealing money from the public, because you cannot go ahead and buy land that you do not want. So, it is very wrong in its setting.

My second observation is related to the appointment of the Chief Executive Officer. Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the person the consultant recommended, Mr David Ogong, was not appointed; and it is very shocking that the Authority went ahead and confirmed that actually, the person to be appointed should have a good working relationship with the President.

My concern here is: Is there a specific working relationship with the President that is related to certain appointments and why is it that it comes to that point when it involves investment?

So, I find it very dangerous when we have to work like this and it raises a lot of questions. Otherwise, if there are set methods of working with the President, then I think they are the wrong ways of working with the –(Member timed out.)

5.10
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the chairman of the committee and the members. There is one issue they have forgotten to present in their report; and that is Shimon Demonstration School land, and the school itself. If there is anybody who should be in prison, it is Dr Maggie Kigozi. If there is anybody in Uganda Investment Authority - you see, there is a business in this country, where someone serves in a department, leaves it untouched after he has mismanaged the government department. When they were selling out Shimon Demonstration School, they promised us that they were going to construct a school by that Arab called - and I know you have knowledge of that school.

Incidentally, nothing took place and as we talk, somebody is building on that plot of land. The owner of the hotel - whether it is a hotel or a special big mall, nothing is known but that there are three owners. The former PTC land where they are constructing is free and somebody within the school management of Shimon by then also got a plot and is enjoying his piece of land; and that is by Dr Maggie Kigozi.

Two, in Uganda, anything can happen. Somebody can even wear his pair of trousers through the head as long as he can make money. When I look at this report, there are certain areas I am not comfortable with. For example, the plot on Ring Road. Where is this plot? Then they talked about a place called Lumu village. Where is Lumu village council? This is how somebody can make money and we have met this in the Public Accounts Committee. A place is given a name, which has never existed.

Let us go to UBC land. Who is the owner of that hotel? It is called Aya, and sometimes it even displays fireworks at the beginning of the year, but the real owner of the hotel is not known. So, when you talk about Uganda Investment Authority, you should not leave out Dr Maggie Kigozi, who mismanaged the whole Authority from the beginning.

I also want to thank hon. Rev. Bakaluba Mukasa. It is high time you joined Bishop Zac Niringiye -(Laughter)- because what you are saying is what the Bishop from Church of Uganda is saying. I was about to cry that maybe when you went to Kyankwanzi, things were changing, but you seem to have come with a better message from Kyankwanzi, which is going to help us get these things from Uganda Investment Authority and other places.

When we talk about Presidential directives, I want to be clear on this, Madam Speaker. We have met the President several times and when it came to the Basajjabalaba issue and hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya, the question was, “Why didn’t the ministers advise me?” Now, you honourable ministers seated in front there, you might stay as ministers but you will suffer with everything as a result because he said you do not advise him. But that is your party issue. Continue smuggling and stealing whatever you want - take land, but the problems will end up boomeranging on everybody because these are clear issues, which we cannot run away from. (Member timed out.)

5.14
MS FLORENCE IBI EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Following what hon. Balyeku commented upon, I urge that this House requests that the Uganda Investment Authority makes a presentation like they normally make outside this country to the people in the Diaspora. If you had just a glimpse of what the Uganda Investment Authority paints as the picture of what the dream Uganda would be, I think you would all be in cloud nine and admire to be associated with Uganda.

So, this issue and element of making presentations and flowery pictures abroad should stop. They either accept that they have failed and do the right thing or pack their bags and let us know as Ugandans that we do not have anybody worth taking credit for and talking about. 

I thank the committee wholeheartedly. On page one, when you make a recommendation and an observation that the Authority did not have a proper and clear mechanism to follow up and evaluate the planned investment, how can a would-be credible body like Uganda Investment Authority fail to have mechanisms and follow-up procedures on what is supposed to be done as far as investment is concerned? 

Madam Speaker, jobs in this country are given through procedures of interviews and then at the end, we get the best and the cream that we have in this country, but if you tell me that the people awarded contracts are people who cannot manage a body that would create all the jobs we would need for the youth in this country and some of our people who have studied and completed their studies, but are staying over 20 years without any jobs. This is a body that would have settled all the problems that Ugandans have, but at the end of the day, if they do not have any way of evaluating the progress of this body, then what are we doing here? What is the use of the planning unit under the Ministry of Finance? 

This brings me to the Ministry of Finance. We are fed up of Ministry of Finance wanting to go everywhere there are funds. We had the issue of NSSF and Finance was fighting with the Ministry of Gender over the question of NSSF. Again, it is dipping its hands in the issue of the Uganda Investment Authority with the proper Ministry for Trade and Industry. Why do you want to get where there are funds that you can easily meddle with? 

At the beginning of the session, we expected hon. Maria Kiwanuka to be here because the letters and correspondences are under her jurisdiction. She was here when we were beginning and she has now disappeared. These are issues that we want whoever is in charge to be held by the horns. (Member timed out.)

5.18
MR MAXWELL AKORA (UPC, Maruzi County, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chair of COSASE and his members for this report. It is a very factual and clear report that exposes the rot that we always knew existed at the Uganda Investment Authority; the rot that was presided over by Dr Maggie Kigozi as Executive Director for a very long time and the board chair.
 
This report highlights what we all knew while Dr Kigozi went about fooling the whole country, and globetrotting making flashy presentations, glossy appearances, giving away land, even giving tax waivers to fake investors while denying the country critical resources that we needed. 
 
Now, the report has been presented to this House. But what I find lacking is that the report is not hard-hitting.  It does not go far enough in recommending measures that should be taken to bring the culprits to book with regard to the omissions and commissions that they undertook. I think it is high time that this House made strong pronouncements and made recommendations. I suggest that a commission of inquiry be instituted to look into the affairs of mismanagement at the Uganda Investment Authority. (Applause)  

When Dr Kigozi left as the Executive Director, Dama Consultants were contracted by the Board to manage the process of identifying a successor. Dr David Ogong was identified as the best candidate. But he was deemed not to be qualifying in two regards; that the 70 percent that he scored was below the threshold, which had not been indicated to Dama Consultants, and that the President was not at ease with working with him. 

One is left wondering what sort of persons the President would want to work with. Dr David Ogong is a Ugandan national, a holder of a Bachelor of Science Degree in Veterinary Medicine, and a Bachelor of Science in Finance and Accounting. He is a Fellow of the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants. (Interruption) 

MR BYANDALA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for giving way. My colleague has consistently said that the President said he does not want to work with this gentleman, which is not true. Can the honourable member produce evidence to that effect? (Interjections) No, this is a report of the committee. I want the statement from the President.
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think when the minister responds, he will be able to address that because it is in this report.

MR AKORA: Madam Speaker, I made reference to the report and it is indicated that the Board cited that the President was not willing or at ease working with Dr David Ogong. So, one is left wondering what was it that Dr David Ogong lacked or had that would rule him out. 

This is something that this House has asked for in the past, that there are certain positions in Government that seem to be out of bounds for certain people, particularly, from certain regions of this country. We want to know if there is such a policy that people from certain parts of this country cannot access certain jobs even if they have the right qualifications. (Applause) 

5.22
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the COSASE committee for this very good report. 

I will start with paragraph 2.3; political leadership. The recommendation being given by the committee is that: “Government should transfer political leadership and supervision of UIA from Ministry of Finance to that of Trade.” I do not think this is a very important point. You see, let us not fall victims of ministries fighting for where money is. It has happened before and as one honourable colleague has said, everybody knew there was a lot of money in NSSF and Finance was fighting very hard to retain NSSF; and so was Gender. But the person who was fighting very hard at that time, I remember, was a State Minister in charge of General Duties, the hon. Rukutana. But as fate would have it, in the following reshuffle, he was taken to Gender. (Laughter) And again, he fought so hard to have NSSF in Gender. So, let us not fall victims of this. 

I think there is already a Minister in charge of Investment in this country. What we can propose propose to the appointing authority is, to have a separate Ministry of Investment to handle all these issues other than Trade; because investment is actually far bigger than Trade. It involves planning and so on. But if you have a different ministry, then they can handle this problem. 

Mr Speaker, we have a problem in this country today and my friend, hon. Byandala, was rising to defend a situation. But look at the report. This Mr Ogong according to the report, “In addition, the Board explained that an ideal Chief Executive Officer should be a person who can work well with the President.” But one Dr Ogong had won the interviews. So, who are these Ugandans who are going to be denied a job because somebody suspects they cannot work with the President?
 
The President is for all of us; for all Ugandans. Where do you expect high professionals to migrate to? Not to get a job because somebody sits somewhere and thinks he cannot work with the President. I think that is wrong. 

And then the President - for those of you who speak to him - should change his method of work. From all this, you read here, the Presidency should change its method of work. You see - and the President I knew was against this adhoclism - you remember when he was blasting the late Godfrey Binaisa? That he had turned State House into a clearing house. But here is a PPS saying, “We have identified this land belonging to a Taremwa; you people go and buy that land.” That cannot be worth of the President of this country. 

Hon. Col Mwesigye, let me tell you this, the Constitution gives the President executive powers, I agree, but that very article you were reading also says, “...subject to this Constitution.” All these institutions of Government have been created by the Constitution. Therefore, the President should exercise his executive authority subject to the Constitution. That is why we put up these institutions like UIA’s Board to do its work. 

The President in exercising executive authority cannot do the work of the UIA Board. He will be breaching the Constitution. We pay these gentlemen to do that. So, our point is, even these officers, if you received a letter from the President, say, “Yes we have received this advice,” and then follow the Constitution. 

Don’t you find it strange in the Uganda of today that money in a Government ministry can be requested in the morning and in the afternoon it is on the account? It is just strange because it does not happen. By the time the letter came, Finance had already arranged that money and was just waiting to take it to UIA to pay to a certain Taremwa. 

Lastly, this issue about land at Namanve is a big issue. I would request that all colleagues should support the idea that we constitute a small committee to investigate Namanve because what has happened is that we got a loan to prepare that land - I think it was $72 million. That is what we approved - $72 million. And do you know what has happened? That land has been parcelled out to speculators and these speculators are now selling it to some people. And do you know what is happening in the report about Luzira? They are saying the Government Valuer made his valuation, then UIA said, “No! To attract investors, we sell at lower prices.” Whom were they selling to? These speculators. And now the speculators are selling at market value. We cannot allow this. It is a moral issue. It is our children and grandchildren who are going to pay this money we have borrowed - the future generation. And yet speculators have swindled it, Madam Speaker. (Member timed out.)

5.28
MR SSEMUJJU NGANDA (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a good report. It took the people of Zaire then more than 10 years to realise that the Mobutu Government had actually collapsed; more than half a decade ago. They were looking at the symptoms and that is what this Parliament is doing. 

There is no single report that has been presented here and it does not reveal the stealing of public resources and abuse of office. Maybe, it will take us another two decades, long after this Government has gone, for people to realise that we were actually discussing symptoms. Just imagine every single report, from GAVI, CHOGM, Temangalo, and Pension. 

The Ninth Parliament has dealt with bicycles, IDs, Basajjabalaba and now it is the Investment Authority. You can only wait for any other report. It will read the same; you are only changing names and figures. 

This Parliament must now discuss the real issues. I do not think we have a Government in place. We simply have a syndicate of individuals who are rotting as if they are going somewhere. You go and open the pension office. People who have retired; old people who cannot work again; their money is stolen. Even people who have suffered because of a war for two decades, their money is stolen; people who are sick, their money is stolen. Children who go to school, their money is stolen. We are just wasting time here. These recommendations you are making move from one ministry to another; from this and that. You are discussing symptoms. 

I asked a colleague here - because if you are a head of state who issues chits for people to get land, really that President must work with people who can do that, not David Ogong. There are individuals who will look at a chit and then wire money immediately. Some of them are even looking at me here. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, my recommendation - and I am looking at a report - part of Namanve Industrial Park is in my constituency. Go to Rwanda. Rwanda has an economic zone. They took a decision that we must move every factory to the economic zone. That was a decision. So, if it involves a lot of money, Government constructs the factory and you move your machines to the economic zone. You can see all the facilities - water treatment facilities; they have even brought experts. But here, who is supposed to go to Namanve? - Because you have Roofings and one or two other companies. The other day, we were there with hon. Nambooze because part of the industrial park is in her constituency, and we found one Chinese man had written, “If you want land, call this number.” This was land allocated by the Investment Authority. 

The question you must ask yourself is, “Was the chief executive and his aides interested in investment or some statistics?” Because when you look at what the Investment Authority claims they have done; they do not compare it with what they found already done; they are just giving you accumulation of statistics - very many companies we have registered; so many jobs. Go to the industrial park. There is no single new factory. Instead, last time, when I went touring, I found the signpost, “Supermarket coming very soon” in the middle of an industrial park. (Laughter) 

In Rwanda, they are moving factories to an economic zone but in Uganda it is a supermarket coming soon. We demolish schools for supermarkets, Shimon here; and we are now even allocating land for industrial development for supermarkets. Maybe we are just one shopping mall; I do not know. 

Therefore, my recommendation, is that this Parliament should dedicate two days to discuss the direction this country has taken - not taking, but has taken. 

5.33
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I was reading through this report, I observed five pertinent issues which I feel I should present here. 
One is, why do we have a useless spending culture in our country on no-value institutions? We are talking about Uganda Investment Authority and every Member here is observing that they are doing no work. You will also realise later that even in the Ministry of Works, we have Uganda National Roads Authority, and we have the Uganda Road Fund; and then we have the Ministry of Works. Then we have the Ministry of Trade and Uganda Investment Authority. We have the Ministry of Lands and then we have Uganda Investment Authority. So, which department is doing what? Is it necessary for us to create institutions and bodies which are useless and we are spending on them taxpayers’ money?  

Then, the second aspect is, what mode of implementation are we taking on? Are we saying that when, today, we are procuring land for industrial parks in Kampala, then tomorrow, in the same financial year, we are procuring land in Soroti? Then the following financial year, we are procuring land in Mbarara, when we have actually not developed the one of Kampala. Is it giving us any sense of direction that then we must continue purchasing land for investment yet we have not yet even developed the first land we procured?

The third aspect is, do the authorities that we are creating have authority? The Authority team will tell you that, “For us we are acting on orders from above.” Now, if you are acting on orders from above, why should you be there? Then you are not relevant. And this one brings us to the aspect that then we should revisit our approach as to whether it is necessary to create unnecessary authorities, which do not have authority in doing their mandate.

The fourth one is that there is the depreciation principle that I have seen in this report. This is my first time, even before I went to A’level to do Economics; in primary school, I knew that land appreciates in value. But here is a paid officer, who says land depreciates. Yes, because in essence when you say you are writing off land, you are telling me in the Economics sense that it has depreciated. That is the interpretation in simple logic. And I want to tell you, Madam Speaker, that time and again on the Floor of Parliament, Members have complained that there are specific and particular people who must get jobs in this country. When there is a person whose name begins with letter O, everybody hesitates to give them a job, claiming that that person is not going to work with the President. 

Yet, every time these people on the frontbench are in Kyankwanzi, they tell the nation that they are talking of patriotism and nationalism. What kind of patriotism and nationalism is that when other people from other regions in this country are doubted for any job and yet they are competent? 

And I can tell you, Madam Speaker, that today, it is happening when the President is coming from Western Uganda; but what about tomorrow, when the President comes from the Central? What about tomorrow when the President will come from Eastern? Should the same trend be taken? I think this is very unrealistic, but when you come to the issue of the land of Bugisu Cooperative Union, the land which was purchased –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member from Kasese, hon. Nzoghu, that the President is not segregative and we have seen many positions given to some people whose names begin with letter ‘O’. (Laughter) We have Odong Mike, who is the Executive Director of the Road Fund. [HON. MEMBERS: “Another one.”] So, we have several members of Uganda -(Interjections)- citizens of Uganda whose names begin with letter ‘O’ who are in various big positions.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you for the information. You know, Madam Speaker, even hon. Otafiire’s name begins with ‘O’ and you know, they have even crafted names so that they really confuse Ugandans. That is the truth I am actually bringing here. 

Finally, I want to point out that there is this issue of the land, which was purchased from Bugisu Cooperative Union and the compensation of the settlers. I want to find out from the chairperson and maybe the members of the committee of COSASE whether these settlers were there before the land was purchased because -(Member timed out.) 

5.40
DR BAYIGGA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the committee for producing this report. 

I want to be associated with the words of hon. Ssemujju Nganda who talked about collapsing regimes which people do not realise quickly. Such regimes are akin to what is called ‘zombie’ which refers to a dead body which walks. I will not dwell on that, but this Parliament must ascertain whether we have power to ensure that we influence the Executive to move in a direction which can help this country. 

I have been having a grudge with this Uganda Investment Authority, especially when Dr Maggie Kigozi was heading it. These are the people who came and bought large chunks of land and donated them free of charge to a Boer in Goli, Najja sub-county, Kiyindi Parish, and evicted hundreds of people and paid a paltry Shs 200,000 for a  kibanja and so on. 

I am privy to this information because I followed it up and I have letters related to this give-away of land. The person who was supposed to invest in fish farming to produce fish because fish has been a catch for foreign exchange in this country, after acquiring that piece of land and evicting hundreds of people, the fellow resorted to fishing silver fish, “mukene”, just like anybody does. And that land has never been returned to the people. Even the compensation has never been done and Dr Maggie Kigozi knows this clearly. 

When people continue lamenting – these are the people who even organised a function and made the President hand over a gift of the Investor of the Year. He came second as Investor of the Year; a man who acquired land at zero price having got it from the Uganda Investment Authority at Government’s cost. This scenario has not been captured in this report and I want to make a case for any further investigation into this.

In any recommendation in this report, certain people like Dr Maggie Kigozi must be held accountable and must take responsibility. It will be a weakness of this Parliament if certain people do not take responsibility for their actions or inactions during their tenures of office. It should be them to report to us who directed them to act so and then we can deal with that scenario when it comes our way.

This Parliament must also be in position to convince itself that we can do something. If at all, we are going to be intimidated as Parliament, to have recommendations which are not going to be implemented and other reports continue to come and we make further recommendations, which are not going to be implemented, Madam Speaker, you should know that many people are going to be discouraged from –(Member timed out.)

5.44 
MR PHILLIP WAFULA OGUTTU (FDC, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I support the report and I thank my colleague hon. Amuriat and his committee for a good report and work well done. It is yet another depressing report about a depressing situation in our country. Quite symptomatic of what is happening generally in our country, everything has collapsed or is collapsing, but we do not seem to be reading this clearly. Because there is no report we have received here, which presents a good picture of what is happening in our country. 

This policy of parks by URA is now 20 years old. The system of setting up industrial parks is now 20 years old. UIA has also been there for almost 25 years, but where is the industrial park of 25 years? Why don’t you people in Government, my friends the ministers on the front bench; why don’t you ask yourselves in your meetings; where is the park which has been set up successfully? Why don’t you go and study what other countries are doing? [HON. MEMBERS: “They go.”] When you go, why do you waste our money? Why don’t you study because there is no park? You have dust in Namanve. First, it was supposed to be a container terminal; inland port; then it changed to something else; then something else. We are jokers and time-wasters. 

I was interested in this question of the land of Mr Taremwa. Who is this Taremwa? Is he one of the in-laws of State House? We should find out why this Taremwa got this money and who directed that Taremwa receives this money for land which was not needed by URA. These are little things, but tell us what is happening in this country and we do not seem to be reading the signals. We should ask the chairman of the committee – he should have told us who gave a directive for this land to be bought. 

The President will again deny this and Grace Akello has since left. Maybe, we shall get answers from the ministry or the government. The Investment Authority always -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: On the question of Dr Ogong, this has been going on for the last 26 years. I remember that one time, there was a one Gabriel Opio when he was still in UPC, he got a job as Head of UCB, but he was denied the job. One Henry Makmot got this job of Uganda Investment Authority but he was refused - you see letter “O” - in this process of getting and Executive Director for the Uganda Investment Authority, there was a Dr Joseph Muvawala from Busoga, whose name just disappeared during the process. It is not just letter “O” but that some positions are ring-fenced for certain people who must work well with the President. 

The President for goodness’ sake must work with every Uganda because we all pay taxes which he enjoys and he has sworn by the Constitution to be our leader and –(Member timed out.)

5.49
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representative): I thank you very much. I want to take this opportunity to also thank the committee for the good report and for me, I will not lament so much, but I would request for a serious resolution from this Parliament to the Investment Authority.

There is no doubt that there was mismanagement in the Investment Authority; the board failed 100 percent to execute its oversight role. I, therefore, agree with this recommendation that it should be “chased”. (Laughter) –[MR KATUNTU: “With a spear!”]- They should be disbanded - stop working in the Investment Authority and be investigated.

I agree with colleagues who are suggesting that we should constitute a committee to investigate the Namanve project. (Applause) [HON. MEMEBRS: “All industrial parks.”] Yes, all industrial parks. Although some of our colleagues try to divert us, this is a serious issue –(Laughter)- by bringing in politics and behaving desperately like my brother, hon. Ssemujju. Do not worry because this Government is still strong and we can correct mistakes and punish those who are abusing the power that they have. I want to assure you that this Parliament, together, we can correct the mistakes in the Investment Authority.

We should stop the directives of the Minister for Investment of restructuring headed by a man called Buringuriza, and I think we should overhaul the whole institution and we start afresh.

I would like the government and minister to know that those who have been in the Investment Authority have mismanaged it enough and they can no longer do much. (Applause) (Member timed out.)

5.52
MR YOROKAMU KATWIREMU (NRM, Sheema County South, Sheema): I thank you. I join my colleagues in thanking the chair and the committee for a good report.

I would like to concentrate my comments on the last page - the conclusion. This report takes care of activities of 10 years and the chairman has said that there is so much pending information that they have not analysed that even if they anaylsed it and we keep on lamenting about this report and another one similar to this, we may not be getting value for our time as Parliament, and I think it is an interest right across the aisle on both sides of the House that we get an effective Uganda Investment Authority. 

The President is on record of late for having said that the most critical thing in this country now is industrialisation and creation of jobs, and there is nowhere we are going to industrialise effectively and create jobs without an effective Investment Authority.

We need - those who were suggesting a committee to investigate the Namanve Industrial Park – I think it is limited in scope. I think we need to review the mission and operations of Uganda Investment Authority. Is it still on course? Because when you read this report, it gives you the impression that there is a systems failure and in order to cure systems failure, you have to go back onto the drawing board and design the system anew. Therefore, we may not go very far if we keep tinkling with the existing Uganda Investment Authority. 

The committee recommends the disbursement of the current board. I mean if you do not have an effective board, how on earth do you expect to have effective management?  Definitely, wherever it is placed is not so much an issue for me, but wherever it is placed, you have to have an effective ministry that supervises an effective board that supervises an effective management and there is no short-cut to that; we have got to go back and have effective political supervision of an effective board of an effective management. And if it needs that we have to overhaul the board, then we have to do it.–(Interruption) 

MR SSEBUNYA: Information 

MR KATWIREMU: Is that part of my time?

THE SPEAKER: Of your three minutes; if you want to donate, then that is up to you. (Laughter)

MR KATWIREMU: Let me finish. (Member timed out.) (Laughter)

5.56
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am not going to be one of those who are going to be taken up by the word, “park”. We have continuously misused the word industrial park and maybe, it is high time that we got the definition of the phrase “industrial park”. 

An industrial park is that area that is set aside for industrial development and service, and is zoned for that specific purpose. In Uganda, we do not have an industrial park yet, but we have areas that we are planning to serve as industrial parks.

As we talk about the industrial parks, many areas were reserved for that specific purpose, and it is high time we asked ourselves where the money that was realised from Namanve is, because in the initial plan, every plot was supposed to go for at least a certain amount and it was supposed to be $80,000. The first lot was 277 plots, but only 170 plots were paid for and only 30 have been developed so far. What about the rest? 

So, it is high time we had an audit into all the activities, especially Namanve, because Government spent a lot of money. Madam Speaker, it is high time a number of Government departments stopped being land dealers because there are a number of people in these Government departments who are actually land agents. We have the same experience in Buvuma, where Government wants to undertake the palm oil project. Government bought land and this same land has tenants on it. After paying for the land, we are saying, what about the tenants? Government was duped and it paid a lot of money for this land. 

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time we revised the approaches we are taking to steer industrialisation. Short of that, we are going to lose money and we shall not even achieve what we intended to achieve. Thank you very much. 

5.58
PROF. BALTAZAR ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report. I want to begin from where hon. Katwiremu ended. 

An effective ministry supervising these would-be effective agencies; from my institutional memory, right from the Seventh Parliament, where I was a member of the Budget Committee, there was a serious recommendation for the Ministry of Finance to be restructured. 

There are many agencies that are under the Ministry of Finance; very many of them; especially these organisations which have been privatised and Government retained some percentage. The parent ministries do policy formulation, but these agencies are under Ministry of Finance. There are certain agencies where the chairman of the board is from Finance and some officer of Finance is a chairman of about 10 boards. 

How can you supervise these agencies? We have been complaining about National Planning Authority being made non-functional. It is all because it is under Ministry of Finance. 

Can the Executive this time round accept that the Ministry of Finance should be restructured so that they are responsible for mobilisation of resources? Parliament is responsible for appropriation. The National Planning Authority is responsible for planning and it should be somewhere, where they cannot be gagged, so that they do the planning very well; Finance mobilises the resources; and Parliament appropriates them. 

But for as long as Ministry of Finance wants to do everything – one time, Madam Speaker, PMA was under Finance and yet matters were about agriculture. I was on the Committee on Agriculture then; we fought with Ministry of Finance to have PMA transferred and when they were transferred, they went with nothing; no money! 

So, we have a problem – Finance; and in good faith, they should accept that the ministry is restructured. 

I agree with the committee that Uganda Investment Authority should in the meantime be under the Ministry of Trade – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute.

PROF. ATWOOKI: Lastly, we have been talking about creating free trade zones. Have we forgotten? -  because, a free trade zone is also responsible for investment and it is good trade. What has happened? I think there was even a Bill; I do not know whether it was thrown out. So that people who have good business ventures and investments can come in. (Interjections) A colleague is saying it is in the committee – these are some of the things which are in the pipeline, which pipeline is not ending. It is very long. Thank you. 

6.03
MR AMOS OKOT (NRM, Agago County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker and the committee for the report, which you have given to the country and that we are debating. 

I have some concerns. The first concern is, in this report, the names of the people who have been involved in this malpractice, if you could single them out, it would help us very much. These are the people who are trying to throw mud at everybody who is either in Government or they are doing things which are not right. Indeed, they are many. I have this question in my mind. Where is our intelligence and what are they doing? Are they really trying to find out that the government and the property of Government and its programmes are being implemented well?

Uganda Investment Authority has a good plan if it was to be implemented well. This could create something good for the country. And where is our intelligence? What are they doing? Can they find out who these people are and the assets they own so that they are brought to book?

Secondly, on page 23 and 24, they say there was a double payment. They mention that the Accounting Officer authorised the double payment. The committee recommended that this money should be refunded. I think it should not be just refunded. The person should be interdicted or arrested. How can you authorise double payment knowingly and yet you are stealing from the country and you are enjoying your position? I feel, it is not just about only refunding, but it should be about arresting and interdicting that person immediately.

On page 22, the committee gives a recommendation. A company, ANUPAM Soft Global Limited, had a good programme of training Ugandans, but the project never took off. The money was paid, but no work was done. The committee recommended that they should update the books with regard to that huge sum of money. It is not only about updating the books. It is clear that work was not done and money was spent. It is not about updating the books. It is about refunding the money and the person responsible takes it up immediately. I think as Parliament and the country at large, we should guard against this.

Lastly, on rent, I was in Rwanda last year. The government of Rwanda, having seen that government vehicles were not being used well – when we were interacting with the citizens and a Member of Parliament from Rwanda, they told us that one day, the President made an announcement that all government vehicles should be parked wherever they were. The order was given immediately and vehicles were taken where they were needed. Government said that if one deserved a vehicle, one would be given a loan. There was no use of government vehicles because they were misusing them. 

In Uganda you find Government ministries, instead of them using Government houses or ministry houses, they leave them and instead rent. They spend a lot of money on rent. For example, the Ministry of Agriculture left Entebbe and started renting in Kampala. You wonder why. 

We need to find out who is behind these buildings; who is the owner of these buildings. A lot of money is being spent. Why don’t we say one day that if a ministry has a building, they should not rent anymore and they go back to their house and we save this money? I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.06
THE MINISTER OF GENERAL DUTIES (OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER) (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know this report is about the Uganda Investment Authority, and I know that the relevant minister in charge will respond. But I have been provoked to say something given the comments of some of our colleagues on this side.

First, I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report and that is how it should be. The process of governance is that you have an Auditor-General who audits Government ministries, departments and agencies. And constitutionally, that Auditor-General reports to this House before PAC looks at these reports in order to present their report here. Those who are found guilty are dealt with. That is how governance works.

Therefore, when you find a situation working like that, it shows there is stability and the government is working–(Interjections)– yes. When we came to power, there had not been any audited report for five years. There had not been any PAC at all. So, the fact that these institutions are in place –

THE SPEAKER: Order! Members.

MR AKENA: Madam Speaker, I am wondering whether it is in order for the honourable member holding the Floor to deliberately mislead this this House that there had been no PAC before they came to power. The evidence is in existence and the reports are even in the library of Parliament. So, is the honourable member in order to mislead this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think he said there had been no PAC reports for five years – no, no the Auditor-General was in existence, but had the PAC debated those reports? That is what he is saying. No, NRM came in 1986, but what happened in between? And after Amin Dada, there was the UNLF Government and then that Government of Gen. Tito Okello.

MR NASASIRA: Anyway, there were no PAC reports and you can go and check the records. But what I am saying is; to stand here because the Auditor-General’s report has identified either embezzlement or a mis-procurement and you say that there is no Government, is not understanding the system at all. There is a serious Government and that is why these systems are working –(Interjections)– yes; and Government will continue, elections will continue and other parliaments will come. What Parliament should be asking is what action has been taken on those who have misappropriated funds by the Auditor-General. For me, that is the most important thing.

But that takes me to another point on the fact that we need to think about how we work. This is important because we are all interested in getting our country to develop. Maybe –(Interjections)– you may have your views, but I also have mine. For example, I noticed the Leader of the Opposition make his statement, but it would have been more efficient if he had sent a copy of that statement to the Leader of Government Business before presenting it here. That would have enabled the Leader of Government Business to give his response immediately. Because there is always a Leader of Government Business here –(Interjections)- there is always a Leader of Government Business here. Again, that is how Government works.

But now, for you to make a statement and ask for a response that will come after a month; we need time to read these reports; that is something we need to think about. For example, we have heard one side of the report; there was a recommendation that a new Executive Director be appointed, but also the chairperson realised that there is one who was appointed – because we are dealing with many reports – for example, when this report is going to be presented here, Government has to prepare its response. Government would have come with maybe half of the answers. Anyway, what is important is that audits must be made. Government must respond and what is important is how those responsible actions are taken –(Interjections)– I am just concluding. (Interruptions)

MR SEMUJJU NGANDA: Madam Speaker, the processes that lead to presentation of a report by a committee of Parliament, is a legal process that is known to everybody. We are now actually debating the stealing of money as noted by this report.

Other than the President confirming when he visited Rwanda that he is actually with thieves, is the hon. John Nasasira in order to divert this Parliament to something that we should have looked at, if we wanted, during the orientation, instead of discussing and adding value to the report of the committee. Is he in order to divert the House?

THE SPEAKER: The honourable member is making proposals for the amendment of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. Please, conclude.

MR NASASIRA: I think we should learn to listen to others without unnecessary interruptions. What I was saying is that in future, we need to find the best way to get quick answers to issues raised in such reports.
 
Lastly, there was the issue of the land in Mbarara. Whatever happened, there is nowhere in the world you will find someone selling 50 hectares of land for Shs 488 million. I think there must be some corrections.

MR AMURIAT: Can I just give information on that issue? Okay, thank you so much, honourable minister for giving way. Madam Speaker, I would like to make a correction and I regret that the information given here might have been misleading. On page 7 of the report, where it talks about the land belonging to Mr Taremwa – look at the third sentence on page 7 of the report – the individual is called Enoch Taremwa. That piece of land measures about 150 acres; actually, to be precise, the land measures 147.34 acres. That is per the report of the Chief Government Valuer. When converted to hectares, this land would measure 59.629 hectares. That is the correction I wanted to make. Thank you for calling my attention to it.

MR NASASIRA: Thank you for that correction. In conclusion, I would like to say that this is the process that Government goes through when working. What is important is about what action has been taken as far as the Auditor-General’s report is concerned and we will live on with our stability. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us ask the minister to give us a way forward. Minister of Finance.

MR ASTON KAJARA: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. First, I would like to thank the committee and its chairperson for generating a good report. However, I would also like to thank all Members of Parliament for the concerns that have been raised.

This report covered a wide range of issues and activities ranging from 2002 to 2010, and beyond. Issues have been raised on policy, accountability, the functioning of Government departments and actions of officials of UIA.

The committee has also generated 30 recommendations, also covering quite a wide range of issues including restructuring of UIA. There are also issues of governance, for example, on the board of directors and staff, and recommendations with regard to the people who were found to have committed wrongs including prosecutions. Madam Speaker, the recommendations also include improvement in investments such as in industrial parks, especially in Namanve, and recovery of lost monies for those who were found to have misappropriated funds. 

You will realise that from 2002 to-date, there have been a number of players in these sectors both at institutional level of UIA, but also in the ministries like ministers who have been in charge of this.

The report is 25 pages and as Government, I would like to say that we just received this report on the Floor of the House. In other words, we have not had a lot of time to internalise the contents of this report. We have not had sufficient time to look at these issues, especially the governance issues and issues that need to be rectified, and more so, the recommendations affect Government and the people of Uganda. 

The rules of natural justice demand that you hear the other side, and for Government to be heard adequately, I request that we are enabled to generate comprehensive answers before this report is adopted. I beg to move. 

MR MWIRU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am aware, just as the minister maybe, that after a report of this nature has been adopted, Cabinet must pronounce itself on the report by way of treasury memorandums. At this point, what we have to do as Parliament is to debate the way we have done so that the minister just commits to report in treasury memorandums because more often than not, they do not even come. We have passed many reports with recommendations in this House and we have not actually had treasury memorandums and hon. Nasasira even said it. 

Therefore, the clarification I am seeking from the honourable minister is: Does that mean that when you actually make a response to these recommendations, then you do not have to respond by way of treasury memorandums to the recommendations which have been passed by the committee?

THE SPEAKER: May I add that I have been interacting with the Auditor-General and one of his frustrations is that Government has never issued treasury memorandums on his reports. So, I think we should adopt the report and you come back with treasury memorandums and tell us what you will do to each recommendation. 

MR OKUPA: I think if we take the route that the minister is asking for, it will derail the work of Parliament. We know very well that when Parliament opened our Business Committee meeting, Government was represented and the agenda was known - what was going to transpire this week. So, they knew what was coming here. These reports were ready since last year. They had an opportunity to look at the report and by Monday when the Business Committee met, you knew what was on the agenda. 

But also, the honourable minister here was the former Minister of State for Investment, and is more on top of things than even the current minister. So, he should be able to answer or give clarifications to these questions; some of them were even discussed at committee level in the last Parliament. Even in this Parliament, we have had you in the committee and we have shared with you these issues and you knew what was coming. So, what are you talking about? (Laughter)

THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mrs Justine Kasule Lumumba): Madam Speaker and honourable members, when the Business Committee of Parliament sat on Monday, I represented Government and yes, we agreed on business, but our Rules of Procedure do not allow to have a report discussed and debated outside plenary before it is tabled in Parliament. 

Therefore, I am not supposed to have carried a report which I had not even received, to the Minister of Finance to have these issues discussed. We have to follow the rules. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we need to follow the standing orders and regulations. The proper procedure would be that you return here with treasury memorandums in response to all our recommendations. So, let us adopt the report and you will come back with that memorandum because that is what you should be doing, showing the action that you will have taken. 

I put the question that this House do adopt the –(Mr Okupa rose_)-You are proposing to lay something? Hon. Okupa has something to lay on Table.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I promised to lay letters on Table. The first letter is dated 25 January 2013 from the Ministry of Finance to the Executive Director, Uganda Investment Authority. The reference is “Restructuring of the Uganda Investment Authority” and signed by Dr Ajedra G. Aridru, MP and Minister of State for Investment. I beg to lay it on Table. 

The second letter is a response to that letter from the Executive Director, UIA to Tom Buringuriza, instructing him to do what the minister had directed him to do during the restructuring process. I beg to lay it on Table. Thank you.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I had proposed another - I had discussed it with the chair and he was of the same view that an ad hoc committee be instituted by this House to investigate the affairs affecting Namanve Industrial Park. The proposal was also first made by the honourable member the other side, hon. Ogwang. So, I propose that, that particular recommendation be part of the report. (Mr Nasasira rose­­_)

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Gender wants to seek clarification. 

MR NASASIRA: When the chairman was here and Namanve came up, he said there is a value-for-money audit of the new report which is before us. Wouldn’t it be better if this report came, and if we, in the House say there was need to have an ad hoc committee, then we can go ahead and have the ad hoc committee other than cutting short the value–for- money audit.

THE SPEAKER: We also know that we have been demanding for the value-for-money audit as a House. So, let that job be completed before we -[HON. MEMBER: “It is a diversion.”] It is not a diversion. We are the ones who demanded for a value-for-money audit. 

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I wish to thank honourable members for the debate and questions that were asked, but to also regret that the minister who was previously in charge of investment could come here and try to kill the report. We all understand the processes in this Parliament and how committees work and how we, as a committee of COSASE, took the trouble to meet about 10 times. In some of those meetings, the minister was invited and I would like to insist that we discussed in our minutes here signed and approved by me and the issues that were raised by the Auditor-General. for example, issues of governance were discussed. 

We also had the opportunity to meet with the board of Uganda Investment Authority. Mr Bitature led a big team - not once but twice. We had meetings on the sidelines as well to try to reach a position. We also met senior management, some of whom we met in Canada. 

So, a lot of work, energy and thinking have been put into this report. And we have tried to involve as many stakeholders as possible. We have had field visits to Mbarara and to other parts of the country like Namanve, and the Soroti and Mbale industrial parks. And so, this is a culmination of hard work and a lot of thought. Therefore, for the minister to come here and try to dissociate himself from what has been reported today, and his involvement in the process, is certainly disheartening.

I would like to also comment on the proposal by hon. Katuntu for an ad hoc committee to be named by you. There are two things in this: There is a project that was run and financed by the World Bank; and then the issue of allocation of land in Namanve. If we want to consider these issues separately, it is at the discretion of the House. If we want a value-for-money audit done at the same time with the misallocation of land in Namanve, then that could also be done. 

I would like to insist, however, that we do not turn this House into a talking shop; that what we recommend in this House is taken seriously by Government and that it reports back at an opportune moment. You have talked about the treasury memorandum, that Government is not doing its work. They should be able to arrive at that from the recommendations of the committee, which are well considered as well as balanced. They should be able to produce a treasury memorandum - that is provided for in the law. Then the Auditor-General will audit this memorandum and it should then be brought back to us. That is when the accountability committees and Parliament will be seen to be functioning well.

THE SPEAKER: I cannot see you when you are seated. 

MR BIRAARO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to give more information on the issue of the treasury memorandum. Madam Speaker, you know that we go on trips and study what we do. Last year, in mid-December, a team of COSASE members went to Zambia and we interacted with members of the auditing department, internal auditors, the IGG and the Ministry of Finance. In that country, which operates on the Commonwealth standards like Uganda does, a treasury memorandum comes only after six working days after the report has been given and adopted by the House. I suggest that we adopt almost the same thing as is done in Zambia and other Commonwealth countries. That is the information I had to give to enhance the issue of Government responding with treasury memoranda whenever a report is adopted by Parliament. Thank you. (Applause)

MR AMURIAT: Thank you for the information. Actually, some members of COSASE went on a benchmarking trip to the Zambian Parliament and those are the products of that trip.

Finally, Madam Speaker, I would like to comment on the Kashari land and to also say that we experienced a lot of challenges. Sometimes when entities interact with us and we feel that something is going terribly wrong within the entity, the leadership is given authority by the committee members to write to that entity, asking them to halt the process as we continue with the investigations. Unfortunately, our requests are sometimes ignored and this came to play in the case of the Kashari land. 

I think there were very many forces behind the procurement of this land. After all our comments were made, we saw an advert in the newspaper late last year, advertising for vendors who have land for sale. And the description of the land fitted exactly –(Laughter)– into the land we had asked Uganda Investment Authority to stop the process of purchasing. The specifications were: 10 kilometres off the road, five kilometres to the nearest industrial park, about 150 acres, which should be virgin land. All this description fitted exactly Enoch Taremwa’s property and for us, we thought there was interest. 

We understand now that for this particular piece of land the procurement has almost been concluded. As a committee, we are going to take Uganda Investment Authority to task to explain whether they carried out due diligence and whether they got the necessary recommendations. And I think we shall continue engaging them on this piece of land and other issues you have raised during your question time. 

Once again, thank you and I thank the distinguished members of the COSASE committee and the staff of Parliament, namely the Research Department and the Clerks’ Department for diligently undertaking the task of supporting the committee and myself during the course of producing this report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members -(Interjections)- we have spent over three hours on this matter -  

6.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, I want to plead with you that at the time of adopting these recommendations, we go through them one by one. The rationale is simply that the committee has made some good recommendations, but in some cases, it has let the culprits off the hook. I will give an example of the plot they sold at 1.7 million dollars; they sold that plot at that price and yet there was somebody who had offered $2 million, and moreover they were renting. And the committee is not talking about the criminals who were involved in the transaction. It is just saying that they should work faster and complete their construction. How do you go to rent a building when you had your own? How do you start construction while you are renting and yet you had your own property? And that, Madam Speaker, is my request – the recommendations are good; we only need to tighten them so that we catch the culprits.

The other point I want to inform the committee about is that even the issue of the cooperative land, the date quoted was wrong – it was June 2008 not 2000, and my colleague there is a board member. The board of Bugisu Cooperative Union then was chased on 2 May 2008. Now, the UIA bought the property and the people who signed were not in office. That means the board members who signed were nonexistent because they had been earlier on chased. Likewise, I think UIA even never went to see the land because they would have seen the squatters there. And BCU has never agreed on the sale because you cannot carry out a transaction with a nonexistent board. So, they bought air and as we speak, Bugisu Cooperative Union is in court over this same land. So, UIA has very big problems and has no land. 

And even the Solicitor-General was never consulted on this matter because the Attorney-General’s Chambers should be involved. These are some of the things – anyway we know that there were problems in the union, but we must deal with them. Good enough, hon. Kajara was the minister of state in charge investments at that time and therefore he must have known about that transaction. And that is why –(Interruption)

MR KAJARA: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi has referred to the year 2008 as the year when the industrial park in Mbale was purchased. If his memory is correct, that time I was still in Karamoja.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Now you have been exonerated; you were with the PRDP. (Laughter)

So, Madam Speaker, it is my humble request – first, I thank the committee for the good job done, but we need to tighten some of the recommendations and I want to seek your indulgence to do it at an appropriate time and maybe you can advise me on when we should do it. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I don’t know what other Members think. Do we adopt them as they are or we make amendments - (Interjections)- no, but you know with this business of amending orally, sometimes you don’t know what you are doing.

MR AMURIAT: Madam Speaker, I think this task probably falls on us, given that we have the documents. We will see how to extract the recommendations and where applicable, we are going to name persons. Maybe if the committee wants it that way, we can name individuals and maybe in a week’s time bring back the copy of our recommendations to this House.

THE SPEAKER: So, that means we cannot take a decision today. Can we have them in writing, including the amendments? You know this business of doing things - anyway decision on this is deferred until Tuesday next week.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, since you have decided that the decision will be taken on Tuesday, I still crave your indulgence that since we were not ready with answers to some of these things, the ministry be enabled to answer some of them before the resolutions are adopted.

THE SPEAKER: No, honourable minister. If we have not been doing things properly, we should start now. You are expected to present a Treasury Memorandum as Government in response to this. That is the Auditor-General’s Act and what it requires you to do. Okay? So, we defer decision to Tuesday. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON COMPENSATION PAYMENT TO DURA CEMENT LIMITED

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, it is coming to 7.00 p.m. and the report, which is going to be presented, is a Public Accounts Committee report and these are public accounts. The owners of the accounts have now gone to sleep –(Interjections)- yes, it is a very serious issue because when they are presenting this report, we want the entire country to know what took place. 

Madam Speaker, if you know the report they are going to present, it touches on very important things and if you hear them, you can even shed more tears than Uganda Investment Authority. So, I would plead that this report be the first item - we can handle other items on the Order Paper, but let it be the first item on Tuesday, so that the owners of the money can know what the issue is. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, according to our rules, we are supposed to sit until 7 O’clock and this report is only 28 pages; the rest are annexures. Let us receive it. I think we are on air, let us receive it. Honourable members, I also have my programmes and there is work I must finish. Let us receive the report. Present.

6.42
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Maxwell Akora): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I present a report of the Public Accounts Committee on Government Compensation Payments to Dura Cement Limited in the Financial Year 2009/2010.

This report is being handed out now, and I will start from page one, paragraph two of the report. 

In the report of the Auditor-General to Parliament for the year ended 30 June 2010, it was reported that Government was incurring a lot in compensation to companies and individuals for loss of business arising from cancellation of contracts that they entered into with Government. It was also noted that in a number of cases, trade taxes had not been assessed or collected. 

The Auditor-General’s report highlighted examples of some of the compensation claims brought against Government and that included, on page two of the report, item three - Dura Cement Limited was paid US$ 16.4 million on account of its mining lease over Dura Limestone in Kamwenge having been cancelled.

Page 3 indicates the terms of reference that the committee followed and Members can read through. Page 4 indicates the methodology that the committee used to arrive at this report. I will proceed straight to page 6 for the detailed findings, observations and recommendations.

Introduction 

In the financial year 2009/2010, Government of Uganda paid Dura Cement Ltd US$ 16.4 million on the account of its mining lease to establish a third cement factory in Kamwenge having been cancelled by the government. The question was, how did this compensation come about and who caused this financial loss?

The background is that on 7 March 1990, the National Enterprises Corporation (NEC), the commercial arm of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces (UPDF), obtained from the Geological Survey and Mines Department of the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, a 21-year mining lease titled ML 3946 on property LVR 2504, Folio 4, plots 4, 5 and 6 Burahya, Block 162, measuring 278.5 hectares. The certificate of title to the above land was issued to NEC retrospectively on the 9th August 1996 for a term of 21 years beginning from the date of 7th March 1990.

NEC subsequently, on 10 June 1997, sub-leased the remaining term of its mining lease of 14 years to M/S Lafarge/Hima Cement 1994 Ltd (HCL). A sub-lease agreement between NEC and M/S Lafarge/HCL was signed by Col Fred Mwesigye as the Managing Director and witnessed by Lt J.M. Bangirana the Corporation Secretary on behalf of NEC. M/S Lafarge/HCL were required, under the terms of the sub-lease, to mobilise resources, make detailed surveys and develop infrastructure at Dura within one year from 10 June 1997. 

By 2005, eight years later, however, Lafarge/HCL had failed to fulfil its obligations and had not exploited the limestone and stone deposits at Dura. Lafarge/HCL were notified by NEC in March 2002, of their breach and specifically asked to submit monthly returns and pay royalties and rent under the Articles of the Lease Deed.

Hima Cement Ltd continued to ignore complying with the provisions of the Mining Act and instructions issued by the Commissioner of Geological Surveys and Mines. Another letter was then written to Hima Cement Ltd by the Commissioner in February 2003, in which Hima Cement Ltd was duly notified of its being in fundamental breach because of non-compliance with the covenants under the sub-lease. 

Owing to the above failure by Hima Cement Ltd to remedy the default as required by law, NEC sought the legal opinion of the Solicitor-General on how to disengage from the Hima Cement Ltd relationship. The Solicitor-General advised that there was breach of several covenants, which entitled NEC to terminate the sub-lease and to re-enter the land. 

Basing on the Solicitor-General’s advice on 22 June 2006, NEC issued 90 days’ notice of termination of the sub-lease to Hima Cement on the basis of breach of several covenants. Hima Cement Limited resisted the proposed termination. The relationship between NEC and Laferge/Hima Cement Group was legally terminated by Col Fred Mwesigye on 9th August 2006. 

Meanwhile, in January 2005, Col Fred Mwesigye had invited Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal of M/s Motor Sales Limited, Nairobi to co-invest with NEC by putting up a cement factory at Dura. Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal submitted a detailed business proposal in July 2006 in response to the invitation to co-invest at Dura. Government officials including the Minister of Defence, the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development, the Minister of Tourism, Trade and Industry, the Commissioner of Geological Survey and Mines, and officials from NEC assessed and approved the viability of the proposal. Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal later on the 25th of October 2006, incorporated a company called Dura Cement Ltd (DCL), with two offshore companies as shareholders namely, Diva Enterprises SL of Panama and Sweetline SA of British Virgin Islands. On the 9th of August 2006, DCL’s business proposal was officially accepted by Government. Brig. Noble Mayombo (RIP) the then Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence communicated the acceptance to Dura Cement Ltd. 

Meanwhile, NEC requested for the enlargement of the mining area and on 22 December 2006, NEC was issued a certificate of title LRV 3668 folio 18 for plots 3, 4, 5 and 6 measuring 473.5 hectares. On 19 January 2007, the Commissioner for Geological Surveys and Mines effected the transfer of the mining lease from NEC to Dura Cement Ltd. On the 2nd of February 2007, the commissioner informed Dura Cement that the mining lease formerly held by NEC, which was left with four years to expire, had been extended in favour of Dura Cement for an extra 15 years with effect from 7 March 2007. 

Madam Speaker, the committee made several observations at this point as follows:
The committee noted that the procedure by which NEC transferred the initial sub-lease to Lafarge/HCL was not transparent. The sub-lease was not tendered under the Central Tendering Board to ensure competition and value-for-money. This is where the problem began, leading to the transfer of the lease to DCL and the subsequent termination and compensation to DCL. 

PAC also noted that the procedure by which Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal was invited to submit the business proposal was not transparent. The criteria used to evaluate the proposal was not clear. It is difficult to establish that Dura Cement proposal would have been the best evaluated proposal after the debacle with Lafarge/Hima Cement Group. Competitive bids were not solicited to determine the best investment proposal. The company, Dura Cement Ltd with offshore shareholders in British Virgin Islands and Panama was expressly incorporated for this undertaking after the promoters had been invited by NEC. Dura Cement offered no consideration for acquiring the lease. NEC transferred its mining concession and land measuring 473.5 hectares to Dura Cement free of charge. 

PAC noted that it was the same Kumar’s company which had bought Hima Cement Factory when it was privatised by Government, and later sold it in 1997 to Lafarge/Hima Cement. Mr Kumar had been introduced to His Excellency the President by officials from NEC led by the then MD of NEC Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye and officials from the Ministry of Defence, which is tantamount to influence peddling. It is apparent that there was no due diligence prior to inviting and engaging Mr Kumar to establish a third factory at Dura.

Cancellation of Dura Cement lease

On the 5th of April 2007, a few months after Dura Cement had acquired the sub-lease, His Excellency the President wrote to Mr Bruno Lafont, President of Lafarge SA and owners of Hima Cement Industry 1994 Ltd, responding to the letter by Lafarge expressing interest to expand investment in cement production at the Dura site. In the letter, the President informed Lafarge that he had, “Directed the Minister of Energy and Minerals and other relevant ministries to expeditiously make arrangements to hand over.” the Dura site to Lafarge. The President’s letter was copied to Baroness Linda Chalker of Unilever International. 

Subsequently, on 10th April 2007, the President wrote to hon. Daudi Migereko, then Minister of Energy and Mineral Development informing him that “M/s Lafarge is an internationally renowned company, credible in terms of technical competence and financial worthiness.” The President directed that Dura site be given to Lafarge, and in the same letter the President directed the Attorney-General to propose how best the agreement with Dura Cement could be terminated. 

On the same day the President wrote the above letter, the then Solicitor-General, Mr Lucien Tibaruha gave a legal opinion advising that cancellation of the contract would have negative economic and financial consequences for Uganda. He observed that not only would Dura Cement claim specific and general damages, but would also be entitled to compensation for loss of projected business for 19 years, which would be around $1.1628 billion. 

The Solicitor-General recommended that Government should effectively prepare to negotiate with Dura Cement on the actual amount of compensation payable. The Solicitor-General also advised that Government should negotiate an agreement with Lafarge/Hima Cement with detailed legally enforceable development conditions for the establishment of a third cement factory at Dura, and also incorporate the principle of burden sharing in respect to compensation that will inevitably arise from takeover of the Dura site by Lafarge and Hima Cement Group. 

The committee noted that the recommendations and advice given by the Solicitor-General were not heeded to by Government. The President differed from the recommendations of the Commissioner of Geological Surveys and Mines as to the quantity of lime deposits that would sustain a third factory at Dura. 

His Excellency the President also waived the proposal by the Solicitor-General for Hima Cement to co-share the burden of compensation for the cancellation of the lease to Dura Cement. PAC observed that Hima Cement obtained the lease for the Dura site without an application as required by law despite paying compensation to Dura Cement for the cancellation of their lease Government offered Hima Cement the land lease free of charge. His Excellency the President informed the committee that he took the decision to cancel the contract of Dura Cement in favour of Lafarge because of economic and strategic reasons. He indicated that the limestone deposits at Dura had been exaggerated and the available deposits could not sustain a factory and that Lafarge had threatened to close the Hima Cement factory if they had been refused to take over the Dura site to supplement the deposits at Hima. 

Consequently, on 7 May 2007 His Excellency the President wrote to Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal as Managing Director of Hima Cement informing him that Government had received an alternative investment proposal from Lafarge to exploit Dura limestone deposits which project was in the best interest of the country. His Excellency the President also informed Mr Rawal that Government would terminate his contract on mutually agreed terms and that Government would not hesitate to recommend Dura Cement to develop any other site that they would wish to invest in as long as there were no encumbrances on the site so chosen. 

Subsequently, on the 12 of June 2007, the Commissioner for Geological Surveys and Mines, Mr Joshua Tuhumwire, invited Mr Rajesh Rawal as Director of DCL to discuss the cancellation of their lease. Mr Rawal objected to these overtures and wrote to the Minster of Energy and Mineral Development on 22 June 2007 demanding that either Government restores their mining rights or compensates Dura Cement for the cancellation of their rights. 

On 26 July 2007, hon. Migereko formally wrote on the instructions of the President cancelling the lease to Dura Cement Ltd. Dura Cement Ltd were not willing to discuss the termination and immediately filed the case in court and thereafter the matter was referred to the Attorney-General for an out of court settlement. The Attorney-General handled the matter of compensation together with the Minister of Finance without further engaging the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. 

The committee observed that the then Minister of Energy and Mineral Development pursued the directive of the President to negotiate with Dura Cement the cancellation of their lease on mutually agreed terms by proposing to provide Dura Cement an alternative site for development. By considering that Dura Cement had obtained the lease at no cost; and by bringing to the attention of Mr Rawal that Dura Cement had not made any investment at the site. 

The committee observed that His Excellency the President’s intervention handed back the mining lease to a company which has failed to exploit the lease for eight years moreover at no consideration to the Uganda Government. 

Handling of compensation claims submitted by Dura Cement Ltd

In March 2008, Dura Cement sued the Attorney-General for breach of contract and demanded for compensation to the tune of $103.4 million. The Attorney-General constituted a negotiation team chaired by the then acting Solicitor-General, Mr Billy Kainamura, and consisting of officials from the Ministry of Finance and that of Energy and Mineral Development together with staff from the Attorney-General’s Chambers.

The Acting Solicitor-General requested the Auditor-General to evaluate the claim and advise. The Auditor-General engaged KPMG on behalf of the Ministry of Justice at the cost of $250,000. KPMG assessed, based on the information availed, that the Dura Cement claim could not be substantiated and, therefore, no compensation was payable under the different items claimed. 

KPMG indicated that Dura Cement Ltd could only be reimbursed expenses incurred if the expenses could be substantiated and verified. In the event that no such documentation was available, KPMG recommended a nil sum as quantification of the claim submitted by Dura Cement Ltd. The table gives a summary of the DCL claim and the recommendations of KPMG based on evidence submitted by Dura Cement Ltd.

There were seven items of claims amounting to $103.4 million. The computation of loss that was derived by the KPMG firm was nil. So, the computation was nil as compensation payable to Dura Cement for the cancellation.

However, KPMG also indicated that based on the Dura Cement Business Plan that had been submitted under the investment proposal, assuming that all the capital investments, the production quantities, the operating expenses and sales revenues in the proposal were realised, the anticipated net profits attributable to Dura Cement shareholders over the 19-year term of the lease would have amounted to $14,566,890. 

Observations

PAC observed that the report from KPMG dated 1 September 2008 was a draft report with the express disclaimer that it should be used only by Mr Billy Kainamura, the then acting Solicitor-General. No subsequent or final report was availed or demanded by Mr Kainamura from KPMG. The committee found it inexplicable that the sum of $14.5 million purported to have been recommended by KPMG in the draft report to Mr Billy Kainamura came to the knowledge of Mr Elly Karuhanga who used it to brief the President. The committee observed that by the time the Dura Cement contract was cancelled, the latter had not made any investments whatsoever under its business plan.

There was no specific recommendation by KPMG that the DCL claim had been assessed at US$ 14.5 million as subsequently claimed by the acting Solicitor-General as fair computation for loss of net profits over the term of the lease of 19 years.

The government negotiating team had proposed an offer of $450,000 to be made to Dura Cement in lieu of set-up and legal costs incurred, as a start-up position for potential negotiation. This position was negated by the assessment of US$ 14.5 million ostensibly recommended by KPMG.

The committee interacted with His Excellency the President, who informed the committee that he had been briefed of the KPMG valuation of US$ 14.5 million by Mr Elly Karuhanga of Kampala Associated Advocates (KAA), who were the lawyers representing Dura Cement in pursuing their claim. PAC noted that there was no evidence of the acting Solicitor-General having formally communicated to KAA the assessment by KPMG.

Finalisation of the Claim

On 28 January 2009, His Excellency the President wrote to the Attorney-General and suggested that the sum of US$ 14.5 million assessed by KPMG should be paid to Dura Cement as negotiated compensation for loss of their mining rights, and directed that the negotiations should be finalised within 30 days. Based on the recommendation from His Excellency the President, the negotiation team abandoned their initial offer of $450,000. In any case, Dura Cement, represented by KAA, had been copied the letter from the President. However, the negotiation team opted to apply the principle of acceleration supported by legal precedents to discount the $14.5 million over the 19 years into a single lump sum payment of $6.5 million. The negotiation team forwarded this recommendation to the Attorney-General on 16 July 2009.

The Attorney-General then, hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya, in a loose minute to the Ag Solicitor-General dated 23 October 2009, rejected the proposal to discount the award. He based his decision on the following arguments:

    • The President’s offer of $14.5 million had been communicated to Dura Cement through their lawyers, Kampala Associated Advocates;

    • The fact that Dura Cement had not breached the mining lease; that they were prepared to carry out the project and it was Government that had reneged on its commitment;

    • The reasoning of discounting pre-dates the intervention of KPMG and would cast doubt on the efficacy and professionalism of KPMG;

    • The consideration on lump sum payments are “technically subsumed under the principle of acceleration, the claimants are being compensated for thwarted expectations, this is an investment proposal to which the principle of acceleration is not easily applicable; it is bad enough to cancel an investment project out of no fault of the investor, and the continued delay in sorting out this matter does not augur well for Uganda as an investment destination.”

The Attorney-General advised the Ag Solicitor-General to negotiate on these terms. The committee observed that the former Attorney-General, hon. Khiddu Makubuya:

    i. Ignored the recommendations of a technical negotiation committee that he had instituted.
    ii. Seemed to be arguing the case for the claimant and not for Government as he would be expected to as the chief legal advisor under the Constitution. The Attorney-General’s position was not based on any investments made or commitments incurred by the claimant, but was based solely on the claim submitted of $103.4 million. The burden of proof would have fallen on the claimant in court, to determine what would have been adequate compensation, based on the principle of restitution.

On 30 October 2009, Dura Cement and the Attorney-General entered into a consent judgment where the Attorney-General (on behalf of Government would:

    i. Pay $14 million to the plaintiff as special damages for the cancellation of the plaintiff’s mining lease;
    ii. Pay $2 million to the plaintiff as general damages for the cancellation of the said mining lease;
    iii. Pay legal costs at 2.5 percent of the total sum payable in (1) and (2) above;
    iv. Pay the above sums in one lump-sum; 
    v. Pay interest on (1), (2), and (3) above, at 8 percent from the date of the consent judgment till payment in full.

On 23 April 2010, the Ministry of Finance further negotiated with Dura Cement on the modalities of payment of the compensation. The Ministry of Finance proposed that Government would pay $16.4 million in four equal installments of $4.1 million, and that no interest would be paid on the outstanding amounts. Dura Cement accepted the new terms.

When PAC met the His Excellency the President on 21 December 2011, he expressed surprise at the amount Government compensated Dura Cement. He indicated that Dura Cement had not made any investments at the time of its contract being cancelled, which view the committee agreed with. His Excellency intimated that $500,000 would have been sufficient given that Dura Cement had been awarded the lease at no fee.

Observations

The committee made the following observations:

    i. The consent judgment was drawn to the effect that it lumped all compensations under damages which are not taxable. This was not in line with the claim that had been submitted.

    ii. The award of $14 million as special damages was not specifically claimed. The committee did not receive any evidence that this claim was proved as required by law.

    iii. The committee observed that the first draft of the consent judgment provided for award of $14 million as compensation for cancellation of the mining lease. This would have been taxable under the Income Tax Act. However, the final consent judgment changed this award to special damages which are not taxable. The committee notes that this change was deliberately made to avoid payment of taxes.

    iv. The Ministry of Finance was able to further negotiate the terms of the compensation over four installments. This is an indication that the consent judgment entered into between the parties was not well negotiated on the part of Government, since the plaintiff was able to concede further ground outside the consent judgment.

    v. Since the Dura mining lease and land had been handed back to the Lafarge Group for no consideration either, and after their initial breach and cancellation, the former Solicitor-General, Mr Lucien Tibaruha, had advised that the Lafarge Group co-share the burden of any compensation. This was not done and the whole burden fell on the Government of Uganda.

    vi. His Excellency President, in offering the site to the Lafarge Group in April 2007 had indicated the following performance benchmarks to be met by the group:

    • The Hima Cement expansion must start immediately and a specific period be given within which Hima Cement must commence production at the Dura site.

    • Lafarge Group/Hima Cement must assure Government that the price of cement would come down as soon as they increase production due to the increase in supply in the market; or if the price is to remain high, it should be on account of ascertainable facts and not on account of monopolistic pricing;

    • Lafarge Group/Hima Cement must assure Government that they would undertake to make use of the residual 4.1 million metric tonnes of dimension stone for commercial purposes instead of disposing it off as waste.

vii 	The offer of $14.5 million was recommended by the President in his letter of 28 January 2009 to the Attorney-General, based on the brief by Mr Elly Karuhanga of KAA, purportedly based on the KPMG report to which he was not privy. It is, therefore, surprising that the President did not know the amount that Dura had been offered for settlement by the time PAC met him in December 2011. 

viii 	PAC further observed that handing over the Dura site to Lafarge in effect secured the limestone deposits in the area to the group who now enjoy near monopoly in cement production in the country. It is noted that the price of cement has continued to spiral with the attendant increase in cost of construction and inflation in general.

Tax assessment on the Dura compensation payment 

On the 20th of December 2010, Uganda Revenue Authority appointed Kampala Associated Advocates as its agent to collect Shs 3,214,569,600 being taxes due and payable by Dura Cement. Indeed, on the 22 December 2010, the firm, after instruction by Dura Cement, paid Shs 3,214,569,600 to the URA account.
However, on the 16th of January 2011, Kampala Associated Advocates, again on instruction by Dura Cement, lodged an application to URA disputing its assessment. The advocates argued that Dura was awarded damages by the Government of Uganda, which damages could not be taxed by URA as they are not taxable under the Income Tax Act. URA considered the grounds raising the objection and allowed the objection in its entirety and consequently, the assessment number 31/6855 dated 22 October 2011, was vacated. This position was communicated to Dura Cement by the Commissioner, Domestic Taxes, Mr Moses Kajubi in his letter to Kampala Associated Advocates dated 30 March 2011.

Recommendations

Based on the findings and observations made, the committee recommends that: 

    1. The then managing director of National Enterprises Corporation (NEC), Col (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye be held responsible for causing financial loss to Government by the irregular transfer of the mining sub-lease from NEC to Lafarge without tendering. After cancelling the sub-lease for failure by Lafarge to comply with the terms of the sub-lease, NEC subsequently invited and transferred the mining lease to Dura Cement without tendering and at no fee. 

    2. NEC, including but not limited to the then managing director, Col Fred Mwesigye, be held liable for failure to carry out due diligence resulting into dealings with a one Kumar Rajesh Rawal who turned out to be a mere middleman and fraudster as he was neither a director nor a shareholder of Dura Cement as per the documents obtained from the company’s registry.

    3. The then managing director of NEC, Col Fred Mwesigye, be held responsible for introducing Mr Kumar Rajesh Rawal to the President with a view of securing transfer of the mining lease from NEC to Dura Cement.

    4. The President should respect technical advice given by Government departments rather than relying on briefs and information from unofficial sources. The President should desist from gifting critical national resources to so-called investors free of charge and without following due processes.

    5. The Registrar of Companies be investigated with a view of establishing how Dura Cement Limited was incorporated with offshore shareholders without availing particulars of local directors and establishing a place of business in Uganda.

    6. The former Acting Solicitor-General, now Justice Billy Kainamura, be held responsible for leaking the draft KPMG report to Mr Elly Karuhanga of Kampala Associated Advocates, who used it to mislead the President as to the amount recommended by KPMG to compensate Dura Cement Limited.

    7. The former Acting Solicitor-General, now Justice Billy Kainamura, be held liable for causing financial loss to Government by abandoning the original offer from a negotiation team to Dura Cement of $450,000 as compensation, and entertaining the new offer in the letter from the President of $14.5 million which letter made reference to the KPMG report that had indeed recommended a nil sum.

    8. The former acting Solicitor-General, now Justice Billy Kainamura, be held liable for causing financial loss to Government by committing the sum of $250,000 to engage KPMG and later abandoning the recommendations in the KPMG report and failing to obtain a final report. The committee recommends that he should be made to refund the money lost.

    9. Mr Elly Karuhanga be held liable for influence-peddling and professional misconduct as a lawyer of Dura Cement, who had sued Government for compensation. Mr Karuhanga’s conduct and interests should be investigated by other organs of Government and relevant professional bodies.

    10. The former Attorney-General, Hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya, be held responsible for causing financial loss to Government by refusing to discount the offer of $14.5 million over 19 years to a single lump sum payment of $6.5 million.
    11. The URA Commissioner for Domestic Taxes, Mr Moses Kajubi, be investigated for waiving tax on the compensation which was deemed to have arisen from loss of business profits over 19 years.

    12. Kampala Associated Advocates be investigated for influence-peddling and professional misconduct for making false representation in the consent judgement specifically to avoid payment of taxes.

    13. Investigative arms of Government step in to lift the veil of incorporation of Dura Cement to establish its true owners and to identify the beneficiaries of the payment of $14.5 million to Kampala Associated Advocates. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the report is signed by members of the committee. Names and signatures are appended. I beg to lay several documents as appendices to support our report. 

The first document I beg to lay is a list of names of witnesses that the committee interacted with. That is Appendix 1. I beg to lay.

The second document is a mining lease dated 7 March 1990, signed by the PS Ministry of Water on behalf of the ministry granting –(Interjections)- this is Annex 2. This is a mining lease that granted NEC mining rights over this site, dated 7th of March, 1990 - Lease ML3946. I beg to lay. 

I beg to lay the certificate of title for the land that was issued on the 9th of August 1996 for a 21-year term offering the land to National Enterprises Corporation; Annex 3. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a sub-lease agreement between National Enterprises Corporation and Hima Cement 1994 Limited that was dated 10th of June 1997; Annex 4. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter of notification of breach by the Corporation Secretary of National Enterprises Corporation to the managing director of Hima Cement Limited dated 4 March 2002; Appendix 5. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay another letter written by the Commissioner to Hima Cement in February 2003 in which Hima Cement is notified of its being in fundamental breach of the sub-lease covenants. The letter is written by the acting Commissioner Geological Survey and Mines, Annex 6. I beg to lay

I beg to lay a letter of intent to terminate the sub-lease that was written by Col. (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye addressed to the Managing Director, Hima Cement Limited, dated 22 June 2006, Annex 7. I beg to lay
 
I beg to lay Annex 8 which was a letter of termination of the sub-lease agreement from National Enterprises Corporation to Hima Cement Ltd written by Col. (Rtd) Fred Mwesigye dated 9 August 2006; Annex 8  I beg to lay.

I beg to lay Annex 9, a letter written by Col. Fred Mwesigye to Motor Sense Limited inviting Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal to establish a cement factory at Dura dated 12 January 2005; Annex 9. I beg to lay

I beg to lay another letter dated 9 August 2006 written by the late Brigadier Noble Mayombo, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Defence, to Mr Rajesh Kumar Rawal, dated 9 August 2006, about establishment of a cement plant at Dura in Western Uganda; Annex 10. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay another certificate of title dated 22 December 2006 that expanded the mining lease that was offered to National Enterprises Corporation and Dura Cement; Appendix 11. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the transfer of the mining lease issued by the Commissioner of Geological Survey and Mines dated 11 December 2006 transferring the mining lease from National Enterprises Corporation to Dura Cement; Appendix 12. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the renewal of the mining lease for a further term of 15 years beginning 7 March 2011 by the Commissioner of Geological Survey and Mines addressed to the Director of Dura Cement dated 2 February 2007 in Annex 13. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from His Excellency the President dated 5 April 2007, addressed to Mr Bruno Lafont of Lafarge with the subject: “Interest to expand your investment of cement production to Dura site”;Appendix 14. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from His Excellency the President dated 10 April 2007, to the then Minister for Energy and Mineral Development, Hon. Daudi Migereko on the subject: “Report on Limestone deposits and investments at Dura” in Appendix 15. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the recommendation of the Solicitor-General then, Mr Lucien Tibaruha, dated 10 April 2007, indicating the legal position that could follow the termination of the Dura contract; Appendix 16. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from His Excellency the President, dated 7 May 2007, addressed to Mr Rawal Rajesh, with the subject: “Interest to expand your investment of cement production at Dura site” indicating that Government had decided to terminate his contract; Appendix 17. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from the Commissioner of Geological Survey and Mines addressed to Mr Rajesh Rawal dated 12 June 2007, “RE: Cancellation of the Dura Cement Limited Mining Lease No.ML3946”; Appendix 18. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from Rajesh and Shilpa Rawal on behalf of the Board of Directors of Dura Cement Limited dated 22 June 2007, addressed to the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development, hon. Daudi Migereko; Appendix 19. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay notice of termination, “RE: Cancellation of Dura Cement Ltd’s mining lease No.ML3946 at Dura, Kamwenge District,” written by the Minister for Energy and Mineral Development addressed to Mr Rajesh Rawal, Managing Director of Dura Cement Ltd dated 26 July 2007; Appendix 20. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the report of KPMG addressed to the Auditor-General dated 1 September 2008, and to Mr Billy Kainamura, Acting Director, Legal Advisory Services, Ministry of Justice indicating their observations and recommendations as to the Dura claim; Appendix 21. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from His Excellency the President, dated 28 January 2009, to the Attorney-General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, “RE: Dura Cement Limited vs. Attorney-General” directing the Attorney-General to offer a sum of $14.4 million as reasonable compensation;  Appendix 22. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay Appendix 23, which was a loose minute from Mr Oluka Henry, Senior State Attorney, dated July 2009 to the Acting Solicitor-General, presenting a negotiated position to be offered to Dura Cement indicating that the President’s offer of $14.5 million should be discounted to $6.5 million. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a loose minute authored by hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya (MP), Attorney-General and Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, addressed to the Acting Solicitor-General of Ministry of Justice with regard to Dura Cement Limited vs Attorney General, the principle sum payable and setting out the arguments to offer the sum of $14.5 million to Dura Cement; Appendix 24. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the consent judgment signed between Dura Cement Limited and the Attorney-General on behalf of the Attorney-General by Mr Billy Kainamura, Acting Solicitor-General, dated 30 October 2009, consent judgment setting out the terms of the settlement; Appendix 25. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from the Commissioner Domestic Taxes, Uganda Revenue Authority, to Kampala Associated Advocates appointing them as collection agents for the Dura Cement Ltd dated 20 December 2010, Appendix 26. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay the Payment Remittance Advice - Payment Registration Slip of Uganda Revenue Authority indicating receipt of payment of Shs 3,214,569,600 in taxes with the regard to the dollar compensation; Appendix 27. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a Letter of Objection of assessment against Dura Cement Ltd written by Kampala Associated Advocates addressed to the Commissioner-General of Uganda Revenue Authority dated 16 February 2011. ; Appendix 28. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay a letter from the Commissioner of Domestic Taxes, Mr Moses Kajubi addressed to Kampala Associated Advocates with regard to: “Dura Cement Ltd objection decision” waiving the taxes that have been assessed; Appendix 29. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the report. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much chairperson and the Committee on Public Accounts for the work done. Honourable members, I think we need to find a way of giving a summary of the report and then submitting. Members can read the full report, but I think the presentation, could be summarised. We took one and a half hours receiving the COSASE report because it was – honourable, I do not know whether you are seated or standing. (Laughter) Yes, hon. Mwiru - but this one was very brief.

7.27 
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Madam Speaker, we are appreciating that actually Parliament has very precious time and it must be protected so that we deal with other matters. However, for purposes of delivering reports - where we sit for long hours - it is important that there is a flow, because I know that some Members here walk in and out, and they do not even get ample time to read the report, but when a report is being read, they get firsthand information and it helps them to participate in the debate. 

It is also actually very disinteresting if we invest all that time to write a report and then present it in five minutes. Madam Speaker, we need to agree on the presentation of reports and we have the report the way it is. 

7.28
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Nathan Nandala-Mafabi): Madam Speaker, when we are passing the budget we take time, and we let the Executive to go and spend the money. At the end of it, we send the Auditor-General to audit; we want them to account for the money we gave them. So, we should also invest time in the accountability because if the Executive knows that we don’t have time for accountability, they can do anything. 

Madam Speaker, these reports are very interesting. They should be given time and we read them. You have heard what they have read. I hope this is Col. Mwesigye you are talking about. (Laughter) You see, people here pretend to be – when you see them talking too much - we know what they have done. (Laughter) 

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, you made a ruling that they read the report and we debate later. Is it really in order for my friend, hon. Mafabi, to start attacking colleagues in this House. 

THE SPEAKER: No. We had agreed that we just receive the report and the debate will ensue later. I was not talking about accountability committees; I was talking across the board - national economy committee and all the committee reports. Well, if you want to sit and listen, fine. How big is yours? How many pages is it? Sixteen pages? I think you can present. Come and present.

7.30
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Akora Maxwell): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I wish to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee. I believe the report is available for distribution. 

The report of the Public Accounts Committee on Government compensation payment to Basil - Read Bouygues for rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road in the financial year 2009/2010. (Interjections) 

THE SPEAKER: Can we listen and then they can lay later? Listening does not require quorum.

MR AKORA: Madam Speaker, we submitted this report to your office, and this morning we availed a copy to the Clerk. We thought the report had been copied and would be availed to Members here this afternoon. Do we defer the presentation to the next sitting of the House?

MRS SSENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As a matter of procedure, I want to request that we listen to the chairman present the report while we wait for the copies, since we are not going to debate the report now. If we are to debate the report on Tuesday, it would give Members time to look through it over the weekend. Because if they don’t present the report, that means we shall not be able to have the copies even when they come. So, I beg that we listen to the report.

THE SPEAKER: Members, it is only 16 pages. Let us listen, and that will open the door for distribution even to the pigeon holes. Thank you, for your patience.

MR AKORA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Honourable members, I present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on government compensation payment to Basil-Read Bouygues for rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road in the financial year 2009/2010. 

I will proceed to the detailed findings, observations and recommendations from page four of the report.

Introduction

Basil-Read Bouygues TP Joint Venture (BRB) was established under the Laws of South Africa by M/s Basil Read Pty and M/s Bouygues Traveau, Republic of France. Basil-Read Bouygues was awarded a contract under European Union/European Development Fund to Uganda to construct Jinja-Bugiri Road at a contract price of Shs 84.7 billion. BRB was subsequently paid 13 million Euros, equivalent to Shs 36.4 billion on account of the contract having been frustrated by Government. 

Background

In February 2004, BRB signed an agreement with the Government of Uganda represented by the National Authorising Office of the European Development Fund under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, for the rehabilitation of the Jinja-Bugiri Road. The road is 72.8 km long, and forms part of the Northern corridor. The contract was financed by a grant from the European Union under EDF funding at a price of Shs 84.7 billion. The contract had been cleared by the Solicitor-General on 16 January 2004.

The contracting authority on behalf of Government was the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, while the supervisor in charge of technical issues was the Road Agency Formation Unit (RAFU) under the then Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications.

Procurement of the contractor

Tendering for the Jinja-Bugiri Road was conducted through open invitation in both the local and international press, using International Competitive Bidding (ICB) under EU procedures. A total of six tenders were received and opened on 4 June 2003 in the presence of all bidders’ representatives. The tenders were evaluated by a committee consisting of five RAFU staff, two design consultants, an observer from the National Authorising Office and the European Union.

The committee found three of the bids, including that of Basil-Read Bouygues, to be non-responsive. However, the responsive bidders exceeded the EU budget for the project. In light of this, the evaluation committee did not make any award. In accordance with EU regulations, the tender was annulled. The EU then approved direct negotiations with two of the bidders, one of whom was Basil-Read Bouygues.

The offer from Basil-Read Bouygues was within the project budget, but had a number of unacceptable conditions. The negotiations sought to remove the conditions and to seek clarification on some technical points. The conditions included, among others, that they be paid within 45 days of issuing a certificate instead of 90 days provided for in the standard contract under EU financing agreement.

The negotiation team endorsed by the European Union comprised of three RAFU staff and two officers from the Attorney-General’s Chambers. Basil-Read Bouygues increased their bid price to waive the conditions and the contract was subsequently awarded in February 2004, at a price of Shs 99,106,999,586 inclusive of 17 percent VAT.

The Public Accounts Committee noted that the VAT law was amended from 1st July 2004, to the effect that roads and engineering services were exempted from VAT. This meant that Basil-Read Bouygues could not recover VAT on its inputs thereby increasing their cost and reducing their expected profit under the contract.

Termination of the Contract

Within 10 months of signing the contract and commencement of work, Basil-Read Bouygues abandoned the site. PAC received information from the Attorney-General’s Chambers (via a loose minute dated 30 July 2009 to the Attorney-General) that Basil-Read Bouygues had terminated the contract on 29 December 2004 on the following grounds:

    1. Government had delayed to pay Value Added Tax amounts that fell due under the contract;

    2. Government had delayed to amend the contract to provide for compensation for Basil-Read Bouygues for the change in the VAT law that adversely affected Basil-Read Bouygues;

    3. Government had failed to take appropriate measures to mitigate the effects of unexpected cables and utilities on the project site.
    4. That the contract supervisor RAFU under the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications had failed to supply original project drawings and design data at the time prescribed in the contract; and

    5. That Government had failed to make a timely decision regarding modification of asphalt specifications, which it had changed.

Response by Government

Government regarded Basil-Read Bouygues termination as invalid because the issues raised were being addressed. RAFU viewed Basil-Read Bouygues claims as ordinary contract issues that arise in the execution of almost all contracts of this nature and that are usually addressed by monetary compensation and extension of time.

RAFU considered the delays were not long enough to justify abandonment of work or termination. RAFU reasoned that all claims put by DRB were undergoing a consultative process involving the contractor, the EU Delegation and Government of Uganda with a view to verifying them and agreeing to the appropriate time and monetary compensation. That when Basil-Read Bouygues abandoned the site during the verification process, it was clear that they were not ready to progress with the contract. This prompted Government to terminate that contract in February 2005 with a view of finding another contractor since the road was nearly impassable. The decision by Government to terminate the contract was made after receiving legal advice from M/s Shadbolt & Co and the Solicitor-General.

Arbitration

Basil-Read Bouygues took the matter for arbitration in London and Government counter claimed against that on grounds that Basil-Read Bouygues had no reason to terminate the contract. The Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, on behalf of Government, called in the advance payment guarantees that had been issued by banks in France and South Africa. Basil-Read Bouygues challenged the clause on guarantees in courts of law in both France and South Africa. The courts, however, decided in favour of Government of Uganda and a total of Euros 9.7 million and Shs 2.3 billion were recovered from the banks.

However, Government did not proceed to recover the performance guarantee because the matter was now under arbitration. Government could not, therefore, recover or enforce the guarantees as this was a subject matter of the arbitration. In the meantime, Government contracted another company, Rhinos Construction Co. to take over the contract using the balance of the money in the EU Financing Agreement plus the advance payments recovered.

Settlement of the dispute and determination of the award

Before the arbitration hearing could proceed, a conciliation process was undertaken under the EU legal office in Brussels. The two parties failed an amicable resolution of the dispute for the reason that each party maintained that they were right in terminating the contract.

DRB claimed Euros 18 million in a generalised and unsubstantiated way as below:

    a) Time extension – Euros 10 million.
    b) Change in asphalt specifications – Euros 5.5 million.
    c) And miscellaneous costs – Euros 2.5 million.

The arbitration tribunal decided that out of the five grounds advanced by Basil-Read Bouygues as reasons for termination, two grounds were valid.

    (i) Failure by Government to modify the contract after the change in the VAT law; and 

    (ii) Failure by Government to issue an administrative order notifying the change in asphalt specifications within a reasonable time.

With regard to the change in the VAT law, Government, however, argued that that the change did not only affect Basil-Read Bouygues, but all contractors on similarly EU-funded projects. The other contractors agreed on the use of administrative orders as a means of addressing the imbalance and the change in the law.

Through these orders, the contractors got full compensation for the VAT payment. It was clear that Basil-Read Bouygues was not willing to spend its money first on the input VAT, proceed with the works and get refunds in due course.

With regard to change in asphalt specifications, Government averred that Basil-Read Bouygues preferred a more complicated route for modifying the contract, which would have entailed among other things, getting the amendments approved by EU Headquarters in Brussels as opposed to an administrative order that would only be endorsed by the Head of the EU Delegation in Kampala.

RAFU as the contract supervisor held several meetings with Basil-Read Bouygues and the latter was instructed to proceed with the changed asphalt specifications as had been agreed between it and RAFU.

However, Basil-Read Bouygues declined to carry on with the instructions from RAFU until they got a signed administrative order counter signed by the EU, which process would take time. Government considered this to be too rigid and unreasonable on BRB’s part as the established practice is that in order to avoid delay on the works and cause unnecessary costs, once the agreement is reached between the contractor and the supervisor, work proceeds pending finalisation of a formal administrative order. Government considered this as undue rigidity and a sign of lack of cooperation by BRB.

According to the submissions to PAC by the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications, Basil-Read Bouygues seemed to be spoiling for a fight in order to exit for possible lack of capacity to undertake the contract.

According to Government, the arbitration tribunal took the strict and rather unreasonable view of the situation, it relied on the evidence given by Mr Guy Rijcken, the then EU Deputy Head of Missions who stated that he was worried that it would not be easy for Government to find money to compensate BRB for change in a VAT law quickly and timely. It relied on the evidence that there was no provision in the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communication’s budget for that year to compensate for the imbalance. The tribunal then came to the conclusion that Government had failed to make timely and adequate provisions to compensate Basil-Read Bouygues. Government considered this as an incorrect and unfair conclusion as it had done all it could to address the issue and that it did not breach but acting in conformity with the requirements under Article 48.4 of the contract by making arrangements to compensate Bazil.

The Article provides thus: “In the event of changes to or introduction of any national state statute, ordinance, decree or other law or any regulation or by-law of any local or other public authority after the date stated in Article 48.3 which caused the change in the  contractual relationship between the parties to the contract, the contracting authority and the contractor shall consult on how best to proceed with the contract and may as a result of such consultation decide: a) to modify the contract; or b) on payment of compensation for the resulting balance by one party to the other; or c) to terminate the contract on mutually agreed terms.”

The situation was not helped by Mr Rijcken’s baseless evidence that Government would not find the money to compensate Basil-Read Bouygues yet the Ministry of Finance did in fact authorize the opening of special VAT accounts and put in money out of which VAT refunds to other contractors were made.

Consequently, the arbitration tribunal proceeded to assess losses, damages, interest and cost to award in favour of Basil-Read Bouygues. Basil-Read Bouygues had claimed 33,762,134.10 Euros as total loss, damages, interest, 4,239,230.83 Euros as legal costs and 1,250,000 Euros as arbitrator’s fee and costs all totaling 39,251,364.93 Euros.

Government opted for negotiated settlement rather than risk a second decision of the arbitration tribunal on appeal that would incur a further legal and arbitration costs. Under the arbitration law, no appeal can be made against the arbitral award except where there is proof of fraud, erroneous computation, misrepresentation or misconduct on the part of the arbitrators.

RAFU under the Ministry of Works, Housing and Transport constituted a legal team, on behalf of Government comprising of staff from the Attorney-General’s Chambers, M/s Corbett and Co. of UK, Kampala Associated Advocates and the Uganda National Roads Authority in-house Counsel, conducted initial negotiations in June 2009 and presented a negotiated position of 12.2 million Euros. Basil-Read Bouygues reduced their claim from 39.25 million Euros to 14.11 million Euros. The legal counsel from M/s Corbett and Co. of UK together with Kampala Associated Advocates were appointed by the Solicitor-General and endorsed by the EU Delegation to Uganda.

On 13 October 2009, the then Minister of Finance, hon. Syda Bbumba wrote to then Attorney-General, hon. Kiddhu Makubuya, stating that Basil-Read Bouygues had indicated that they would accept either of the following settlement options:

    a) Payment of 14 million Euros before 23 November 2009;
    b) Payment of 13 million Euros before 31 October 2009; or 
    c) Payment of 15 million Euros or possibly more depending on proposed date of payment if payment is made after the hearing date. 

Hon. Syda Bbumba indicated that it would be in the best interest of Government if payment of the lowest sum of 13 million Euros was made before 31 October 2009. She then requested for a no-objection to the payment of 13 million Euros before 31 October 2009. On 21 October 2009, hon. Kiddu Makubuya gave the no-objection to Government to pay the sum of 13 million Euros before the 31 October 2009, which was paid. No evidence came to the committee’s attention to indicate that the applicable taxes were paid on the damages and interest awarded in this case. 

PAC observations

The committee observed that there were anomalies in the award of the contract for the rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road to Basil-Read Bouygues. 

Basil-Read was contracted as a result of negotiations proposed by EU yet it had been found to be non-responsive by the evaluation committee.

Under the EU guidelines, Government was forced to enter into a contract with the lowest bidder that had been found to be non responsive. Basil-Read did not have the financial capacity to execute the contract and sought to use institutional weaknesses and change in the tax law to demand huge upward revisions in their bid price. Under the EU financing arrangement, there is no close liaison between the contracting authority and the implementing agency to execute the project. Supervision of the works was left to RAFU who were not effectively supervised by the parent Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications. This led to the delay in resolving technical issues that arose in execution of the contract and subsequently, resulted in termination by Basil-Read and compensation being awarded against Government.

RAFU under the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications failed to supply the contractor with the original project drawings and design data within the time prescribed in the contract.

Government failed to modify the contract after amendment of the VAT law. The amendment in the VAT statute was initiated by Government itself which should have considered the impact of the amendment on the contract and taken steps to mitigate possible financial consequences. 

RAFU under the Ministry of Works did not give the right asphalt specifications for the road in time. The committee finds RAFU and the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications at fault to engage a contractor and immediately change specifications. This was bound to result into delays, increased costs and possible litigation as it turned out to be.

The contract in question was signed in Uganda and Article 16 of the contract provided for arbitration to be conducted in the African Caribbean Pacific state in which the contract was awarded or performed. Therefore, the arbitration should have been conducted in Uganda. Instead Government yielded to the request by the arbitration tribunal to hold the hearing in London.

Whereas the place of arbitration was said to have been in London, the signed arbitration document indicate that the hearing was held in Uganda. This suggests that Government of Uganda was hoodwinked about the whole process.

Government legal representation seemed not to have put up a spirited defence. Solicitor-General hand-picked and contracted private lawyers in Uganda namely Kampala Associated Advocates and in the UK, Corbett & Co. without following PPDA regulations at a great cost to the taxpayer to the sum of 1.09 million Euros. It is difficult to establish whether the taxpayer obtained value for money from this representation.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that:

i. 	Government should ensure that the people of Uganda get maximum value for any assistance provided by development partners in line with established legal and regulatory frameworks in place. This should include harmonising the assistance in line with our national interest and development priorities.

ii. 	Government should ensure that assistance from development partners respect national institutions and regulation frameworks for effective contracting and supervision. 

iii. 	Government should ensure that future changes in its policy with regard to taxation should consider likely consequences on existing contracts to avoid breach and to minimise losses.

vi. 	Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications takes responsibility for failing to effectively supervise RAFU who in turn failed to avail changed asphalt specifications in time which led to the contractor abandoning the contract and suing Government.

v. 	The contracting authority, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, takes responsibility for failing to take adequate administrative steps in time to resolve the issues that arose following the change in the VAT statute.
 
vi 	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs takes responsibility for failing to effectively manage the arbitration process to the effect that Government agreed to the hearing being held outside African Caribbean Pacific region and that Government’s own witness from the European Union which had initiated the negotiation to contract Basil-Read testifying against Government leading to the arbitration award being made against Government.

vii 	The Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should ensure that it has competent legal representation to defend cases filed against Government in courts of law. The committee recommends that all Government negotiations should be led by the Attorney-General as the chief legal advisor.

Madam Speaker, honourable members, attached is the list of members of the committee who appended their signatures to the report. There are a number of appendices that I wish to lay on Table to support our report.

The Appendix I, is the list of names of witnesses that appeared before the committee. They are 19 of them. I beg to lay Appendix I. I beg to lay.

Appendix II is the agreement signed between Government and Basil-Read for the rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road. This is the contract - Appendix II. I beg to lay.

Appendix III is a financing agreement between European Commission and the Republic of Uganda, that availed funding to finance the contract. I beg to lay.

Appendix IV is the clearance of the contract by the Solicitor-General’s Office dated 16 January 2004; “Contract for Rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road Project Account.” I beg to lay.

Appendix V is a list of bidders that were received and opened on 4 June 2003 signed by Mr Francis Byaruhanga on behalf of RAFU, who was chairman of evaluation committee. I beg to lay.

Appendix VI is a list of items that were found to be non-responsive in the BRB bid that was to be negotiated with the EU and RAFU. I beg to lay.

Appendix VII is the revised contract offered to Basil-Read Bouygues of Shs 99,106,999,586 for the rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road. I beg to lay.

Appendix VIII is a loose minute from Mr Oluka Henry, Senior State Attorney, Ministry of Justice, the Acting Solicitor-General, indicating the legal position, and the issues raised by Basil-Read Bouygues in their termination of the agreement. I beg to lay.

I beg to lay Appendix IX, which is a notice of intention to terminate by the contracting party, the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury/Deputy National Authorising Officer addressed to Basil-Read Bouygues, dated 17 January 2005 to terminate the contract. 

I beg to lay Appendix X, which is the legal review and report from the consultants Shadbolt & Co. advising Government on the position with regard to the Basil-Read Bouygues termination. 

Appendix XI is the letter from the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to Treasury and Deputy National Authorising Officer addressed to the bank in South Africa to call in the advance payment guarantee to Basil-Read Bouygues of Shs 760 million and Euros 2.9 million. This is dated 25 January 2005, Appendix XI. I beg to lay.

Appendix XII is a letter from the then Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Syda Bbumba, to the honourable Minister of Justice and Attorney-General, dated 13 October 2009.  It is indicating the offer for final settlement from Basil-Read Bouygues. I beg to lay.

Appendix XIII is the response from the then Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, hon. Dr Khiddu Makubuya, addressed to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, dated 21 October 2009, offering no objection to the settlement of the claim at Euros 13 million. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, that is the report of the Public Accounts Committee on Government compensation payment to Basil-Read Bouygues for rehabilitation of Jinja-Bugiri Road in the financial year 2009/2010. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Again, thank you Chair and the members of the Public Accounts Committee for the second report. I think we have received enough information today. We should digest it and then we can commence debate next week. So, kindly look through all the items, and of course, we have something pending on an amendment which should be done on Tuesday and then we shall go to these other things.
The House is adjourned to 2.00 p.m. on Tuesday. Thank you. 

(House rose at 7.58 p.m. and was adjourned until Tuesday, 12 February 2013 at 2.00 p.m.)
