

Friday, 24 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.22 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. We are sitting under unusual circumstances because one of our colleagues has died. However, I would like to thank you for supporting the family for all these days.

I would like to announce the following messages:

    1. There is a message from the Chairperson of Acholi Parliamentary Group, Prof. Ogenga Latigo to the family.

    2. The NRM candidates for EALA; hon. Musamali, hon. Akol, hon. Namara, hon. Mugyenyi, hon. Odongo and hon. Mathias Kasamba have enclosed Shs 1 million as contribution towards the funeral.

    3. Hon. Bigirwa, on behalf of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association; they send their condolences and they have contributed Shs 300,000.

    4. The Democratic Party headquarters, through the Office of the Secretary General, also send their condolences and pray that her soul rests in eternal peace.

    5. Hon. Lucy Akello, the Chairperson of the Catholic Parliamentary Chaplaincy, on behalf of the chaplaincy, have contributed Shs 300,000 and they have sent a message of condolence and support to the family.

    6. Uganda Association of Sacred Heart Alumni; these are the old girls of Kangole SS and Kalungu GTC, under this umbrella, have sent a condolence message of Shs 100,000.

    7. Hon. Tinkasiimire, on behalf of the Bunyoro caucus, has sent their message of condolence. You will be informed about the amount of money later.

    8. Hon. Ruth Nankabirwa Sentamu, the Government Chief Whip where hon. Annie belongs, has also sent a condolence message and a sum of Shs 1 million to the family towards burial expenses.

Thank you very much. We will read the other messages as they come in. [A Member rose] There is no procedure today. 

Hon. Benard Atiku, on behalf of the West Nile Group, has also sent a condolence message. They say they have contributed  Shs 1.4 million to support the family. I also declare a free sitting today. (Applause)

(Entrance of the late hon. Annie Logiel)

National Anthem

East African Community Anthem

Laying of wreaths

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. ANNIE LOGIEL, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE FOR MOROTO DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before the Prime Minister presents the motion to the House, I would like to announce a condolence message from the Teso Parliamentary Group and they have contributed Shs 2.5 million. 

I would also like to present a condolence message from hon. Chris Opoka.

We also have a message from the Buganda Parliamentary Caucus. They have contributed Shs 500,000. 

We have a message from the Parliamentarians SACCO where Annie Logiel was a member. They have contributed Shs 1 million.

The Busoga Parliamentary Group has contributed Shs 2 million. 

In the Public Gallery, join me in welcoming EALA candidates: hon. Mathias Kasamba, hon. Rose Akol, hon. Mary Mugenyi, hon. Paul Musamali, hon. Denis Namara, and hon. George Odong.

I would also like you to welcome hon. Susan Nakawuki, hon. Mariam Nalubega and hon. Ibi Ekwau, also candidates of the East African Legislative Assembly.

Let us also welcome hon. Amanya Mushega, former Minister of Education and Sports; hon. Anthony Butele, the ten-point programme; hon. John Emily Otekat, a former Member of Parliament; hon. Rose Lilly Akullu, hon. Benson Obua, former Member of Parliament and candidate of the East African Legislative Assembly and hon. Mukasa Mbidde, candidate of the East African Legislative Assembly.
Honourable members, sometimes we take certain things for granted but on behalf of the House and the country, I would like to thank the Clerk and her team. Our colleague passed on outside the country and of course we are lucky that we have our ambassador in Denmark who helped in the coordination. Otherwise, it would have been very hard to coordinate it. 

Nevertheless, we would like to thank the Clerk for all the arrangements she made in bringing Annie back. We would also like to thank her for her simultaneous support to the home in Entebbe and in Moroto. It is really a long process. So I want to thank her and the Parliamentary Commission for that.

Let me now invite the Rt hon. Prime Minister to move the motion.   

2.53
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Annie Logiel for her dedicated service to the nation. I am moving this motion under rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of this august House.

“WHEREAS Parliament learnt with sadness of the death of hon. Annie Logiel, the Woman Member of Parliament for Moroto District, which occurred on 14 February 2017 at the Rigshospitalet Hospital in Copenhagen, Denmark;

AND WHEREAS the late hon. Annie Logiel was born on 27 March 1968 at Nakapelimen village, Nadunget sub-county , Moroto District to Peter Epuyo and Margaret Munyes and held a Masters' Degree in International Health from the University of Copenhagen, Denmark, a Bachelor of Nursing Sciences from the International Health Sciences University in Kampala and a Diploma in Nursing and Midwifery at Nsambya School of Nursing and an enrolled Nursing Certificate from St Kizito Hospital, Matany and a Diploma in Public Administration from Uganda Christian University as well as a Uganda Certificate of Education from Kangole Girls Secondary School in Moroto and;

FURTHER WHEREAS the late hon. Annie Logiel will be remembered for founding the Karamoja Indigenous and Modern Health Collaboration Project, which has been playing an important role especially in the improvement of mother and child health in the Karamoja sub-region;

RECOGNISING that the late Annie Logiel served as a Senior Nursing Officer in Moroto Regional Referral Hospital from 2OO2 to 2015 and prior to that, as a Nursing Officer at Nadunget Health Centre III and at Kololo Hospital in Kampala;

APPRECIATING that at the time of her demise, the late Logiel was an elected Member of the Tenth Parliament of Uganda where she served as Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Health, Vice-Chairperson of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group and as a member of the Committee on HIV/AIDS;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:
    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda upon the loss of hon. Annie Logiel, this distinguished daughter of Uganda.
    2. That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated services rendered and contribution made by the late hon. Annie Logiel to her community, to the Tenth Parliament and to the people of Uganda.
    3. That this Parliament collectively prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved and grant our departed colleague and friend, hon. Annie Logiel, eternal peace.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded by several Members in the House. Rt hon. Prime Minister, you can make your justification. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, we are here again, on another sad occasion, to pay tribute to our colleague, hon. Annie Logiel, who passed away in Denmark on 14 February 2017. 

In hon. Logiel, we have lost a strong legislator whom the country still had a lot to benefit from, this having been her first term in this very august House. We have lost a well-trained and committed health worker who had a deep passion for improving health services in the country, especially in the Karamoja region.  

Madam Speaker, right from her early years of service, hon. Logiel dedicated her life to serving the nation as a health worker. Her service at Kololo Hospital as a nursing officer, Moroto District Hospital and later referral hospital as a senior nursing officer are spoken about with gratitude by both her workmates and the people that she nursed.

In an effort to advance health care in her region, hon. Logiel founded Karamoja Indigenous and Modern Health Care Collaboration Project, an initiative that champions improved maternal and health care. 

Madam Speaker, born to Peter Epuyo and Margaret Munyes in Nakapelimen village, Nadunget sub-county in Moroto District on 27 March 1968, hon. Logiel started school in 1976 at Lotome Girls Primary School and proceeded to Kangole Girls Secondary School for her Uganda Certificate of Education, which she completed in 1986. She later enrolled for a nursing course at St. Kizito Hospital Matany in 1987.

She later went to Nsambya Nursing School for a Diploma in Nursing and Midwifery in 2001 and obtained a Diploma in Public Administration from Uganda Christian University in 2010.

Madam Speaker, hon. Logiel endeavored to set a good example to the children and young people in Moroto and Karamoja by advancing further her pursuit of academic excellence through obtaining a Degree in Nursing Sciences from The International Health Sciences University and a Masters of International Health from the University of Copenhagen in Denmark. These academic achievements clearly demonstrate her determination to advance her career and to provide the urgently needed health services to the people of Uganda.

Hon. Logiel's credentials were a solid foundation for her role as a Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Health and member of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters in this Parliament.

Hon. Logiel has been supporting a number of children from her community to attain education through a bursary scheme she personally established. She has clearly been a leading light in Moroto, Karamoja and in the country. Her services and contribution will be greatly missed.

Madam Speaker, the information we have received indicates that in 2004, while studying in Denmark, hon. Logiel experienced vision loss. An MRI was conducted and it showed the presence of a brain tumor. She thereafter underwent surgery and the tumor was successfully removed. She had no complications in relation to that until October 2016, when she started complaining of severe headache and loss of her vision again.

On 2 November 2016, she visited Uganda Cancer Institute and underwent another MRI scan, which revealed a relapse of the brain tumor. On 18 January 2017, she left for Denmark and underwent surgery. However, after l0 days, she felt headache, collapsed and was taken back to hospital from where she died on 14th February 2017.

We would like to extend our gratitude to the family for nurturing such an outstanding and industrious daughter. We share in the grief of this loss with the widower, Mr Eric Jors, the family, friends, colleagues and the nation at large. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, the Rt hon. Prime Minister. Honourable members, I want you to join me in welcoming her immediate family, her husband; Mr Eric Jors, her daughter Diana Lamongin who is 18 years old and her son Jordan Jagal who is 12 years. We thank them for supporting her.

3.06
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (MS WINFRED KIIZA): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, we gather here once again on a sad day. On behalf of the Opposition, both in and outside Parliament, together with the people of Kasese whom I represent in this Parliament, I rise to second the motion moved by the Prime Minister for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to hon. Annie Logiel, a woman of special tribute, dedicated health worker and a personality many Members would have wished to associate with much longer.

Colleagues, it is so sad that Annie has lived her life like a candle in the wind. I met her two weeks before Parliament opened. Hajjat Rehamah Kasule had invited me at a mentorship session in Ridar Hotel. I had gone there to mentor new Members of Parliament.

In that mentorship session, I was requested to be the Speaker of a mock Parliament. When the session ended, Annie came to me and said, “You have been a very wonderful speaker, as we go to Parliament, would you have intentions of contesting for the Office of the Speaker?” I replied that I have a candidate and she wanted to know who my candidate was.

She said that I would make a nice Speaker. I told her that I already have a candidate and that I would tell her later. When she was sworn in, she came and asked me to vote for Rt hon. Kadaga. I replied that I would because that was the candidate I was talking about. Surprisingly, she was also asking for the vote of Muhammad Nsereko. I told her that she was voting the same people I was voting. I told her, “I am the one going to second the nomination of hon. Muhammad Nsereko. So, we are together.”

I saw a courageous woman in Annie. She was quiet but steady in whatever she was doing. She was polite in dealing with each one of us. 

Annie has gone too soon. There is a lot that the people of Moroto expected from Annie. She had a motherly heart. To each one of us, she had a sweet word to keep you moving. Madam Speaker, you cannot believe it that Annie had 106 children under her scholarship programme and all were under her shoulders.

One of the children collapsed when she heard of Annie’s death. She commented that she did not know her next move because Annie was her only hope. We are saying goodbye to this woman. It is unfortunate that death has robbed us of a mother, friend and a people’s representative whom everybody would have wished to stay with longer.

Something I noted about Annie is that she was ready to learn. She would always come and say, “In case I moved this way, what would happen?” She was not so much bothered about political sides. All she wanted was development for her people.

Under her project which the Prime Minister talked about, she was determined to see mothers give birth to healthy babies and they remain alive. She lobbied for mother kits under her slogan of, “Help them today to live a happier tomorrow.” This is the woman we are seeing going just like that.

In her own way, she thought education should also be extended to the rural poor. Even when we know that it is hard for Government to take care of the people even when there is what they have called Universal Secondary Education, it is not really universal because there are some poor people whose children are very bright but they cannot afford the small money that is being asked for in Government schools. Annie took it upon herself to ensure that the poorest of the poor who are bright can still access education.

I would pray that people of good will, well-wishers around the world take up her initiative of seeing the poor people from Karamoja sub region access quality education so that we help them today to have a better tomorrow, which Annie has been struggling for. 

She believed in changing the environment where she is, so that she leaves it better than she found it. I found that very extra-ordinary about Annie. I have not been with her for a long time but in that shortest time that is what I saw in her. 

She was a star to many; being a health worker, Annie believed in quality health for all Ugandans. I would pray that as we pay tribute to Annie, let us reconsider our health system.

It is true that we have very many health centres around but the majority of them are ill equipped. Let this moment bring us to the reality that better healthcare is critical for a healthy nation. 

As we put up health centres, we should ensure that the ones that are where hon. Annie belonged are fully equipped and the workers are well paid. She called for better service to the health workers; and better service for the nation is a pay rise; better working conditions that they can be able to give a better service to the Ugandans.

Annie, you played your part even in the shortest time we have been with you here in Parliament. You proved that even in the shortest time much can be accomplished. Although we expected more from you as we continue to discuss the budget; we thought that we would tap into her expertise as a health worker maybe to advocate for increment in the health subsector. You are all aware that when the budget framework paper was being discussed here, we realised that cuts were made in the health sub sector; and this was the sector where she had all her passion. It is unfortunate that we are going to discuss this budget when she is not alive.

That is a call to you who are here who are friends of Annie, to talk about improvement of the health sub sector of this country so that many of our people stop dying at the hands of ill-facilitated health workers; dying in hospitals that are ill-equipped - then we shall know that Annie has left a legacy.

We would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda and specifically you, Madam Speaker, for enabling us to assemble here to say bye to our friend.

We would like to tell the family that you are not alone, our Lord is with you and the friends of Annie will always be there with you. Diana and Jordan you have your mother’s friends. They will always be there because Annie had many friends. 

It is sometimes hard that when we have friends and we pass on they forget our families, children. I call upon you colleagues; Annie has left a young family which needs the support of friends. I would like to thank all of you for coming today; it is a weekend.

When I look at the numbers in the House, it speaks volumes. (Laughter) Many people are supposed to be in their constituencies but they did not go; they said, “Let us go and see our friend off.”

Sometimes when we are saying bye to our colleagues, I keep asking myself what will happen on that day when people are speaking about me. What will they speak? I sometimes imagine myself on that coffin and someday it will happen but it may not be today. 

Many times when we are dealing with humanity we should begin making those imaginations. What will they stand up to say, will they say good riddance, or they will rise here to say that she was a hard working woman, she was really one of our own.

There are some who die and you begin patching up words to find what to speak about them. Some of us are even forced to lie by saying, “The person was good, we are going to miss the person.” When deep down in your heart you know that what you have talked is a lie.

However, Annie was a woman of high moral standards that anybody would have wished to stay longer with. Annie, God gave you to us and he is the same who has taken you. I know one day we shall meet you. May your soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition. As I invite hon. Anita Amongi, I would like to recognise hon. Norbert Mao, President General of the Democratic Party; hon. Blacks Siranda, Secretary General of the Democratic Party; Mr Kennedy Oluma, Secretary General of the Uganda Federal Alliance and hon. Pulkol David.

3.17
MS ANITA AMONG (Independent, Woman Representative, Bukedea): Madam Speaker, allow me second the motion of a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to hon. Annie Logiel for her dedicated service to the nation. 

Today, we are here to mourn and to remember the life of Annie; I bring condolences from the people of Bukedea to the Karamoja Parliamentary Group, the people of Karamoja and to the whole nation; this is a national loss.

Annie who has been in Parliament less than one year has left us and we are here to mourn and remember the good works she has done for her people in Karamoja and for the people of this nation as you have already heard from the mover of the motion.

I came to know Annie when we had just joined this Parliament. I can proudly say that I have been one of her best friends. And we have been working as a team as new Members of Parliament.

For the time we have known her since she joined Parliament, Annie was full of humility and was blessed with the charisma that she would not want to hurt anybody. She was such a lady that would not want to even hurt a fly; we must thank God for that kind of a person.

Annie who is lying down here was a very reliable legislator, very consistent - if she told you in the morning that she would do something, in the afternoon she would tell you the same thing and before dawn it would be the same again - very consistent. Most of you will bear me witness on this.

She was a team player as you have already said. She was that kind of person who believed in working with her colleagues. People who have worked with Annie in the various committees will confirm that. As legislatures, we should learn something from the late. 

As a trained health practitioner, Annie was a very neat person; she was very organised in everything that she did. She was so neat that you wished to be like her. At one time, I asked her; “Annie what makes you organised like this,” she told me it was by training.

When you reach her office, you find order and that explains why when she was going for treatment, she organised her office saying, “I am going and I do not know whether I will come back. If I come back, we shall thank God for it.” Those were own words.

Annie, who is before us here, was a great lady. She was very wonderful. Being a great and wonderful lady could have been the reason why the Government Chief Whip and the NRM Government made her the Vice-Chairperson of the Committee on Health. She was really great.

I would like to tell the legislators who are here that today it is Annie and tomorrow it is somebody else. I would plead with the legislators here tonight that we get united and bring up those young children Annie has left. We need to give the moral and any other support that would bring up those children. Those children belong to us. The same way we have come here today in this big number is the same way we should still work together and bring up those children.
Madam Speaker, we must thank the Parliament of Uganda for what they have done from the day Annie died up to now. There is nothing we can do as friends of Annie and as Members of Parliament. We can only say, “Thank you.” (Applause)

Annie, you were born a child of light and you return to the beauty that you have always been. I will always have you in my mind and remember your genuine smile. Annie, you have fought a good fight. 

May your soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Annita Among. There is a message from the Board of Trustees of the Parliamentary Pension Scheme, where Annie was a member. They give their condolences and request the family at an appropriate time to contact them. However, I think I will instruct the Clerk to write to the family and detail whatever benefits are available so that they do not have to run around checking. Clerk, you write to inform them about her savings and what is available in the Parliamentary Pensions Scheme.

Honourable members, the movers have moved the motion. The rest of you will have three minutes each. I would like to invite the Chairperson of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. It will be followed by a representative of the Chairperson of the Committee on Health, the Minister for Karamoja Affairs and then others will follow.

3.25
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON HIV/AIDS AND RELATED MATTERS (Ms Judith Alyek): Madam Speaker, we are gathered here today for the thing that God has done amidst us. We are very saddened about the death of our colleague, the late hon. Annie Logiel who has been a Member of Parliament for Moroto District. Annie has been a Member of my committee, the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters, where I am the chairperson.  

For the short time I interacted with Annie, I have known her as a dedicated Member and very close to us on issues that affect this country in as far as HIV/AIDS is concerned. We will miss her. We are also going to miss the bravery in her. Annie had been deliberating with us very well. She never missed any meeting that we organised for the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters. For that matter, honourable members, I would like to say that we have missed a great person, a friend, a mother and a very useful legislator. 

We pray for her family – children and husband – as well as friends that have been equally touched like we have been touched today. 

When I heard about the death of Annie, I could not believe Annie had a problem. I did not know Annie had a brain tumour. It took me by surprise when I saw Members of Parliament in our various platforms – the WhatsApp platform of the Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters as well as the WhatsApp platform of the Committee on Health – when we heard that she was sick and in critical condition. I could not believe what I read. Annie was ever patient. She was tolerant. She did not go about sharing with everybody what she was going through –(Member timed out.)

3.28
MR HERBERT KINOBERE (Independent, Kibuku County, Kibuku): Madam Speaker, I am standing in for the chairperson of the Committee on Health, the same committee where we have been sitting with hon. Logiel.

On behalf of the Committee, allow me convey this message to my colleagues. It was hard for us as the committee to believe on the 14th when we learnt about the death of our dear colleague, hon. Annie Logiel. It is very sad that she has left us.
Madam Speaker, Annie gave us a very strong hope that all would be well as she got treatment abroad. She was looking forward to returning home to carry on with her duties as a Member of Parliament.

Hon. Annie asked each of us to pray for her. We moved with her in the bus and she asked us to pray for her. As a committee, we all prayed for her and we had hope that she would come back, not knowing that maybe we were bidding her farewell.

We shall miss Annie but we are sure that at one time we shall meet. Psalms 26:1-2 says: “Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted also in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide. Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.” 

We shall miss you, Annie. May your soul rest in eternal peace. As Committee of Health, we have contributed Shs 2,168,000 to help with the burial expenses. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.31
THE MINISTER OF KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the Ministry of Karamoja Affairs and on behalf of the people of Ibanda South, I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to hon. Annie Logiel, Woman Member of Parliament for Moroto District.

Hon. Logiel had a very unique character and braveness. I interacted with her recently at Nadugent Health Centre III and that is when she told all she had gone through to reach where she is now. She had a unique character in the sense that many people from Karamoja region are still lagging behind compared to other regions. When they obtain education, they tend not to go back to serve their people. Immediately after her studies in Nsambya, hon. Logiel decided to go back and serve her people at Matany Hospital in Napak and that was the time when Karamoja was on fire. It was a no go area but because of her braveness, she decided to go and serve her people. Hon. Logiel loves her people. She continued to Moroto Hospital and served her people. When I met her at Nadugent, we were actually immunising the children and she was participating in this exercise. This is the character the people of Karamoja have lost. To lose such a person from an area like Karamoja is a heavy blow. That kind of braveness and kindness to pay school fees for others; it is really unique among all of us.

Madam Speaker, therefore, as we pay tribute to hon. Logiel, I would like to extend our prayers to the family and to the people of Karamoja. I usually quote this whenever I am concluding my eulogy that they may find comfort in the words of Job 1:21. “The Lord gave and the Lord has taken away. May the Name of the Lord be praised.”  
May her soul rest in eternal peace.

3.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Ms Jenipher Namuyangu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the fallen heroine, hon. Logiel. We have lost a humble person and an icon in the health sector.

At the Ministry of Local Government, we are grappling with challenges of staffing levels in some of the local governments. Districts like Amudat have only 23 per cent staffing level in the health sector. A person like Annie even after going through the ranks from the level of Enrolled Nurse to someone holding a Master’s Degree in the health sector to choose to remain in Karamoja, we have lost a selfless person, very patriotic and a person who had passion to serve the people of Uganda.

I used to meet Annie in the corridors of this Parliament and she would ask me, “Honourable minister, when are you giving us our sub counties? When are you making Moroto a city?”  I would tell her that I will start with your village and also make it a city and she would laugh.

We have lost a colleague. It is very unfortunate we all know that having gone through elections, it was not easy. Hardly seven months, hon. Annie is no more. It is very painful. However, as I was mourning, I realised that God’s plans are not our plans. 

May hon. Annie Logiel’s soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the standing Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Matters is contributing Shs 1.3 million to the family. 

3.37
MR JOHN BAPTIST LOKII (NRM, Matheniko County, Moroto): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion that this Parliament pays tribute to our fallen colleague hon. Annie Logiel. I would like to thank the movers and seconders of the motion that we pay tribute to the daughter of this country.

On behalf of the people of Matheniko County, I would like to sincerely send condolences to the bereaved family; the relatives, friends and in-laws for the demise of our sister. The death of our sister occurred at the time when this country needed her services most.

Madam Speaker, I met hon. Annie Logiel even before she joined Parliament. I have known her as a hardworking person. She has demonstrated this in her work and in whatever she says. Indeed, it is very sad to lose such a person when she has just served this nation for less than a year. It is very sad to lose her at the time when she was just settling to serve this country better. 

Hon. Annie Logiel has departed. However, I would like to highlight the achievements and the services she has left behind to the people of Moroto especially, in the health sub sector. Hon. Annie Logiel was an innovative person. Her innovation was seen when she formed a local NGO that is trying to bring the interface between traditional medicine and modern medicine particularly, to address the plight of the children and the mothers of Uganda –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute.

MR LOKII: She formed a local NGO, which is serving the people of Moroto District. We have lost her and it is painful. We have also lost a hardworking and generous person. A person who would share the little she earns with the community and people who are in need. This was part of her passion to give back to her community. She demonstrated this by extending the bursaries to over 100 students in Matheniko County, Moroto District. How many of us can do that? We do it, but hon. Logiel had done it more.

Sincerely, we shall miss hon. Annie Logiel. I would like to thank the Government for the support they extended to hon. Annie Logiel and her family in meeting the burial expenses, medical and repatriation bills. We are humbled by this support. We thank the Members of Parliament who gave both moral and financial supports to hon. Logiel and her family when she was hospitalised in Copenhagen. I would like to –(Member timed out.)

3.42
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to also support the motion moved by the Prime Minister. Honourable members of Parliament, these are moments when even a great orator has no fully prepared speech. I did not expect to lose a sister in the Tenth Parliament. As I talked to someone about the issue of the budget some time, I wondered how many Members of Parliament would die in this term. But also it never came to my memory that my sister would be the first to go back to the Lord.

Hon. Annie Logiel happened to be my maternal cousin. Her father’s and my mother’s names are the same. They were named after one person. When we came to Parliament, we became closer than we were before. 

We used to move together every day in the same car from Entebbe to Parliament. We would, a daily on basis, talk how we were going to come back to Parliament for more than three terms. But we didn’t know because the people of Karamoja can’t vote someone for only one term. I bear this a witness because most of my other colleagues have been voted to Parliament more than two terms. She had just tasted it but the Lord said it was her turn to join him. 

She was a courageous and selfless friend. We definitely heard about the people she was sponsoring. Hon. Logiel has left a very big gap; it is irrecoverable. Nobody can pick that position in their family. She was a bread winner and the most educated girl in their family. She had the zeal to help the family. 

When she passed on a week ago, I didn’t believe it until yesterday afternoon, when I saw her casket being lowered from the plane. We never slept last night, including the children especially the young boy. We all stayed awake up to morning and the boy kept asking us whether she would wake up. This is what we went through last night. We never slept, as a family, because it was yesterday that we believed it was true she was no longer with us.

She struggled against poor health. She wished for all good health, but unfortunately, she has lost hers. Death is quite unwanted, but superior. It is God we always run to when it occurs. 

I extend my gratitude to the Government of Uganda, the institution of Parliament, the staff of Parliament and Members of Parliament who were with us yesterday at the tarmac and Members of Parliament from Karamoja. 

Every day, from the time Logiel passed away, we kept meeting to see how we could have our sister buried decently and we had no idea. However, the support Parliament has given us, as Karamoja, is beyond our expectations. We just do not know how to say, thank you. (Applause)

Her husband and I can attest to it. Her husband told me yesterday he couldn’t believe what the Government of Uganda had offered Annie. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, as hon. Ongom comes to contribute, just for your planning, the body will leave Kampala tomorrow at 8 o’clock. It will be airlifted to Moroto. There is going to be a council session in the Moroto Municipal’s Chamber, tomorrow morning. There will be Mass at Nawowi Catholic Mission. Then, there will be a vigil at Nadunget Village and burial will be on Sunday at 2 p.m. Therefore, Parliament has set aside some transport: one bus will leave today and six buses will leave tomorrow. Therefore, those who are going to Moroto should assemble here tomorrow at 8 o’clock in the morning.

I would like to announce a contribution of Shs 1 million from hon. Anita Among.

3.47
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to pay tribute to hon. Annie Logiel. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Annie Logiel was the Vice Chairperson of the Committee on Health of which I am a member. Hon. Annie Logiel was sincerely a unique person. She was humble and someone who was so passionate about health issues. I remember when we moved with Annie to the health centres to do monitoring, even if Members wanted to go to the next room, Annie would still remain asking questions to understand what the situation was. 

She was somebody so joyous. We moved with her to the East and I recall hon. Mbwatekamwa was with us. While on our trip, somebody nicknamed hon. Mbwatekamwa as Mbwateluma. But throughout the trip, Annie kept saying that that was the only Luganda word she had learnt. She made us laugh throughout that trip. 

Amidst her pain, Annie could smile. She asked us as a committee to pray for her because she needed to undergo a surgery in Denmark even though she wasn’t a citizen there. We told her God would pave a way for her.

As a committee, we didn’t know she had such a great pain. When we asked her what it was, she told us she had a tumour. Madam Speaker, it was sad for us to realise on WhatsApp that Annie had passed on. 

I am sorry, but rumour moving around the corridor is that the medical board, somehow tried to delay her movement. I would like to appeal that we deserve better. Once a Member has such problems, can we see a way of supporting him or her, as fast as possible? Death is there. Today is Annie, tomorrow is some other person. There is that song that says that, “This world is not our home; we are just passers-by”. Annie has passed-by. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

3.51
PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO (FDC, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As Chairperson of Acholi Parliamentary Group and members of that group, we formally wrote our condolence message. 

However, allow me take a brief moment to share with Members what came to my mind when we were having the requiem Mass for hon. Annie Logiel in the church. 

In life, death of significant people is a sign that people must reflect on. For members who do not know, hon. Annie Logiel is the second Karimojong to die in Parliament. 

In the Eighth Parliament, the first Member of Parliament to die was hon. Mark Ark Lodo. He passed away when we were just settling in Parliament - (Interjection) - I apologise. Now, before the end of the Tenth Parliament, another Karimojong becomes the first Member of Parliament to die. We pray that this bad coincidence ends for Karamoja with hon. Annie Logiel.  

Second, Madam Speaker, nobody expected the kind of rain that fell this morning. It literally disrupted very many people from attending Mass on time. These heavy rainfalls, when we are celebrating the life of someone whose community is under severe distress because of drought - we truly have to reflect on that. As hon. Logiel goes to the Lord, we pray that she asks the Lord to bless Karamoja abundantly with rain.

Third, not long ago, we eulogized a distinguished medical practitioner, Dr Margret Mungherera, and today we are again eulogizing the death of a distinguished medical practitioner. It says something about our health services. The Leader of Opposition has already mentioned something about that and as a country we must think about it.

Finally, last night I was listening to BBC and there was a programme where a very distinguished academic professor from Yale and others, were discussing about a smile as a scientific phenomenon - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Amongin comes, the honourable member raised something about delay in getting clearance from the medical board. We have been complaining about this matter as Parliament. I know that when the honourable member informed me, I informed the Clerk to Parliament. We wrote, however, we are not allowed to send money to a hospital abroad without the medical board. That is the problem we have, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

I do not know whether the requests by the members can be fast-tracked but also other Ugandans need theirs to be fast-tracked. I do not know what we can do. Is there bureaucracy that sometimes they do not meet and if they do not meet, no one takes action? I do not know how you can help us.

3.55
MS JACQUELINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, on behalf of the people of Ngora and on my behalf, to add a voice to the voices of colleagues who have already spoken about hon. Annie Logiel’ life. I also would like to add my voice to the voices of all the other members of Parliament from Karamoja especially the women who are our aunts and so dear because we have a special name for them “Ija”, meaning aunt.

When you called the late hon. Annie Longiel “Ija”, she would just smile and the best she could always do was to hug. I remember that great lady, although she has been in this House briefly. She had a vision and a passion for health. Even when we would raise issues of health in this House, she would say, my niece, raise a voice on health. 

Therefore, today as we celebrate her life, it is very imperative for us members - who are privileged to speak for the vulnerable in this House - to take this opportunity while still living to rise our concerns and see how we can change issues passionate  to us especially health issues.

Madam Speaker, in Uganda we still have very many issues relating to health despite all the relevant laws and declarations, including the Abuja Declaration that gives prioritisation to health. We have tried but we need to try further as Members of this Parliament because when we lose our own that are here - I imagine that a person who becomes a Member of Parliament is privileged. When you are here, I imagine that you represent the other person who is not heard in any way. 

Yes, my sister and aunt died in Denmark but I do not think that the other children in Aguu village, where I hail from, can have an opportunity to be taken abroad. We talk about cancer - we do not have a cancer machine at Mulago Hospital yet there are so many patients out there who need this service.

We are talking about brain tumours - I am dreaming about a situation where at one time, we will remember hon. Annie Logiel’s concerns and address basic health issues.
 
First, majority of Ugandans need information about cancer. Many of them just want a machine to - sometimes even checking for oxygen in our health centres IV can be very hard.

Honourable colleagues, as we lay our sister to rest, we are celebrating her life because she has already, within the nine months that she has been in this House, shown where her passion was. 

Therefore, as members who are still here with a voice to speak to fulfil her dreams, let us rise to the occasion and make hon. Logiel happy wherever she will be by raising concerns and if we cannot try, let us try harder because I know there is –(Member timed out.)

3.59
MR FELIX OKOT-OGONG (NRM, Dokolo South County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I stand here, on behalf of Members of Parliament from Lango and entire Lango Sub Region and the country, to sincerely express our sympathy and condolences to the people of Karamoja, the people Uganda and Parliament of Uganda upon the loss of my cousin and our cousin, hon. Annie Logiel.

Madam Speaker, just know that all the people from Karamoja are our cousins. The word “Karamoja” or “Karimojong” means old people who remained behind. They remained behind but our fore fathers stepped ahead of them. Therefore, they are our cousins; we belong to the Ateker clan and we are together.

Madam Speaker, as we mourn our sister and pay tribute to her, there are three things that I would like Members of Parliament to ponder upon. 

One, I know the people of Karamoja and Lango are very enduring. They live and survive for long. However, when you see a Member of Parliament and people from Karamoja suffering from cancer, then that is a point we need to consider.

Madam Speaker, from the record that we have, Uganda is one of the countries that have very high incidents of cancer, ranking as third in the whole world and we must consider that.

Madam Speaker, there are many issues that we need to consider, as Members of Parliament.  We need to look at the standards of the goods that we consume. As you may be aware, all the supermarkets are stocked with many products that are not inspected. Many of our industries are producing products that are not controlled yet we consume them. 

Madam Speaker, this is very serious. We have Uganda National Bureau of Standards with no resources. They have no capacity to control or monitor what we consume. Therefore, honourable members, I believe from today, we should stand firm and make clear contributions to the agency that we have mandated to monitor and control whatever we eat.

Madam Speaker, I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament that in the next national Budget, we consider giving money; not just the small monies that we always allocate and we allocate money where we should not. His Excellency has always quoted the Bible thus: “Do what…” - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, concerning the issue of Uganda National Bureau of Standards, the Minister of Trade has been on the Floor of this House, for three financial years, complaining that she does not have inspectors at all the border points. I think if we are to help the country, we need to support that ministry to get sufficient capacity because most of the border points are not monitored; people just roll in and out.

4.03
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri West County, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I met my former colleague, hon. Annie Logiel, when I was a Leader of the Opposition and at that time I was visiting Moroto Hospital. She was a good lady, loving and willing to work, but her work place was difficult to work in. 

Madam Speaker, when we vote a Member of Parliament, she/he ceases to be a Member of Parliament of that area because that Member now belongs to Uganda and once they are here, they must work as members of Parliament of Uganda and so we have lost hon. Annie Logiel as a Ugandan.

As Forum for Democratic Change, a party I lead as the Secretary General, we have lost a Ugandan and in Bugisu, we have lost our neighbour. Those of you who are not aware, I travel frequently to Karamoja and have a lot of interests there. When Karimojong are going to their home area, they pass through Sironko from where I come from.

Madam Speaker, it is high time we demonstrated what we say. I have been in Parliament for a number of years and whenever a colleague dies, we talk about health issues. I would like us to go and extract our reports and see if whatever we have spoken about has been implemented. 

Today, I would like to inform all the honourable members and public that it is high time we demonstrated, at all health units, about health.

Rwanda is a small country, but one is assured of health and education. Why was the late hon. Logiel struggling to look after the said over 100 children? Where is the Government? 

We are all saying that the children she used to look after will suffer, but these children are not for the late hon. Logiel, but for the Republic of Uganda; it is high time we thought about that. 

Madam Speaker, when members fall sick, they are the first to be flown out. Whenever I fall sick, Madam Speaker, I am taken to Mbale Hospital. Why should we rush to fly Members of Parliament and Government officials abroad for treatment while the people of Uganda are dying in those poor health units without medicine? If we are talking about health, let it be for all Ugandans. 

Recently, we lost Dr Margaret Mungherera wo died from India. Many people have been flown to South Africa. What is there in India and South Africa that we cannot do in Uganda? Some of the doctors in South Africa I studied with them at Makerere University and Mwiri and whenever, we are flown there, they are the ones who treat us. Why did they migrate to those foreign countries? We must rethink.

Honourable colleagues, if it means getting the entire budget and invest it in the health and education sectors, let us do it. We can do without roads, but let us invest in health because no one can go to school or dig when they are sick; people have to first treat themselves before they can do anything. 

Madam Speaker, the hon. Annie Logiel has gone and we are saying that we have lost our dear one, but there are many who have –(Member timed out.) 

4.06
MS HELLEN ADDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to the voices of the rest. On behalf of the people of Serere and Teso at large, I bring condolences to the House, the family and people of Karamoja and as others have said, they are our aunts and uncles.

I am a member on the Health Committee and so we have moved together with the late hon. Annie Logiel to many places. What I remember about her is that whenever all members got tired - I remember one day while moving in Mulago Hospital, we got tired but the late did not get tired. 

She would always move with her notebook and would never leave a health centre or hospital without noting down the number of children born from that particular hospital in a week, in a month and in a year. She also always endeavoured to meet mid-wives and nurses.

She always lamented about increasing lunch allowances for the health workers because, according to her, from 1996 to date, lunch allowance for the medical workers has never been increased. 

The late hon. Annie Logiel was a very calm person but principled. When she started inspecting a ward, she would ensure that was completed. 

One time while I was in Kapchorwa, I asked her to tell me about herself and why she had been elected and whether she was known before or not. It was at that point that she told me about her projects and organizations. She even showed me pictures of her children and the husband; this was the good time we spent together. 

However, when I reflect on death of such our dear friend - when Israelites were looking for water and food in the desert, it took their leader to cry until the food was provided. 

When Karamoja is suffering due to drought, famine plus lack of water - this was the time that leaders, like the late hon. Logiel were supposed to cry on behalf of their people. Unfortunately, this is the time God chose to take her away and as someone said, it rained this morning and to go to church when it was raining this was a blessing from God. 

Therefore, I would like to pray that God gives peace to the family. I would further like to request the family to trust in Jesus because He said that the peace He gives us is not what the one that the world would give to us, John 14:27 –(Member timed out.)

4.10
MS JANET GRACE OKORI-MOE AKECH (NRM, Woman Representative, Abim): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion as I send my condolences to the people of Moroto. It is a great loss indeed. 

I hold Moroto District in high esteem because they are the ones who groomed me into politics as a head student at Kangole Girls Secondary and Moroto High School.

While the late hon. Logiel was a tutor in Moroto Teachers College, at a time when the law still allowed public servants to serve in more than one office, the late and others groomed me before I went back to my mother district, Kotido. Please accept my condolences. 

Madam Speaker, I knew the late hon. Annie while we were students at Kangole Girls Secondary School. I happened to be the head student of the school; she was a class behind me. We studied with people like the hon. Angeline Osegge, hon. Christine Tubo and hon. Rosemary Nauwat. Our school motto was, “Grow to Serve” and indeed we grew to serve. The school song we popularly sung, “Grow in truth, integrity and preserve those values…” is what I saw in Annie. 

The late has been a very religious and principled person. Above all, she was committed to working for her people. She always made it a point to come to my office for guidance because we were the only two from Karamoja and in the leadership of committees; she valued a very guidance she got. 

She also had many brilliant ideas, which we are going to miss. At the time of processing her letters for further treatment, she shared her dilemmas with me because she had experienced some delay. She had to resort to using part of her vehicle money because she had not used it, for that operation. 

After her operation, we kept chatting on WhatsApp and she kept giving us hope. I remember the last message I got from her, after the operation, was on the 8th and everything was okay. In her message, she asked me whether hon. Paul Musamali and several other members had gone through for the East African Legislative Assembly.

However, when we got a message from her daughter asking us to pray for her, we could not stomach it. The sad news found me in appointments - (Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute to conclude.

MS OKORI-MOE: Madam Speaker, the late hon. Logiel was the first Matheniko girl to join Parliament. In Karamoja, we have eleven ethnic groups recognised by the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Moroto has always been represented but this was the first time for a Matheniko girl to come to Parliament. So you can imagine what is back home. 

We are told that from the day people heard of her death, old women flocked her home and everybody is speechless. This is the kind of person we have lost. My sister, we have lost you; may you rest in peace. 

4.14
MS BETTY ENGOLA (NRM, Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What I want to say about our fallen colleague is that the late hon. Annie Logiel - and I just want to speak plainly - this is how I knew her. She was very polite, humble and organised in her work. 

In Annie was a warm-hearted lady. Not only that, Annie was also a person who had the desire to grow, which was very positive. Above all, Annie was a person who wanted others to succeed. There are many of us who get good things but keep quiet and also hide them away from others but she was exemplary.

I know the people of Moroto, her voters and Uganda at large will miss her greatly. May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you. 

4.16
MR RICHARD OSEKU (NRM, Kibale County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for organising this special sitting. I also would like to thank  honourable members for having turned up in large numbers. 

I am also a nephew of the Karimojong. I worked in Karamoja for eight years, specifically Moroto District at a time when there was a lot of insecurity. The warriors would come with guns to the hospital but the late Annie would not get scared. She was a person of a very strong character and brave but most specifically, she was very humble. 

I would like to say this about leadership - sometimes people think that you must be very aggressive but Annie was such a humble lady and that was more of strength to me than even a person, who may come up with an aggressive character. 

Madam Speaker, what has been said here, in my interpretation, is about mission and missionaries. We know missionaries as people who came from outside to propagate religion, extend health care and education but we have never seen a person who was a missionary in her own place like the lady before us here. 

We have heard about the support she was extending to the community and this is going to be lost although we pray that some intervention comes in. we would like to ask Government to really give more affirmative action to the area of Karamoja so that we uplift this area, just like other areas. 

Madam Speaker, what has been spoken about Annie and the support she gave the community is an indicator of what leaders go through, especially Members of Parliament in this House. 
We are endeavouring to close the gaps and sometimes we are criticised and demonised by the community. However, what Annie was doing, I am sure it may not be in the same volume, is the same thing all the Members of Parliament are trying to do in this country. 

I think this is the time for Parliament to be appreciated. Members of Parliament should be respected outside there in the community and in Government.  They should know that we are doing a lot to try to contribute to the development of this country. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I knew Annie and even as a person, I met her and I would - (Member timed out.) 

4.19
MR MICHAEL AYEPA (NRM, Labwor County, Abim): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I speak as a Member of Parliament from Karamoja. 

I would like to say that we are really humbled and grateful for the support that the Government of Uganda has given our sister. We are appreciative of the President’s personal contribution and Parliament’s support towards the burial of our sister. 

Madam Speaker, you have a very powerful team of staff of Parliament. They did a very wonderful job and we are very grateful. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, since we started speaking about Annie, we have never spoken about the property she had. We have not talked of the vehicles she owned and the houses she had built; we have only spoken about her love and spirit yet this is exactly what we are going to be judged by. We shall be judged for the good things we do for others. The Leader of the Opposition was asking; if you were the one, what would people talk about you? What will they remember you for? They will never remember you for your houses, vehicles but what you do; what you do for them and not for your children and relatives.

The spirit behind Sustainable Development Goals, the spirit in the Bible is that we should love and care for one another. This is exactly the spirit that Annie had. I would like to thank her mentors; the ones who brought her up; the Catholic Church where she was and the Sisters of the Catholic Church. I would like to thank them for the support that they gave Annie.

Members, I would like to say that there are three categories of people who help society and our families; it is those who help the poor, the community and Government. Therefore, let us also ask Government to do their part, the community and us the individuals we should also do our part as Annie has done.

Finally, in order to remember Annie, I would request the Ministry of Health to fill up the staffing levels in the health and education institutions in Karamoja. Can you imagine, the whole of Amudat has only 23 per cent staffing levels?

Therefore, honourable minister, if you really love our sister, please fill the gap in the staffing levels in Karamoja’s health centres and education institutions.

4.23
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion in paying tribute to our fallen sister, mother, daughter, aunt and a lover of Ugandans, more especially the Karimojong to the attain education that is due to them.

Madam Speaker, I have known hon. Annie as a co-operator and somebody who loved to save. She would visit the Parliamentarian Sacco regularly. I remember she even advised us to encourage all the Members to develop a saving culture. 

I would like to remind this House that today hon. Annie is among the four Members whom we have lost here due to brain tumours. There are others who are out there and still suffering and, Madam Speaker, you might be aware of them.

I would like to request Government - because I received a message recently from one of the former Member of Parliament from Karamoja informing us of how he was fundraising to take his father for an operation to remove a brain tumour.

Madam Speaker, I think you remember that we had a female Member from Karamoja who got bed ridden for three months because of a brain tumour. I ask the Government to take keen interest in this area and find out the causes of brain tumours among our people.

Madam Speaker, you remember hon. Matovu also from the cattle corridor had a brain tumour and we lost him too. I am raising this matter because last night, when I was traveling to the vigil, we were discussing and surfing to find out the causes. Some of these causes can be mitigated by the Government. That is why I request Government to find out the causes of brain tumours and implement some of these policies, which were put in place like tree planting. If we could have tree planting everywhere, even at burials, we shall be able to mitigate some of these diseases.

One of the main causes of brain tumour, Prof. Ogenga Latigo nearly articulated it, it is because of climate change – (Member timed out.)

4.26
MR HILLARY LOKWANG (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to what other Members have said. As the last born of the Tenth Parliament in Karamoja, I have lost a mother who has been very polite and soft spoken.

Hon. Annie has been an asset to Karamoja and Uganda. She has been an ambassador in her dreams of fighting health problems in Karamoja and Uganda.

She has been a role model with rare personality not only in Karamoja but also in Uganda as a whole. She has been a good shepherd, keen person, respectful, responsible and a trustworthy legislator. As they say: indeed, good people do not live long. My condolences go to the family. Thank you, for standing with us in solidarity and being strong. I know how painful it is to lose a mother.

Madam speaker, I lost my mother when I was young. I request the family to be very strong and that it is not the end of life. There is another life coming. 

I would like to send my condolences to the people of Moroto and Karamoja. We are going to miss her and we shall not forget what she has done for Karamoja, her family and Uganda. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

4.29
MR ANDREW BARYAYANGA (Independent, Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we speak of Karamoja as a region and speak of Annie, I am very conversant with the region because I worked there for seven years. I was in Namalu in Nakapiripirit and then moved to Kaabong in Kapedu and Kalenga when I was working with African Pine Initiative.

I know the Karimojong as very good people. When you reach there, they want you to adopt their culture and live like them. They warmly welcome you and you indeed feel it is a very rich culture.

Madam Speaker, hon. Annie is gone but what do we learn from the departure of our honourable member who indeed lived an exemplary life among the Karimojong and Ugandans? Very often than not, when you move downtown, you meet Karimajong on the streets. As Government, we should ensure that these people get better education. However, how best can we move to remove these children off the street such that when Annie is in Heaven and seeing us here, she knows that the legislators she left are indeed legislators that want the people of Karamoja and Uganda to live a better life?

We have been speaking of drought in the region; to what extent have we gone to feed and irrigate Karamoja as a region and bring it back and put it at the same level with the other regions? We always talk about it as one of the remote and backward areas of Uganda.

In Uganda, you cannot find a minister, not even a Member of Parliament, including myself, taking their children to UPE or USE schools. It is high time we came out and believed in our education system and lived by it.

The health system is not healthy at all; it is sick. Can Government come up - Madam Speaker, the things we speak here when we talk about health and education - could Government at least give us deadlines on how best they are going to meet these targets in the shortest time possible. Without education and health, the country is doomed. 

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about Annie and all I will say is may her soul rest in eternal peace. 

4.32
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the gallant lady of Uganda and Karamoja, hon. Annie Logiel.

I have known her for as much as I have been in the education sector in Karamoja. The first time she came to talk to me was in 2002 when she wanted to pursue further studies and I had just come back from the Republic of Ireland. I guided her on how to apply for a Master’s in Public Administration and she went to Copenhagen. 

In summary, as all of you may have known, she lived a life of selflessness. All her talk was on how to help others. In 1992, when I had just come back from Gulu - I was in Lacor Major Seminary, but I left during the conflict. 

She asked me; “Why did you come back”, for me, I am going to join a convent; she was in Mbarara from 1992 to 1994 preparing to be a nun.

When she came back, she again went to the school of midwifery. She wanted to find out how she could help others. “I have gone there but I am not helping the women in Nadunget.” She came back to help women in the community; hers was a life constantly in search of service to others.

Secondly, many people have noticed that Annie was extremely organised; that has a bearing on the training she got from the convent and the nursing school. 

Before she left, she came to the Parliamentary Pension Scheme and updated her records. She said, “I am going and I do not know what will happen to me. So I should get this done and that is why we are happy.”

Madam Speaker, right now out of the 450 MPs, we have written letters to, over 100 have failed to update their records. Just in case you die, you will leave everybody in confusion, your children, husband, in-laws and other relatives will start fighting.

Please update your records; I have been signing letters for the whole of last month but people are not responding. And I keep reminding them even when I am bypassing them in the corridors. Annie was very prayerful; the Parliamentary Chaplaincy knows.

Lastly, I would like to thank members of this House; ever since the Eighth Parliament, I have never seen members turning up in such huge numbers to pay tribute to a colleague. Thank you. (Applause)

I do not know how she influenced all of you so quickly. Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the foresight to budget to such arrangements. How would we have transported the body of Annie from abroad? You cannot believe how much we have spent for bringing her up to Entebbe. And we are still spending until we finally put her to rest. We thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members of Parliament for this support.

4.36
MR ONESIMUS TWINAMASIKO (Independent, Bugangaizi East County, Kibaale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand in unison with my colleagues to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen comrade.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, on behalf of the people of Bugangaizi East Constituency, I pass our deepest condolences to the family of hon. Annie Logiel and to the people of Uganda. 

It is a huge loss to the people of Moroto District, Karamoja and all Ugandans; we have lost an intelligent health professional.

It is quite difficult to describe the life of hon. Annie, she has been very respectful to everyone; she was a very kind and down to earth person. A lot has been said about our health; hon. Okot Ogong talked about the substandard goods in the supermarkets which are contributing to the rise of cancer in Uganda. That is not enough, because the fact is that we need to do more in caring for our lives. We are all going to die because most of us do not have good eating habits. 

Madam Speaker, it is already proven beyond any doubt that eating raw food is healthier than eating cooked food. I think the medics will clarify on this. We have just had lunch there at the restaurant - we always have cooked food. This makes us unhealthy. I will ask the minister of health to move ahead and sensitise Ugandans on what sort of foods they should be eating.

If we were to eat raw food, we would not die -(Laughter) -yes Dr Rugunda is supporting me because he is a health worker –(Member timed out.)

4.40
MR ROBERT NTENDE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague, hon. Annie.

Madam Speaker, I have been serving with Annie on the Committee on HIV/AIDS and at the same time we have been working together in the Parliamentary Forum for Children. 

The late hon. Annie has been the representative for the northern region while I am the eastern region representative. I remember vividly when we converged at Munyonyo to elect the leadership for this forum. My name was nominated that night; we did our campaign and it was obvious that I was unopposed. However, in the morning, when another person came up to contest against me, the late Annie came out strongly and said: “No. Nobody should stand against hon. Ntende because last night we had agreed that he goes unopposed. Indeed, the person who had come up to contest against me was her colleague from Karamoja region. She struggled to convince the colleague to pull out until the colleague withdrew and I actually went through unopposed. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, when you critically examine the background of the late Annie, you realise a person who rose from a humble background who rose from the level of enrolled nurse to attain an international master’s degree in health. This is a high achievement, especially to a female student from Karamoja. 

This woman lying in state today is a woman of high integrity. Madam Speaker, hon. Annie was a woman of substance and a woman who actually feared God. We had an opportunity to travel together. I would like to tell you that during the whole of that journey, Members could have seen her as a quiet person, but she entertained me right from Mbarara up to Kampala here. In her, you would see a gloomy face, but inside she was different –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR GIDEON ONYANGO (Independent, Samia Bugwe County North, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to our fallen hero, sister and colleague, hon. Annie. I first met our fallen friend in 2009 at Uganda Christian University when we both enrolled for a programme in public administration. She enrolled for a diploma while I enrolled for a master’s programme. She was very visionary. 

You are all aware that if you enrol for a post-graduate diploma you can proceed with research and graduate with a master’s degree. However, in 2010 she stood by her words and said: “I am graduating with my diploma.” Her reason was that she was preparing herself to join politics. Being a scientist, she wanted to acquaint herself with political science and leadership-related courses. Indeed, when we met here, her dream had come to pass. This is not usual for people to dream and finally have their dream realised the way they had planned. 

At that time when we met, I was working in Kiruhura and she was working in Moroto Hospital. She felt a lot of pain to see a young energetic man from the east serving in the west. She was always emphasising the need to have love for our communities where we are born. Indeed, she was offering herself selflessly to serve the people of Karamoja –(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. A lot has been said. I would like to bring condolences from the people of Ngora County and Teso in general. I have lost my auntie. In fact, for us the people of Teso, we call the people of Karamoja our aunts and uncles. Now that our aunt has gone, it will be bad manners for me not to say anything in this House. 

Specifically, I would like to say that she was a prayerful person. She was a person who knew what to be done, when and how. We used to sit somewhere in this House. When there was something I wanted to raise, she would say, “Please, add this one on top of what you are going to say”. That is the person who is lying here.

Madam Speaker, since she has been a good Christian, it would be unfair for us not to read the Bible. I am going to read two verses from the Bible, specifically, that fit the occasion today. I am going to read Revelation 21:4. It says: “And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.” 

Friends, I am sure all of us are mourning. From the day you heard about her demise, you have been crying up to now. Even tomorrow, we shall continue crying, but the Bible says, God is going to wipe away our tears as Members of Parliament.

The last verse is from Romans 14:8. It says: “For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we die, we die unto the Lord: whether we live, therefore, or die, we are the Lord's” 

Friends, I would like to say that as Christians and people of Uganda, we must continue praying for the family to get courage and augmented to continue living. I am sure God will not leave them alone. God bless you.

4.48
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague. 

Madam Speaker, they say, “Music soothes the soul; poetry heals the heart”. This is a poem to you, our dear hon. Annie Logiel.

Dear, hon. Annie Logiel
We thought of you with love today 
But that is nothing new
We thought about you yesterday
And days before that, too
We think of you in silence
We often speak your name
We just thought we’d say
We love you and goodbye.

We will miss you dearly, 
Oh gentle honourable Annie
And we promise we won't cry
For you would give way to take a point of information.
 
We will never forget your submissions
How happy you were to speak to us
On your maiden speech
With gentility and humility;
“Madam Speaker”: you said -

We know you'll always be with us
Wherever we will go
No one needs to show us
We will always know.

We don't know what to do, hon. Annie
We never thought we'd lose you
Where we'll go from here
We still haven't got a clue
But in the tidings of the heavenly Father
Shall we find your charm and a smile so jolly.

We hope you'll watch over us
Be our guiding light on a point of procedure
Giving us the strength we need when we are out of order
To win this endless fight of service to our nation.

You're our guardian, 
Oh Angel hon. Annie
Sitting on our shoulders
Whispering your words of wisdom
Words of information and clarification 
To use as we grow older in the service of this House.

We don't want to say goodbye
But we'll meet again someday
We'll pick up where we left off
Before you went away.

Now all we have is memories
And your picture in a frame
Your memory is our keepsake
With which we'll never part
God has you in his keeping
We have you in our hearts.

Rest in Peace Oh Gentle Soul
Rest in Peace Hon. Annie Logiel.

Adapted from; Rose Leon and Mallisa Moore, Published in 2007. We pay tribute to you. Rest in peace our honourable colleague. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the poem.

4.51
MS ZAITUN DRIWARU (Independent, Woman Representative, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to pay tribute to our fallen colleague.

Madam Speaker, the late hon. Annie is a truthful person whose truthfulness I confirmed when the news of her death arrived here. Sometime back, she told me she is supporting over 100 children. It was not easy for me to believe because she is a first timer in Parliament. When the news of her death arrived, all the radio stations in West Nile were talking about her support to over 100 children. 

Madam Speaker, we have lost a very resourceful person. We are still losing other resourceful persons who are unnoticed.  Sometimes, we lose people not because we do not have personnel to handle health issues but because our facilities are not adequate. A case in point is when a gentleman brought his sick child to Cancer Institute in Mulago. While there, he requested to go out of the country. The doctors were willing to handle the case but the gentlemen insisted to go abroad. When he reached South Africa, he was overcharged for drugs that were given free of charge in Mulago hospital.

Madam Speaker, we have attitudinal problems. The Government of Uganda must work very hard to change the attitude of its people. In Mulago Hospital, certain drugs are given free of charge but many people opt to go abroad. The Government should know that people are going out because there is no sensitisation. We have trained doctors and these doctors cannot work well if the essential materials in cancer institute breakdown. Definitely, it will give a wrong impression to the outside world that they cannot get the best services in Uganda and yet that should not be the case.

Madam Speaker, the summary I can give about our fallen colleague is that she is a truthful person that we know in this Tenth Parliament. She is a hardworking woman and demonstrative enough. Her handwork demonstrated the power of women in this country and most especially in Karamoja, where people believe that women cannot read nor do the things that men do –(Member timed out.)

4.55
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion to pay tribute to our fallen colleague.

Madam Speaker, a lot has been said about hon. Annie Logiel. I am standing as an Old Girl. I went through Kangole Girl's Senior Secondary School with her. As many of you know, especially those who come from Karamoja region, Kangole Girl's Senior Secondary School is a missionary school. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the missionaries for moulding Annie to a person who she is and I would like to attest to this House that there are many ladies that have passed through that school. I would like to say that the denominator amongst them is the humility that you have seen in Annie. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Annie and I were together in the HIV/AIDS Committee but most often, I met Annie at the chapel when we would have the Tuesday masses. Indeed Annie was a humble person like most of us have stated. We will miss her and the nation is already missing her.

Madam Speaker, coming to what she has been doing to our people in Karamoja; it is a great loss to the people of Karamoja and the people of Uganda. We have always gone through the streets of Kampala and there are many street children from Karamoja. As the Parliament of Uganda, we need to do something about it. Otherwise, this legacy will be lost. 

She had a dream for education. Can we do something as Parliament? Can we promote affirmative action in this area? I know the Government has done something for Karamoja but I think it is not enough. We need to do something in remembrance of Annie. She cherished education and she had a heart for her people and especially the destitute. Can we do something so that at the end of the day, while she rests up there, she will know that her efforts were not in vain – (Member timed out.)

4.57
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. On behalf of the people of Sebei, I rise to support the motion. We have lost Annie, a very unique person.

Madam Speaker, I have known Annie in this Parliament as a close friend of hon. Okori-Moe. Whenever Annie and Okori-Moe were around, you would see them speaking together. I will miss her because we had plans to work together with hon. Okori-Moe and Annie and the initial idea was suggested by hon. Annie.

Madam Speaker, when I was sick in India, the Committee on Health went to Kapchorwa District. I was not aware that this committee had visited my district but hon. Annie called me and said hon. Chekamondo; thank you for what you have done in your district. What I have seen here, we need to integrate it to other health centres. You know, my health workers in the district are very creative especially in the wards. 

She had promised that this year in May, she would invite those health workers from Kapchorwa to integrate and share information of what they have been doing to help the people so that they can also borrow the idea to Karamoja. Karamoja has lost someone who was very loyal, reliable and who could transfer knowledge to other people.

Madam Speaker, while in India, I got an opportunity to ask the doctors, “What is it that you have done that everyone who falls sick wants to come for treatment in India?” He told me that it is commitment. First of all, Uganda has well trained doctors but they lack -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute and conclude.

MS CHEKAMONDO: He said we have well trained doctors but we lack equipment. The second one is that after operation, care is still lacking here. He said they have the equipment and the care after operation is what they take very seriously. 

Thirdly, he said they noticed our country Uganda does not have trees. I asked him what they did to have those trees. He told me there is room for trees and even if they planted them just at the veranda, they will not affect their walls. If it were there, even at Parliament here, we would be having trees. I found their whole area was green. It is one of the things that contributed to their good health.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I call upon this Parliament and Government to do something to improve on the –(Member timed out.)

5.01
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Madam Speaker, thank you for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our friend and colleague, hon. Annie Logiel. She was my vice chairperson of the Committee on Health. As my colleagues have testified, she was a very calm, cool headed, down to earth, selfless and astute member of the committee.

As the Health committee, we shall miss her counsel, experience and knowledge on health issues. I ask the family to take heart. Considering the testimonies that are being given in this House about hon. Annie Logiel, she is already in heaven. What will make her smile even more is to carry on her legacy. She was very passionate about health issues especially maternal health.

On this note, I would like to thank the Government for the efforts of building more health centres in this country. However, I feel that is not enough. The most valuable resource that any country can be proud of is its people. Therefore, we may build hospitals or fiscal infrastructure, but if we do not look into the conditions of the health workers in this country, we shall have done a disservice to hon. Annie Logiel and Dr Mungherera whom we mourned the other day.

Therefore, I would like to call on Government to make a paradigm shift and focus on the issue of health workers in this country. Please, increase their remuneration - (Member timed out.)

5.04
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to support the motion to pay tribute to our sister, hon. Annie Logiel. 

Madam Speaker, I have known Annie for more than 10 years. I met her at Nsambya Hospital when she was upgrading in her academics. She was doing a diploma course at the hospital. At that time, I had escorted a friend in labour and we found her in the ward. She gave us the care that we needed and since that time, I picked interest in her. We stayed in contact whenever I went to Nsambya Hospital until she left for Karamoja.

When we met here at Parliament, we were all surprised because we had stayed for some time without hearing from each other. She inquired about the constituency I was representing. When I told her that I represent the workers, she said we were going to work together because very many workers in Uganda have a lot of issues. In fact, the colleagues have already raised the issue she mentioned, especially staffing levels and accommodation of the health workers. She promised that we were going to work together to see that we take forward those interests. 

When she was picking the committees, I asked her again which committee she preferred and she told me she wouldn’t join any committee without the word “health.” Indeed, she opted for the HIV and Health Committees. It is unfortunate that she passed on without fulfilling her interests on those committees. I urge Members to ensure that Karamoja and other areas are considered in terms of staffing. We also call upon Government to work with all the other area Members of Parliament to ensure that problems of health in their areas are solved. 

May her soul rests in eternal peace. Thank you.

5.07
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving us an opportunity to pay tribute to a daughter of Uganda who has passed on at this time. 

The Book of Ecclesiastes Chapter 3 talks about every season having a story to tell. There is a season to cry and there is a season to laugh; there is a season to be born and there is a season to die. This is a sad season for Parliament and the family of Annie, who has passed on at this material time when we most needed her.

Madam Speaker, personally, I wouldn’t have known hon. Annie Logiel until I was curious about her ‘Logiel’ name. Logi in Luo means wash your hands. I then wondered why this person corrupted Luo. I had to look for her. She said the name is neither Luo nor a Ugandan word, but foreign. That is when I learnt that she was married to a foreigner.

From that time, I thought there was something unique about this lady. I later discovered that this lady, as a first timer, was the vice chairperson of a committee. Not only that, she became the vice chairperson of the Karamoja Parliamentary Group. To me, the women of Uganda have lost a very powerful seed of leadership. For the people of Karamoja to find a woman who can stand out to be in the national leadership is not simple.

Madam Speaker, some of us have struggled to be recognised to be vice chairperson of something. Even for our Speaker to become the Speaker, it took long and painful efforts to convince the world. However, with all the distinguished qualifications she had, she had to remain in the basement as a vice. However, for a first timer to be a vice chairperson, it means this lady had the potential to be the real one. Unfortunately, we have lost her. I feel so sad.

Madam Speaker, one thing we have done which is not right and untraditional is that we have said everything good about Annie without acknowledging the role of our son-in-law. Some of us who have been in politics know that without the intimate support of our spouses, we cannot make it. Therefore, I would like to register my appreciation to our son-in-law. Take our voice home and let them know we love you. We shall embrace you as our son. We will be very happy if the Karimojong could allow you to settle in Uganda to make us continue remembering our daughter and take care of our children, grandchildren and the community. 

Madam Speaker, this lady was not only a health worker but she came up with a special health initiative to help the community, particularly, the mothers in maternal health. I am really touched that we would talk about everything, about the lady and her qualifications and you did not talk about how this lady touched the life of the mothers who were delivering -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwal, the Prime Minister in his motion spoke about it.

MS OGWAL: I agree but I thought my fellow Karimojong would have raised it because they were directly benefiting and now that she is gone, they could have been -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Lokii also talked about it.

MS OGWAL: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for that but I thought it should have been a word coming from every mouth. I would like to conclude by stating that every time we lose a Member of Parliament, we talk a lot about what we ought to have done, which we fail to do. One thing I am aware of and which this Parliament has not quite come out with is that the environment is causing a lot of sickness and disease, which are still unknown.

I am, therefore, begging the Prime Minister who is here and the mover of the motion – Cabinet - although they are not always good at attending such meetings, to take trouble to get the country to understand how we can improve our environment. This Parliament passed a law on Kaveera and in the presence of the Prime Minister, people are still using Kaveera as if there is no law.

However, you cannot find this happening in Rwanda or any other country. Why is it so difficult for Ugandans to implement the law which we have passed? Madam Speaker, let us do what we ought to do and avoid diseases. 

I thank you very much for giving us this opportunity, Madam Speaker, and for the support you have given the family. We pray that as a Commission, we will continue to stand with the family and ensure that the Clerk to Parliament provides a vehicle to enable some Members who may want to attend the burial ceremony. May God bless you very much. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As the Minister of State for Health comes, I would like to say that we enacted the National Forestry Authority Act 15 years ago. We were supposed to have tree planting days but we still do not have them. We were supposed to have a Tree Fund and still, we do not have it.

5.14
MS JOYCE MORIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. On behalf of the Ministry of Health and the people of Moyo District, whom I represent, I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to the late hon. Annie Logiel.

Madam Speaker, we have indeed lost an extra ordinary health care professional. As the Ministry of Health, I would like to convey our sincere condolences to the family members and the people of Moroto and Karamoja region. 

Hon. Logiel was so passionate about issues of education and training of health care professionals that she raised this on the first meeting, when we interfaced with the Committee on Health. She was very much concerned especially about improving the quality of nurses and midwives.
Madam Speaker, we will live to recall the legacy of hon. Logiel. As I speak, a lot is being done in this area of improving the quality of health care workers. We have inter-ministerial meetings that have been on-going between the ministries of Education, Health, Finance and health regulatory councils. Certainly, we shall live to recall hon. Logiel’s legacy because we are all working as Government to ensure that the quality of our health care professionals is improved in this country.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I would like to thank my colleagues for sharing the challenges that they have raised in the health sector. As Government, we have a lot of success stories registered in the health sector. We also have challenges; however, the most important aspect that we should manage is our attitude towards the health sector. 

We have got very good facilities especially the equipment. We have the best health care professionals but as I speak - my senior is out of the country for official duty and I have been in the office - we have had two colleagues who came to the office so that I sign and they go out of the country to get treatment.

The chairperson of the board boldly recommended that those cases can be handled in the country because we have the facilities and the doctors. However, because these are senior colleagues whose attitude is that their cases cannot be handled in our country, they insisted. It is on record that I had to sign it.

Madam Speaker, if we continue with such attitude as we improve Mulago Hospital to be a super specialised –(Members rose_)

THE SPEAKER: This is a tribute, no procedure nor point of order.

MS MORIKU: As we improve Mulago Hospital to be super specialised, certainly, we need to embrace our health care system.

Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that we talk about preventive measures but many of us as leaders are not embracing preventive and health promotion. As we talk of improving the health care system, certainly we have challenges which need our collective effort to ensure that we commit to improve it.
However, I would like to appeal that we also embrace the preventive measures of health care and promote health. I am talking about - we have to intensify awareness campaigns of some of these preventable diseases; exercises, screening for blood pressure, cancers and many other preventable diseases. That is my humble appeal.

I would like to commit as Government that we will try our best to improve the health care services as we try every year to make a difference. With your support, I believe we will make a difference in the health care system.

Madam speaker, as I conclude, once again, I would like to thank you for giving us this opportunity to pay tribute to our dear beloved sister whom many have talked positively about. We will miss her in the health sector and we will continue to relive her legacy. Once again, I commit that as the Ministry of Health, we will continue working towards improving the health care system in the country with the support of my colleagues. I thank you.

5.20
MS RUTH NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiboga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues who have supported the motion to pay tribute to our beloved sister. It is 10 days now since hon. Logiel breathed her last. This is not a short period but a period of denial where everybody keeps on asking whether it is true that she passed on until the body arrives. 

That is why people come to view the body; even at that time, people are still in denial. It is a period of grief and therefore, I would like to join the rest of the Members who have passed on their condolences to the family, the widower, the children and the friends.

Madam Speaker, allow me to say this because I have been reflecting on it; at the time when we were discussing the budget proposal of the Parliamentary Commission and we proposed to cater for the departed Members of Parliament, you recall what appeared in the papers. People talked about rice, sodas, meat and other things as if Parliament was extravagant. 

The Parliamentary Commission was tasked to ensure that we are not taken by surprise. We know this is the 10th Parliament and we know what happened in the previous Parliaments. We have to be prepared; you can imagine what has been happening in Moroto, Entebbe, Parliament and Denmark for the last 10 days; the expenditures.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for your leadership and stamina to ensure that this institution is allowed to budget and prepare for the leaders of this country and we have proved it today. I would, therefore, like to call upon everybody to stand with the institution. Government is supportive and we never questioned this budget but supported the Parliamentary Commission.

I would further like to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency the President, who visited the family yesterday evening. I talked to Mama Janet Museveni when we were in Cabinet and she delivered her apologies; you are aware that this couple is part of the Karimojong family. The President has been planning to put a mark in Karamonja region and we have registered success. Therefore, I would like to thank the President; he personally passed on his message towards assisting the children and the family.

I would also like to thank the UPDF, the Chief of Defence Forces whom I talked to and requested to give us transport to Moroto tomorrow; a helicopter has been provided for that. We were stranded because I first talked to the Inspector General of Police and his chopper had a mechanical problem but when I contacted the Chief of Defence Forces, straight away Gen. Muhoozi said, “Oh ma’am, I will provide transport tomorrow, but we must ensure that we arrive safely. We will not be able to leave after 3.00 p.m. Kindly ask Parliament to allow us to move on Saturday at 8.00 a.m. because we would like to reach safely”. Therefore, I salute the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.

I would also like to salute Parliament and I said this in church at Christ the King. Madam Speaker, you have a team which works together in times of sorrow and happiness. While in church, I suggested that we formalise the caucus of the whole House because we have identified what joins us together, whether we like it or not. More so, ever since the late hon. Logiel departed from us, people have been moving around, my staff have been coordinating and everybody was concerned; they were asking about the burial and what we should do.

I was in Entebbe yesterday at the late Logiel’s home and I left this morning but colleagues were still seated there. I would like to thank all of them and I cannot begin to mention one by one.  

I got to know about the late hon. Logiel after swearing in because before that, they were in the hands of the Secretary General. However, after swearing in, they got closer to the Government Chief Whip.

Madam Speaker, when we constituted the committees and leadership of the committees, we would ask, in my office, for academic credentials to accompany your application. These leadership posts are applied for. There was competition on every position. I am in charge of shortlisting so that I forward the shortlist to the central executive committee. However, when I looked at the late hon. Logiel’s papers, I straight away shortlisted her and presented her name to the central executive committee and they did not find any problem with her. 

All of you, including Madam Speaker, said that the late was the right person and that she would do the work. I, therefore, started interacting with her. When she was leaving for treatment, she told me three times whenever she would find me: “Chief Whip, I am processing my papers, I have got a problem and will be flying out for operation because I have got a tumour, but pray for me”. I replied that hon. Annie, we shall pray for you.

However, when I received the news, I was shocked. We cannot get used to death; death can throw you down even if you are a General. We prayed for her but God who gave her to us has decided that this is the most appropriate time to carry her to His place, probably and we would like to believe that. We also would like to thank God for her accomplishments. We shall always remember you, hon. Logiel.

Madam Speaker, the Leader of Government Business has also authorised me to inform this House about what you raised as your concern; - the delays that the medical board takes to authorise processes. From today onwards, the chairman of the board is authorised to handle matters of utmost urgency himself where a board meeting cannot be called immediately to save the situation. He has been authorised to handle the emergency so that we do not spend a lot of time. 

I would like to thank you all for the support and I pray for journey mercies tomorrow and pray to God that he takes over all the burial processes on Sunday. May God bless you all. Hon. Annie Logiel, may you rest in peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I know that many people would still like to contribute but Mr Eric Jors and the children are tired and have not slept for several hours. We also would like them to leave when it is still early; 32 members have spoken and we would like to close the debate.

I would like to say two things: first, to thank Eric for his love and support to the late hon. Logiel and all his sacrificed time during sickness and campaigns. You are all aware that campaigns are hard; they put pressure on the families and therefore, we would like to thank him and the children for their support.

I hope the death of the late hon. Logiel has informed Ugandans that the money we budgeted for the funerals is not given to the Members of Parliament. We just budget for it and if nobody dies, we do not spend it. However, it is certainly not also given to the Members; it remains in the hands of the Clerk until it is needed.

I also hope that they have understood that running funerals for 10 days is expensive; bringing back the remains of the late hon. Logiel from abroad was expensive. Whatever has happened since the day we had the announcement – there was a time when even Members here said that this money was not necessary and I asked them not to talk about things that they do not know and now here we are. 

I would like to thank Annie for the work she did in that short time because she was not a very old person. I did not know that she was sick. We used to just meet and laugh until one day early this year, she walked into my office and told me that she had come to brief me officially about her health situation. She told me about the operation she had undergone many years ago and the recovery process but at that time, there was a re-occurrence. She was very composed, dignified and very courageous. 

I think by the time we separated, both of us knew that things could go either way. I would therefore like to salute her for her courage and dignity.  

Honourable members, I put the question that this House do pay tribute to hon. Annie Logiel as proposed by the Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to extract the Hansard and give it to the family and also send them the tributes, when they are finalised and signed. Thank you. 

The East African Anthem

The National Anthem

(Exit of the late Annie Logiel)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for coming and paying tribute to our colleague. As indicated, there will be transport tomorrow for those who will be able to go in the morning. Please be here by 8 O’clock because the bus will be available. 

Otherwise, honourable members, the House is adjourned to Tuesday, 28 February at 9.30 a.m. On that day, we shall have the East African Legislative Assembly elections and each of the 47 members must be given time to speak. Therefore, we shall assemble here at 9.30 a.m. and start listening. 

After they have spoken, we shall adjourn and the voting will take place in the car park. We shall have four polling routes and we shall distribute the voters according to the alphabet. Each booth will have a particular number, probably 100 each, so that we can do it quickly. The House has been adjourned to 9.30 a.m. on Tuesday. 

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 28 February 2017 at 9.30 a.m

