Thursday, 19 February 2015

Parliament met at 3.00 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting and I am delighted to announce that we have, in the country, a very distinguished Ugandan, Dr John Ssentamu, the Arch Bishop of York. (Applause) He is the first African, in over 600 years, to occupy that position. He is in the country to celebrate the life of the late Arch Bishop Janani Luwum and also to celebrate the work of the late Bishop Hannington in parts of East Africa. Hannington was the Bishop of East Equatorial Africa.
We have invited him to pray with us tomorrow at 11.00 O’clock here at the Parliament. So I am announcing the Holy Communion service at that time. 

This is the only opportunity for us to associate with the Arch Bishop of York as it may take another 100 years before he comes back to this country. Please find time to come and pray with him. The service will take place in the Parliamentary Conference Hall A. All are invited not just the Anglican chaplaincy. Thank you very much. 

There were some Members who had some issues – hon. John Ssimbwa, hon. Franca Akello and hon. Sabila.

3.02
MR JOHN SSIMBWA (NRM, Makindye Division East, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a point of national importance and it is to do with the plight of the active urban-poor in Kampala. 

Kampala is a city with many categories of people. We have the active poor; people who have started up their businesses to survive. Our Constitution, under the national directive principles, talks about the economic rights and the rights of the people in development.

What is happening in Kampala, mostly in my constituency in areas of Kabalagala, is against the provisions of our Constitution. This morning, the premises of the active poor in Kabalagala were demolished without giving them time to remove their merchandise. I would like to appeal to Government, mostly the Minister for Kampala Affairs, to ensure the people of Kampala are involved in the development of the city. We are not developing Kampala for animals neither are we developing it for only the rich. I would also like to ask Parliament to ensure that people get involved in the planning and execution of whatever activities are being undertaken by Government. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, our people in Kampala - I know my colleagues also represent some because some of them come from those villages in their respective constituencies - leave Kampala for their constituencies in a poorer form than  when they came (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, conclude your issue.

MR SSIMBWA: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I also would like to say that this is not only going to affect the economic well-being of these people but also the security of Members of Parliament. Many youth who had started up small businesses can no longer operate them. The women who had borrowed money from micro finance institutions cannot pay it back because they cannot operate any small businesses in Kampala under the circumstances.

Therefore, Government should caution and guide the management of Kampala Capital City Authority on how to implement its programmes. If Government fails to do so, Kampala is going to remain for only the rich. But remember the rich will suffer because the poor will dissent them due to these conditions. Thank you.

3.05
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. This is not the first time I am raising this matter. I would like to request the Ministry of Education and Sports to come out very clearly to this Parliament on the matter regarding the billions of Uganda shillings that were given to the teachers’ SACCOs. 

Madam Speaker, teachers are asking Members of Parliament, across the country, where this money is. Last week, there were some issues on the media where teachers were asked to go through UNATU to access this money. While the Microfinance Support Centre at the Ministry of Finance is claiming they are the ones to give out this money, the Ministry of Education and Sports is also saying they have got to look for a consultant to give out this money. 

This situation has created confusion in the country. People do not know where teachers can go to access the money that was given to them by this Parliament. Therefore, can the Minister of Education and Sports clearly tell this Parliament where teachers can go, especially those who belong to the teachers’ SACCOs, to access this money? This is important to be stated clearly because teachers are asking us where and how to access this SACCO money. They heard Parliament passed the money; they heard the President speak about it but they cannot see it. That is why I am asking the Minister of Education and Sports to let this House and Uganda know more about this money. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I direct the Minister for the Presidency and Kampala Affairs to give us an update on what plans they have to resettle the urban-poor who are being evicted from the city. I also direct the Minister of Education and Sports to brief us on the teachers’ SACCO money. Thank you. (Applause)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE TOXIC CHEMICALS PROHIBITION CONTROL BILL, 2015

3.08
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Toxic Chemicals Prohibition Control Bill, 2015,” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded.

MS KAROORO: Madam Speaker, this Bill is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications and I wish to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. The Bill is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development, for expeditious perusal and report back. They may work with other committees in case they need them.

THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

3.09
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Mary Karooro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015,” be read for the first time and I beg to lay it on Table. The Bill is accompanied by a Certificate of Financial Implications and I beg to lay it on Table.

THE SPEAKER: Has it been seconded? Okay, it has been seconded. Okay, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for expeditious perusal and report back.

THE CHILDREN (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2015

3.10
MR BENARD ATIKU (FDC, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to present a Bill entitled, “The Children (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015,” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is seconded.

MR ATIKU: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for this Bill. 

3.11
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, we have a problem with the Certificate of Financial Implications relating to the Bill just been presented by –(Laughter)- no, I have just been talking to -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, today we have an unprecedented situation where the backbenchers and minister’s initiatives have coincided. I have spent the last two days agonising on how to handle this because it is the first time. I decided that both should present their Bills to the committee because hon. Atiku was given leave of this House by consensus to present this Bill. 

I now send both Bills to the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for expeditious perusal and report back. (Applause) What can I do? It is not saying anything.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you. Madam Speaker, like you have stated, this is the first we are seeing two Bills being presented. It is good that the committee will harmonise the two. What I have difficulties with is the question of the certificate of financial implications because the rules spell out that there will be a certificate not certificates of financial implications for a Bill.

This means there should be one certificate of financial implications for each Bill. Can I get a clarification on whether it is the same Certificate of Financial Implication that will be used for both Bills or not?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there are two Bills - the Children (Amendment) Bill, 2015, which has its certificate and the Children (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill, 2015, which also has. So, there are two Bills. They are both sent to the said committee. Let them be handled expeditiously for report to this House.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on the point of procedure. I raised a matter of national importance in this House about the demolition of property in Jinja and you directed that the Minister of Internal Affairs presents a statement to this House. 

I have been attending proceedings of this House since then - and I see him seated comfortably – but I have never seen a statement being presented to the House regarding that issue. I am wondering whether my efforts were just an academic exercise or not. I am just seeking your guidance. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there is a pending statement from your ministry about the eviction that took place on Alidina Street in Jinja at 3:00 a.m.

3.14
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are quite advanced in preparing that report about what happened at that building. We got your directive and we will fully comply with it.

THE SPEAKER: You will be able to speak to us next week?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Yes, Madam Speaker.

3.15
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two years ago, I also sought leave of the House to introduce a Private Member’s Bill, which was granted. Since then, I have been communicating with Ministry of Finance but they have not issued a certificate of financial implications.

At one point, hon. Ajedra, one of the state ministers in that ministry, had the guts to write to me and hon. Fox Odoi saying we compute the financial implications and give him but we thought that was rather -(Laughter)- no, we refused because we knew it was not our work to do that. To date, we have never got the certificate of financial implications for our Bill. We are wondering whether the Ministry of Finance has decided to use the certificate of financial implications as a graveyard for Private Member’s Bills in this House.

Madam Speaker, following the ruling you gave towards the close of business last year, can we probably be guided whether we can now come back since they are not interested in doing their work of issuing that certificate?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I saw a copy of that letter written to you and I wrote to the Ministry of Finance to inform them that it is their responsible to compute the financial implications and bring the certificate. I will ask the Clerk to Parliament to follow them up between now and next week to ensure the certificate comes, not only for you, but also for hon. Arinaitwe and hon. Oleru’s Bills. Can the Clerk please follow up on those certificates?

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I think it is important that the Minister of Finance takes this issue seriously because you ruled that within 30 days, if somebody wants a certificate of financial implications, the minister should have responded. Maybe what we did not indicate is if the minister fails to do that, what can this Parliament do? We do not want to guess up on financial implications the way hon. Alice Alaso had been told to do. How could a minister ask a Member to compute how much to - because that is not the work of the Member? I think the Minister of Finance should be on record to say they will take this matter seriously because when we come here to legislate, we are serious.

We need also to talk about the sanctions that can be levied against such a minister, when he or she fails to provide a certificate of financial implications in respect of any Bill to be tabled before Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When we raise matters of national importance, we want quick responses because these are issues affecting our communities.
 
I rose on a matter of national important about two weeks ago regarding UNEB withholding results of PLE and UCE candidates of last year. I see the minister comfortably seated here as if there is nothing to provide answers for. (Laughter) I ask for your guidance, Madam Speaker. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Education and Sports will speak about this because the clerks transmitted that question to your ministry; I saw a copy.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Thank you very much. My senior minister has prepared a presentation and I think she will be here any time.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, that is an assurance that the answer will be coming. We shall hold on. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION BY KATAKWI DISTRICT COUNCIL ON BEHALF OF THE PEOPLE OF KATAKWI DISTRICT

3.21
LT (RTD) CYRUS AMODOI (Independent, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for according me this time to present a petition by the Katakwi District Council. This petition has been overdue for almost a year and that is why I am very grateful this afternoon for this opportunity to present it. 

The Humble Petition of Katakwi District Council, on behalf of the people of Katakwi District, over various issues pertaining to the district, is presented by I. 

The subject matter of the petition pertains to the grievances by the petitioners arising from various problems experienced by the people of Katakwi District. 

STATES That, as you may note, Katakwi is one of the districts in the Teso sub-region that suffered various problems ranging from cattle rustling to rebellion, yet not much effort has been put in by Government. 

The petitioners, for the last 50 years, experienced and still experience violent cattle rustling carried out by the Karimojong warriors’ activities that have led to absence of peace, massive displacement of communities to the IDP camps and complete breakdown of social services. 

Whereas Government put into place the disarmament exercise, there are some armed Karimojong who are still using guns to threaten, kill, raid and grab land belonging to the people of Katakwi.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you are supposed to read the title and the prayers. Do not go into the details of the petition.

LT (RTD) AMODOI: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. 

THEREFORE, your Petitioners pray that:
1.	 Parliament carries out an investigation into the various grievances raised by the petitioners; and
2. 	Government intensifies the disarmament exercise if good results are to be achieved.

And your petitioners are, as duty bound, will ever pray and hereto, your humble petitioners have appended their signatures.

Madam Speaker, there are various issues in this petition, ranging from over 60 vacant posts in the district where people are in acting capacity. So, this is their petition calling on Parliament to expedite the process so that –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, how many petitions are you presenting? Are they two petitions? Okay, you present.

LT (RTD) AMODOI: I beg to lay the document in support of the issue regarding the filling of the vacant posts at the district. 
I also beg to lay a document that the petitioners have presented to the Parliament of Uganda, pertaining to their land that has been grabbed. 

Madam Speaker, the other documents are very many but I have the file here and I beg to lay it with all that information. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, all are sent to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs, for perusal and report back.
 
LAYING OF PAPERS

3.25
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I beg to lay the financial statements for the year ended 30 June 2012 together with the report and the opinion thereon by the Auditor-General for the following sub counties: 

    i. Gadumire Sub-County, Kaliro District 
    ii. Namugongo Sub-County, Kaliro District 
    iii. Buhuhira Sub-County, Kasese District 
    iv. Isango Sub-County, Kasese District 
    v. Muko Sub-County, Kabale District 
    vi. Bukinda Sub-County, Kabale District 
    vii. Kamwezi Sub-County, Kabale District 
    viii. Nyankwanzi Sub-County, Kyenjojo District 
    ix. Kyarusozi Sub-County, Kyenjojo District 
    x. Bufunjo Sub-County, Kyenjojo 
    xi. Nyarusiza Sub-County, Kisoro District 
    xii. Nyundo Sub-County, Kisoro District 
    xiii. Buhimba Sub-County, Hoima District 
    xiv. Kitoba Sub-County, Hoima District 
    xv. Buseruka Sub-County, Hoima District 
    xvi. Kiziranfumbi Sub-County, Hoima District 
    xvii. Bugambe Sub-County, Hoima District
    xviii. Kigorobya Sub-County, Hoima District
    xix. Kanyaryeru Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xx. Rwemikoma Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xxi. Kazo Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xxii. Buremba Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xxiii. Kashongi Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xxiv. Kanoni Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xxv. Burunga Sub-County, Kiruhura District
    xxvi. Engaju Sub-County, Buhweju District 
    xxvii. Rwengwe Sub-County, Buhweju District 
    xxviii. Nyakashana Sub-County, Buhweju District 
    xxix. Karungu Sub-County, Buhweju District 
    xxx. Kasagama Sub-County, Lyantonde District 
    xxxi. Mpumudde Sub-County, Lyantonde District 
    xxxii. Rwebisengo Sub-County, Ntoroko District 
    xxxiii. Bweramule Sub-County, Ntoroko District 
    xxxiv. Kanara Sub-County, Ntoroko District
    xxxv. Rwimi Sub-County, Kabarole District
    xxxvi. Hakibaale Sub-County, Kabarole District
    xxxvii. Buheesi Sub-County, Kabarole District 
    xxxviii. Kaptanya Sub-County, Kapchorwa District
    xxxix. Tegeres Sub-County, Kapchorwa District
    xl. Gamogo Sub-County, Kapchorwa District 
    xli. Bumbobi Sub-County, Mbale District
    xlii. Busoba Sub-County, Mbale District
    xliii. Bumasikye Sub-County, Mbale District 
    xliv. Budwale Sub-County, Mbale District 
    xlv. Busano Sub-County, Mbale District 
    xlvi. Bufumbo Sub-County, Mbale District  
    xlvii. Nyondo Sub-County, Mbale District
    xlviii. Rugando Sub-County, Mbarara District
    xlix. Bubaare Sub-County, Mbarara District 
    l. Kakiika Sub-County, Mbarara District
    li. Rubindi Sub-County, Mbarara District 
    lii. Mwizi Sub-County, Mbarara District 
    liii. Bukiro Sub-County, Mbarara District 
    liv. Rubaya Sub-County, Mbarara District

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much, Commissioner Seninde. All are sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising this matter as the Shadow Minister for Local Governments. 

On various days, we have received these reports - and I think we now have thousands of them in Parliament. I am of the view that this be taken as a shared responsibility between Parliament and the district public accounts committees. This is important because sometimes, Parliament may fail to find time to look at all these reports. 
In such circumstances, and through the Chair, I wish to appeal to the House that we mandate the district public accounts committees to look into these reports and get to see what the recommendations are in there. 

In the same spirit, I appeal to Government find money to fund the district public accounts committees, after all they are there doing nothing because of lack of funds. 

Madam Speaker, this work being done by the Auditor-General and the recommendations therein remain unutilised because Parliament does not have time to look into all these reports. That is my humble appeal.

3.32
MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We, as Rules Committee, are mandated by this House to look at the legal implications relating to the processing of these audited reports and the role of public accounts committees at the districts vis-à-vis the activities of the Local Government Accounts Committee of Parliament. 

I want to report that we have done some work. I believe the findings will be very relevant in formulating the resolutions and recommendations for the debate in this House to really see that the concerns of hon. Betty Nambooze are genuinely handled.

We found out that members at various district councils kept on mentioning the name of hon. Abdu Katuntu. But we also thought some of these district public accounts committees need to be helped. Anyway, not to pre-empt the report, our committee on rules is going to bring out the report with proposals for the amendment of our rules or some other legislations. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the concern is noted. But as hon. Jacob Oboth has said, this House directed the rules committee to examine that issue so our decision will abide by the outcome of their report. Thank you.

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 26/01/09 TO THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS

3.34
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Woman Representative, Butambala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. “Would the minister explain to the House the measures Government has instituted to ensure that both Government-aided and private schools have lightening arresters?”

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Bataringaya Kamanda): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I wish to request the Chair to give us up to Thursday next week for us to harmonise our responses. I thank you.

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Speaker, this question was raised by my colleague, hon. Jessica Ababiku. It is over two months now but the Ministry of Education has never availed a response yet they are aware this question required a very urgent response. 

So I am wondering whether in that time they are requesting the question will not have been overtaken by events. I request that the minister answers on Tuesday. 

THE SPEAKER: Does that also apply to the other questions because they are all for your ministry?

MS IBI EKWAU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On Wednesdays, when Members have to raise matters of national importance, it is very rare that ministers come in on time. This afternoon, matters are being raised but some of them cannot wait. Yesterday, during the Prime Minister’s question time, we could not proceed because of the inefficiencies of the Frontbench. 

Madam Speaker, honestly speaking, is this Government really in charge? How are we going to continue raising matters of national importance when the Frontbench is not responding to them? Can we possibly get a response from the Leader of Government Business, whether the Prime Minister’s office is in charge of the ministers that it is supposed to supervise?

MS SSENINDE: Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. In my understanding, when a member raises a question, it is submitted to the Clerk’s Office and of course to the ministry in charge of the issue raised in the question. By the time this question is put on the order paper, it is hoped that the responsible minister has prepared a response and even given a copy to the member who raised the said question. 

I am so surprised that this question was put on the order paper yet the responsible ministry does not seem to be aware. That is what it seems like because if they were, they should have prepared a response for presentation today. 

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on this matter because if the Clerk puts such an item on the order paper with your consent, it means the responsible ministry has already submitted its response to the member concerned. In the absence of that, how are we supposed to proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, towards the end of last year, I communicated to this House that we were disappointed that questions have been asked and not answered. I also informed all of you that every week, questions would be reflected on the order paper without notice because they are old questions. I know that the Government Chief Whip wrote to all the ministers and gave me copies urging them to answer these questions. 

Therefore, I think we shall have to impose some sanctions to the ministries that do not answer our questions. I think that is what we have to do.

3.39
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have asked very many questions to the ministers but I think only one has been answered. Nothing has happened to the rest. I think this is a breach of the confidence that we have in the ministers to answer issues that pertain to our electorates.

Madam Speaker, I would also want to draw your attention to rule 34(3). I think we may have to invoke that rule because when the Prime Minister is not there, sometimes we just close that session and proceed. However, the rule says that in his absence, the ministers may answer those questions that have been put to them. 

Otherwise, some of us have actually given up on asking questions. If we do not bring sanctions on them, we will be frustrating all the rules that have to do with questions to the ministers. I think we need to be guided on this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think for all those ministers who will be bringing business here, it will depend on whether they have answered our questions before we do their work. I think that is what we have to do because we are doing your work and you are not even doing the little that you are expected to do. Honourable ministers of education, next week we want answers to all these questions without fail. 

Honourable members, I had earlier informed you that the Archbishop of York will be coming here to have a service with us. However, those who also want to have dinner with him can go and meet him at Sheraton Hotel tomorrow for a dinner at 6.00 p.m. You will only have to pay Shs 80,000 to sit near the archbishop and eat with him. (Laughter)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REGISTRATION OF PERSONS BILL, 2014

Clause 24

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, yesterday we went as far as clause 23. I now put the question that clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I move for the deletion of clause 24 based on the premise that it contradicts Article 159 of the Constitution. 

Article 159 talks about power of Government to borrow or lend. It states, “Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Government may borrow from any source. (2) Government shall not borrow, guarantee, or raise a loan on behalf of itself or any other public institution, authority or person except as authorised by or under an Act of Parliament. (3) An Act of Parliament made under Clause (2) of this Article shall provide - (a) that the terms and conditions of the loan shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless they have been approved by a resolution of Parliament; 
(b) that any monies received in respect of that loan shall be paid into the Consolidated Fund and form part of that fund or in some other public fund, which is existing or is created for the purpose of the loan.”

Based on that Article, I beg for the deletion of that clause.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, to expound on that constitutional provision, there is an Act of Parliament to that effect. We passed here the Public Finance Act and I remember very well that the mandate of borrowing money was strictly given to the Minister of Finance. If that is true, I would think that the wording of clause 24; borrowing powers- “The Board may, with approval of the minister…” My understanding is that this “Minister” is not specified as the Minister of Finance. Therefore, let us assume that -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Read the whole provision.

MR ANYWARACH: “… Given in consultation with the minister responsible for Finance, borrow money from any source as may be required for meeting its obligations or for the discharge…” This is unconstitutional and also under the Act we just passed, the minister here – if it is the Minister of Finance – is trying to delegate his powers to the Minister of Internal Affairs and to the Authority, which to me is wrong. Therefore, clause 24 must be deleted in totality. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What does the mover say? Honourable minister, what is the rationale for your proposal? They are proposing that it be deleted.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, we understand the concerns. However, a deletion will severely harm the institution. We can only subject it to approval of Parliament in the formulation but a deletion will be so grave to the institution. I beg to move.

MR ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I was reading an Act of this Parliament: The National Information Technology Authority, Uganda Act specifically Section 29. It reads, “Subject to Article 159 of the Constitution, a loan or credit facility obtained by the Authority under this section may, with the prior approval of the minister, be guaranteed by the government and when so guaranteed, the principal sum and interest of the loan shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund.”

Madam Chairperson, Section 29 of this law actually deals with borrowing powers. Therefore, after the promulgation of the 1995 Constitution, this Parliament has created authorities and passed legislations and given them powers to borrow subject to Article 159. Therefore as the minister says, to delete this particular provision in totality would be to impair them. What we need to do is to subject the provision to Article 159 of the Constitution.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I believe the certificate of financial implications was the basis of us authorising the creation of this Authority. In their certificate, they clearly showed the source of funds, which are going to help them operate the Authority. For us to say that the Authority whose source of revenue should be those listed in the certificate of financial implications would be impaired would be to deviate from the certificate.

I would like to conclude by saying that we are not expecting a situation where this Authority is going to borrow money to carry out its activities. This is because they have convinced us that they can sustain this Authority through the sources listed in the certificate of financial implications. 

This is distinguishable from what my colleague, hon. Fox Odoi is raising. The certificate, under that law, did not limit them to the source of funds. Government can borrow and transfer to them as it transfers to other organisations but not this entity to borrow. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, is that certificate in perpetuity? Why do you want to put the Authority in a straitjacket; do not dance, do not sing, just stand there! 

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, let me justify it this way. It is on record that with the approved structure of Government today, there is no government entity working at 60 percent. Some of the districts are working at 9 percent. Even Government operates below 50 percent. 

The thing to be done would have been to allow the Ministry of Internal Affairs to operate at 100 percent as a structure so that all activities will be thereunder. When we allow the creation of the Authority, it is because they have the capacity to sustain their activities. That is why there is the relevance of a certificate of financial implications. Otherwise, we would allow all these authorities to be created and then create a burden to Government and we would be running to borrow. 

That is why today when you look through the Ministry of Finance, they have many projects, which are just based on borrowing. Many of them have been mismanaged and that is why I am saying that for us to move in an orderly way, if the Authority wants money through Government, the Ministry of Finance can borrow and give it to them as transfer to other organisations. We have transferred money through appropriation to other organisations here in this House. Thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concur with the minister. If we can add “With the approval of Parliament”, I think this would be critical and desirable. 

When you look at clause 21(a), it talks about appropriation by Parliament and I feel that there is no problem if we put measures that can try to regulate the borrowing as long as they generate a request and bring it to Parliament. I think its deletion may not be necessary. Instead we can amend it to include “Approval by Parliament”.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I also concur with the minister that we get the approval of Parliament. The only bit that I am uncomfortable with is to leave the statement of borrowing money from any source. 

Madam Chairperson, I remember how the money lenders have been on our necks and how you have been advising the honourable members. In fact, I read in the newspapers that you have directed the banks not to bother the members of Parliament in the Tenth Parliament. 

Now if we allow these authorities to borrow from any source like the members of Parliament, this will be disastrous for the country. I think we need to improve this and give the powers to borrow and we delete “From any source”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: How can you close the sources when you do not know where they are going to borrow from?  

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, I think one thing Members should understand is that we should not block Government bodies from borrowing. They should be allowed to borrow. I think the issue here is how they should borrow the money. You should follow the laid down procedures on how they borrow and how the approval is done. We passed the KCCA Act here and we gave them the power to borrow but through the Ministry of Finance, they bring their requests here and they are approved. 

However, when I look at 24(2), I think that is where there is possibly a problem. If we are borrowing on behalf of the government, why would you want the Authority’s property to be attached here? I would like the clarification from the minister because if Government has borrowed, it would be Government to pay back in the end. However, if you are talking of recovering through the sale of the property of an Authority when it has failed to pay the money, then I think that needs some amendment, honourable minister.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you saying that the Authority cannot mortgage its building to borrow money?

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, my understanding of the borrowing here and of the Public Finance Act we passed is that we can give them the authority to borrow but not through mortgaging of property. We do not mortgage anything when Government borrows.  

THE CHAIRPERSON: Supposing the lender requires a security? 

MR OKUPA: That is why the honourable member from Fort Portal Municipality was saying we should not allow borrowing from anywhere. If we allow borrowing from anywhere, then people will end up borrowing and attaching property and the property is lost.  

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I also propose that we should not delete this provision. We need to allow an institution of Government to operate and we cannot have all the money to operate all the time.

I would propose that we only improve on the construction of that clause. When you read it as it stands now, “The board may, with the approval of the minister…” - in my view, it would first be in consultation with the responsible minister who is the Minister of Internal Affairs and then with the approval of the Minister responsible for Finance. 

Secondly, I also concur with hon. Okupa about sub-section (2) of this clause. I believe when an institution of Government borrows, it is the government that has borrowed. If we allow these institutions to start mortgaging their properties, then at the end of the day, we shall find all properties of Government taken or mortgaged. We should therefore leave it at that level -(Interruption) 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Ssimbwa. I just want to ask: if you are allowing this institution to borrow, why would you not want it to mortgage? This is because the two are synonymous. You can borrow and use the property as a mortgage.

MR SSIMBWA: Let me answer the honourable member. Madam Chairperson, there are well laid down procedures. There are Articles within the Constitution that allow Government to borrow. As Parliament, we passed the Public Finance Accountability Act that allows Government to borrow. There are also other laws that allow Government to borrow without mortgaging properties. 

Therefore, under that law, the same can apply under these provisions by not allowing Government to mortgage. If we do this, Parliament or other institutions might use this to mortgage their property. That is the information.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Thank you very much, honourable colleague for giving way and thank you, Madam Chairperson, for allowing me to speak. Regarding the members’ concerns in clause 24(2), the procedure is already provided for in section 36(3) of the Public Finance Management Act. If you allow me, let me read it verbatim. It says, “The minister may raise a loan by issuing Government bills, bonds or stock or using any other method the minister may deem expedient, including a fluctuating overdraft.”

This is the procedure, which is already provided for in the Public Finance Management Act. Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give the honourable colleague is that since that is provided for, we can delete part 11 of 20(4) and retain part 1 of 24, which says, “The Board may, with the approval of the Minister of Finance and approval by Parliament, borrow money from an authorised source as may be required for meeting its obligations or for the discharge of functions of the Authority under this Act.” Madam Chairperson, we cannot block the borrowing powers because the Public Finance Management Bill has expressly given these powers. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR EKANYA:  Madam Chairperson and colleagues, technically this clause is redundant to me. This is because all Government departments are supposed to have plans: medium term development plans, recruitment plans and others and they submit these plans to the Minister of Finance. We are then supposed to approve the budget. If a department or government institution requires money, they have to apply to the Minister of Finance and show the need based on the plan.

It is the Minister of Finance that will come to Parliament if there is need. When you leave such a clause in the Act, some Government departments with dishonest technical people will use this to write to the Minister of Finance and even go to commercial banks. For example, Basajjabalaba was given a letter of comfort through Bank of Uganda because the authority in that institution had this kind of provision.

Even if the Constitution has that provision that you cannot borrow without parliamentary approval, if the Act establishing that department has this provision, technical people in the Ministry of Finance can connive and pick money from commercial banks.

Right now Madam Chairperson, my fellow members of Parliament and I are planning to take the Attorney–General to Court because of this illegality. The Ministers of Finance and Defence borrowed money from the bank and procured some vehicles. This year again, the Ministers of Finance and Defence have advertised to buy vehicles and to pay back up to the year 2018. They are to borrow the money from commercial banks.

When I saw the advertisement, I wrote to the Secretary to Treasury, copied to the Leader of Opposition and to the Minister of Defence. This is what is happening outside there. What these departments do is that when it comes to the time for budget appropriation, they budget for it and you find your hands tied because Government has already been committed.

Another case in point is the loan before us. Uganda Electricity Generation and Distribution Company have all their assets encumbered to the Exim bank.

Once you allow this kind of provision, the Chairman of the Committee on National Economy will present reports. Therefore Madam Chairperson and colleagues, this clause is redundant. Let us leave the Minister of Finance to handle and we retain the parliamentary power of appropriation. When you do this, you are surrendering your power of appropriation in advance. 

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I appreciate hon. Ekanya’s contribution although I think he is giving us more information without substantiating the issue and it confuses us.

However concerning the clause before us, I would like to make an amendment to the proposal of the chairperson of the committee to suggest that this clause could read as follows, “The Board may, with the approval of Parliament, borrow money as may be required for meeting its obligations or discharge of the functions of the Authority under this Act.”

Madam Chairperson, we do not have to include Finance after all, it is the Minister of Finance who brings the loan here. Those are internal things. At the end of the day, what we want to reflect here is the approval of Parliament, which is a constitutional requirement.

In addition, I would like to suggest that we should not give powers to this institution to borrow as it will be tying its hands. What we need is just to make sure that it is tight and we can only do that by including the approval of Parliament. The Minister of Finance and other ministries are internal matters that we do not have to get involved in. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, what we are doing is really complying with the provisions of Article 159, which requires that borrowing should be with approval of Parliament. I think hon. Bahati has incorporated that.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I agree with proposal by hon. Bahati. We can delete (2) but to say that a government department or authority created - Ministry of Finance is the one that borrows on behalf of Government so how does this Authority or Board go to the Ministry of Finance? 

You have to cite an enabling section of the law, that under this law, we can be able. Madam Chairperson, the proposal would be not to recite the approval of Parliament. How about if we said, “Subject to Article 155”? It is covered and then the rest of the words can be retained. Probably (2) would then find its way to the dustbin.

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. If I recall correctly, when the minister was justifying the reason why we should retain this clause, he said that the deletion would affect the other clauses in the Bill. (Interjections) That is what I heard. Madam Chairperson, I seek for you protection. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, members!

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, in essence the minister was conceding that the clause is unconstitutional. With further guidance from my shadow Minister for Finance, we recently discovered that it is redundant because what we are trying to cater for here is already catered for under another Article of Parliament -(Interruption)

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: My comment on this clause 24 was strictly restricted to clause 24(1) and (2). We discussed and I did not at any time in my communication imply that I was talking about clause 24 up to clause 60. Is the member in order to say that I talked about clause 24 in connection with the Articles that are coming subsequently? Is she in order?
	
THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, she is not supposed to anticipate what you are saying. Let us stick to clause 24, please.

MS ALASO: Madam Chairperson, thank you. I would like to agree to a great extent with what my colleagues have proposed; the fact that there should be borrowing to run these activities and that it should be subject to parliamentary approval- Madam Chairperson, the procedure is important. Witnessing the number of institutions that have come before us and have failed to adhere to the government commitment control systems, it is important, if legislative drafting allows, that we also cite the fact that this borrowing will be guided by the provisions of the Public Finance Accountability Act and the constitutional provisions. 

If we get these two clear then the drafting will be subject to the provisions of the Public Finance and Accountability Act with the approval of Parliament, the Board and then we continue with the rest. 

Madam Chairperson, of course we would be getting rid of (2). With the modification in (1) we would have automatically gotten rid of (2). 

THE CHAIRPERSON: So where have you left the Constitution?

MR SABIITI: Madam Chairperson, if you look at Article 159(8), it says, “Parliament may, by law, exempt any categories of loans from provisions (2) and (3) of this Article, subject to such conditions as Parliament may prescribe.” Article 159 states that as long as Parliament conditions how the borrowing is done, the Constitution allows it.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please conclude.

MR SABIITI: We could subject it to Article 159(8).

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, under the Public Finance Management Act, we extensively dealt with this matter. The Shadow Minister for Finance has just told Parliament that the inclusion of this particular clause would create an idle section in the law. 

In my opinion, when we are legislating we should, as much as possible, avoid creating redundant clauses since they do not serve any useful purpose. We should avoid re-writing other laws. We did our work under the Public Finance Management Act and I do not see any reason why we should bring back the same clauses that we had legislated under another Act of Parliament and re-introduce them here. It confuses people who read the law and creates opportunities for abuse. Madam Chairperson, that is my appeal.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, are you suggesting that if one would like to borrow, first you should bring the Constitution and put it there, you bring the Public Finance Management Act and put it there and start organising yourself? Why don’t you make life simple for the users of these laws? Do you want to send them on a fishing expedition? 

MR BAHATI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Oboth is certainly serious in terms of legal issues but I also know that he has taken some time since he last drafted some of these laws. I thought that all these laws that we are making are subject to the Constitution. I do not see any justification as to why should we have this clause subjected to an Article of the Constitution. I do not think it is a smarter way. Can you rethink it because I thought that my proposal was superior to that of hon. Oboth?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please let us move. What is the proposal that you would like us to go with? Hon. Bahati, can you re-state your position? We delete (2)?

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I had suggested, “The Board may, with the approval of Parliament, borrow money as may be required for meeting its obligations or for the discharge of the functions of the Authority under this Act.”

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to warn my colleagues. Hon. Oboth’s formulation may be better if I am to concede. When we are doing appropriation, an item of borrowing can be in-built and you may not know. Therefore when you approve their policy and figures, technically you have approved that borrowing. Hon. Oboth or somebody said, “subject to Article 159” and this is better because it reinstates power back to the minister and the minister brings a resolution to the House. I think that is better.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I am getting the shadow Minister of Finance to agree and hon. Bahati, yours can never be superior on this one. I thought I was saying what hon. Bahati said but in a better way. You will have problems with the approval of Parliament because what does Article 159 say? It covers everything from clauses 1 to 8. 

Therefore, it would render clause 24(2) redundant. We should go with that. This is simple drafting. By saying, “Subject to Article 159” you are actually saying that Parliament has to approve but you have also reproduced the procedures as laid out in the Constitution in the same Act by saying that this loan will be borrowed according to the Constitution. That is the import of the chartered accountant, hon. Bahati.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Oboth, are you saying that we just say, Subject to Article 159, the Board may … and the delete (2)?

MR OBOTH: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 24 be amended as proposed by Hon. Oboth. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that sub clause 2 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25 

MS AMONGI: Madam Chairperson, we passed clause 21 with amendments that the funds raised shall go to the Consolidated Fund. I think this provision was addressing the fact that these people would have this fund with them as in the original Bill. Therefore with the amendment of clause 21, this one now remains redundant. It should be a consequential amendment and be deleted.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chairperson, I do not see any problem with providing for a situation where the Authority may have some funds, which they are not going to use immediately. If you tie their hands that – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the minister appears to be conceding. The information I wanted to give to my colleague is that in this case there would be no surplus. All monies received and not utilised are returned to -(Interruption)- which surplus, honourable minister?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, yes we concede on this that it be deleted.

THE SPEAKER: Is that okay, hon. Nandala-Mafabi?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, as we are moving to single accounts, it means that everybody will draw money for utilisation. If you do not have any activity, you will not receive money from the Consolidated Fund. That is why I say the minister is right, it is redundant. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 25 be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28

MR NZOGHU: Madam Chairperson, clause 28(3) says, “The Auditor-General or an auditor appointed by the Auditor-General shall, within three months after receipt of the accounts, submit to the minister and Parliament a report on the audited accounts of the Authority.”

Madam Chairperson, I am asking the chairperson or the minister to be specific. There is the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Internal Affairs. Which minister is specified here?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, according to the National Audit Act and the Constitution, it is the Auditor-General who reports and not any other person. If hon. Nandala-Mafabi who has an audit firm is hired to audit on behalf of the Auditor-General, he submits a report to the Auditor-General who has to sign it. 

Therefore, this is wrong drafting. There is a very serious omission here. Clause 28(2) and (3) are wrongly drafted.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, the person who is answerable to Parliament is the Auditor-General not any junior auditor. Minister, don’t you think we need to delete that part?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We concede to remove “the minister” and replace this with “the Auditor-General”.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you look at clause 27, it is saying, “The financial year of the Authority shall be the same as the financial year of Government”. Government accounts are supposed to be submitted to Parliament by 31st March of the following year. Therefore, it would be prudent that we fix the date here and say, “The Auditor-General shall submit the accounts to Parliament by 31st  March of the preceding year after the end of the financial year.” 

The justification is to be in line with Government accounts reporting. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Have you understood him?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me make it clear. Colleagues, every financial year ends on 30th June; for example, 2014/2015 will end on the 30 June, 2015. These accounts will be submitted by the Auditor-General on 31 March, 2016. That is the law; the accounts must be completed and submitted to Parliament within 9 months, latest by 31st March. 

Since we have harmonised the accounting period of this Authority to be in line with the one of government, it means that the latest day the Auditor-General should submit these accounts should be 31st March of the proceeding –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to consult hon. Nandala-Mafabi. The problem is we are doing this legislation without the Public Finance Act, which we passed. This is because in that Act we changed the financial year.

Therefore, I would like to plead with hon. Nandala-Mafabi that there is no need to indicate the time frame. You can say, three months to make it flexible within the law we passed or in conformity with the Public Finance Management Act. That leaves us in a better position.

MR RUHUNDA: Madam Chairperson, we are looking at accounts and audit and when you look at the Finance Management Act section 51, they are talking about the accounting officer who has to prepare and submit half year financial statements to the Accountant-General. I do not see this provided here. Where does the Accountant-General come in before you go to the Auditor-General?

THE CHAIRPERSON: What is the work of the Accountant-General here?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to help my colleague. What you are talking about are management accounts but we are talking about final accounts. I would like to inform members that even under the Company Act, there is a day when accounts are supposed to be submitted and this is clear. For example, for private companies accounts must be submitted within six months after the end of the accounting period.

If we do not indicate the date when these accounts are supposed to be submitted, we will have problems unless we clearly state in the Public Finance and Accountability Act when Government institutions are supposed to submit accounts. If we did this, I would have no objection. We can say, “The Auditor-General shall submit accounts to Parliament as per the Public Finance and Accountability Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us start with 28(3). I put the question that clause 28(3) be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, are you introducing clause 28(4)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, we are saying, ‘The Auditor-General shall submit the accounts to Parliament as prescribed by the Public Finance and Accountability Act.’

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is that clause 28(4)?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: We are amending clause 28(3).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read out the entire sentence?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to propose an amendment to clause 28(3) to read, “The Auditor-General shall submit to Parliament the accounts of the Authority as prescribed in the Public Finance and Accountability Act.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore the words “minister” and “Parliament” are out?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, we are saying they will submit the accounts to Parliament. “The Auditor-General shall submit accounts to Parliament.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, why don’t you just create another section. Why don’t you leave (3), which we have just amended and where we removed the auditor and create (4)? Then we shall talk about management.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, I am creating (4). First of all, we have amended that the Auditor-General shall submit the accounts to Parliament. 4) That the Auditor-General shall submit the audited accounts of the Authority to Parliament as prescribed under the Public Finance and Management Act.

MR KABAJO: Madam Chair, we are not supposed to legislate in anticipation. Therefore, how can you talk about the Finance and Management Act which has not yet been consented to. Even if we passed it, it is not yet assented to. Therefore, we should keep it as it is; we should talk about the three months as it is here instead of talking about an Act which is not yet assented to. I do not see why we cannot keep what is in existence at the moment?

MR BAHATI: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we have covered the issues that are really crucial in clause 3. To create another one saying that “The Auditor-General shall submit accounts to Parliament in accordance with the Public Finance Act”, I do not think it is necessary, because what else would he do? Is there any temptation for the Auditor-General to submit account to Parliament against the other Act? No, I think it is sufficient in my opinion.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 28, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 29

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, before we go to clause 29, the committee proposes to insert two parts after clause 28; before part 5 on compulsory registration and rename the other part of the Bill accordingly as part 5 and part 6; to provide for registration of births and deaths and renumber accordingly.

The justification for this is that part 5 and part 6 have been inserted to cater for the procedure of registration of births and deaths considering that the function of registering births and deaths has been transferred to the Authority under Clause 5(1) (d) of the Bill.

Most of the clauses are a replica of the provisions of the repealed Births and Deaths Registration Act and Regulation Cap 309. In order to consolidate the law relating to registration of persons as stipulated in the long title to the Bill. Madam Chair, I therefore request to read through the part that we are inserting here. 

Part V, Compulsory Registration of Births 

Subject to this Act, registration of every birth within Uganda is free and compulsory”.

Birth Register Book 

A registration officer in charge of a registration area shall keep a register of births and a register of deaths, and shall enter therein or cause to be entered the prescribed particulars of every birth and notify the registration officer respectively.

Period for the registration of Birth

    1. A parent, guardian or the person having charge of a child shall, within three month from, but not later than six months after, the date of birth or finding of the child, notify the registration officer for the purposes of registration of the birth of that child.

    2. A birth not registered within six month from the date of that birth shall not be registered unless the registrar is satisfied as to the truth of the particulars and is directed to register them by the executive director and a prescribed fee has been paid.

    3. The minister may, by notice, in the gazette extend the period of the late registration.

Section 32, Duty to Notify your Birth 

Upon the birth of a child, it is the duty of:
    a) Both the father and mother of the child
    b) In the absence of the father or the mother, or, in the absence of either parents or in circumstances where the available parents lack capacity to inform on the birth, the occupier of the house in which the child is born, or, in the absence of any of the stipulated informants under paragraphs (a) and (b), 
    1) the guardian or the person having charge of the child to give notice of the birth to the registration officer of the registration area in which the birth occurs within such time, as maybe from time to time be prescribed.
    2) Where a birth occurs in a prison, hospital, orphanage, barracks or quarantine session, the officer in charge of the establishment in which the birth takes place shall ensure that the parents and guardians of persons having charge of the child notify the registration officer of the birth.

Section 33, mode of Registration of Birth

    1. A person having notice of the birth of a child shall give the prescribed particulars which shall be entered forth with by the registration officer in the register and the person notifying of the birth shall certify to the correctness of the entry by either signing or by affixing a mark to the register.

    2. The registration officer shall before entering any information in the register ensure that a person giving notice under section 32, provides the following particulars:

    a. In respect of the birth, the name, sex, date, time, nature, any disability, weight at birth, place and district of birth.
    b. In respect of the mother, the name, age, marital status, usual residence, nationality, national identity card number, or unique national identification number, passport number or alien number, level of education, profession, or occupation and previous birth.
    c. In respect of the father, the name , age, marital status, usual residence, nationality, national identity card number, or unique national identification number, passport number or foreign national identity card number, level of education, and profession, or occupation.
    d. In respect of the informant, the name, capacity and signature of the informant and date of notification


Section 34, Register of Presumed Birth and Exposed Child 

    1. The Authority shall maintain a register of presumed birth in respect of every person who has been presumed a citizen under section 13 of the Uganda Citizenship and Immigration Control Act Cap 66.

    2. Any person who finds a live new born child lying exposed or any person who is given the charge of such a child shall report the name immediately to the nearest police station, hospital or chief and the officer in charge of the police station or Hospital or the chief as the case maybe shall register such particulars concerning the birth of a child, that as he or she is able to give with the registration officer of birth and death in the district which the child was found.

Section 35, Registration of a Birth occurring outside Uganda

    1. A person giving notice of a birth occurring outside Uganda of a child whose parent or guardian is a citizen of Uganda shall produce to the registration officer the following evidence of birth:-
    a. A certificate of birth issued by appropriate authority in the foreign country with an English translation of the certificate, if it is not in English or;
    b. If the certificates of birth are not issued in the foreign country, a certificate of the birth given by the doctor, midwife or other persons who attend to the birth with an English translation of a certificate if it is not in English, or;
    c. If there is a Ugandan mission in the country abroad, a certificate of an officer of the mission that the officer is satisfied from the evidence produced and enquiries which meant that the particulars of a birth given in the certificate are correct, or;
    d.  If there is no Uganda mission in the country abroad, such other evidence as the minister may prescribe in the regulations.

    2. The person notifying of the birth shall certify in writing the registration officer the correctness and authenticity of the evidence which such persons submits.

    3. Upon receiving the evidence required under subsection 1, the registration officer shall forthwith enter the prescribed particulars of the birth in the register of birth occurring outside Uganda.

Section 36, Entry of Father in the Register 

    1) A person shall not be entered in the register as the father of any child except either;
    a) Upon the production to the registration officer of such evidence as the registration officer may require that the father and mother were married according to law or in accordance with a recognised custom;
    b) At the joint request of the father and mother of a child appearing physically before the registration officer, or;
    c)  Where the father or the mother or both the father and mother of a child are dead. Upon production of an order of a court of competent jurisdiction to the effect that the person be registered as a father.
(2) 	The registration officer may, if the circumstances so require, demand the physical presence of a child in respect of whom a person seeks to have the name of the child entered in the register in accordance with sub-section (1).

Section 37, Change of Name or Sex

 1) 	Any person, being over the age of 21 years or a widower, widow, divorced person or a married person, who wishes to change his or her name, shall cause to be published in the Gazette a notice in the prescribed form of his or her intention to do so.

2) 	Not less than seven days after the publication of the notice, the person intending to change his or her name may apply in the prescribed form to the registration officer of the registration centre in which his or her birth is registered.

3) 	The registration officer shall, upon being satisfied that the requirements of this section have been carried out and upon payment of the prescribed fee, amend the register accordingly and shall sign and date the amendment.

Section 38, Change of Name of a Child

1) 	The parents or guardian of any child under the age of 21 years, who is not married, divorced; a widower or a widow may apply in the prescribed form to the registration officer of registration centre in which the birth of that child is registered to change the name of the child.

2) 	The registration officer shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, amend the register accordingly and shall sign and date the amendment.

Section 39, Change of Sex of Child

1)	If a child, after being registered, either through an operation or otherwise, changes from a female to a male –(Interjection)– and - 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, order!

MR EKANYA: Madam Chair, is it in order for the chairperson of the committee to read a statement that is derogative to the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, my understanding is that she is reading the provisions of the law which exists.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Chair, what I am reading here was imported from the Registration of Birth and Death Act, of 1973 of the Republic of Uganda. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you can address that later. First listen, let her finish.

MS NAMUGWANYA: If a child after being registered either through an operation or otherwise changes from a female to male or from a male to female and the change is certified by a medical doctor, the registrar of the births and deaths registration district in which the birth is registered shall, with the approval of the executive director and on the application of the parent or guardian of that child, alter the particulars of the child which appear on the birth register.

Section 40, Certificate of Birth

(1) Upon receipt of the application in the prescribed form and upon payment of the prescribed fee, the executive director shall issue a certificate in the prescribed form of the birth of any person compiled in the prescribed manner from the records and registers in the executive director’s custody.

(2) A certificate of birth issued under subsection (1) shall contain the following: Name of child, place of birth, date of birth, sex of child, name, nationality, identity card number or passport number or foreign national registration certificate number of the parent or parents of the child; and any other information as may be prescribed by the Minister.

(3) 	The information contained in a certificate of birth issued under this Act is presumed to be correct and it may be received as evidence in any judicial proceedings.

(4)	A child who has been entered in the register of births and has been issued with a certificate of birth shall be issued with another certificate of birth upon adoption.

Section 41, Production of Certificate of Birth

1) Any ministry, department, agency or institution, in the exercise of its lawful function, may require production of a certificate of birth and such requirement shall be lawful.
2) Any ministry, department, agency or institution under subsection (1) may, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law for the time being, defer consideration of the Authority until the certificate of birth of the said person has been produced or other proof that the birth of the person has been registered is provided.

Part VI — Registration of Deaths

Section 42, Notification and Registration of death

(1) 	A person giving notice of a death shall, to the best of the person’s knowledge and ability, give the prescribed particulars, which shall be entered forthwith by the registration officer in the register of deaths.

(2) 	A person notifying the registration officer in sub-section (1) shall certify to the correctness of the entry by signing or affixing a mark on the register.

(3) 	Every death shall be registered immediately it occurs and in any case, not more than three months from the date of that death.

(4) 	A death shall not be registered after the expiration of three months from the date of that death except upon the applicant complying with such requirements as may be provided for in the regulations.

Section 43, Registration of deaths occurring outside Uganda

(1) 	A person giving notice of the death of a citizen of Uganda which occurred outside Uganda shall produce to the registration officer the:

(a) 	Certificate of death issued by the appropriate authority in the country in which the death occurred, with an English translation of the certificate, if it is not in English;
(b) 	Where there is a Uganda Mission in the country in which the death occurred, a certification by an officer of the Mission that the officer is satisfied, from the evidence produced to that officer and inquiries which the officer has made, that the particulars of the death given are correct; or
(c) 	Where there is no Uganda Mission in the country, any other evidence as the Minister may prescribe in the Regulations.

(2) 	The person giving notice of the death shall certify in writing, to the registration officer, the correctness and authenticity of the evidence produced.

(3) 	Upon receiving the information required under subsection (1), the registration officer shall enter the particulars of the death in the register in the prescribed manner.

Section 44, Duty to Notify of Death

(1) 	Upon the death of any person, it is the duty of:

(a) 	The next of kin or the relative of the deceased present at the time of death of the deceased;
(b) 	In the absence of persons contemplated in paragraph (a), the next of kin or relative of the deceased dwelling or being in the same area as the deceased; or
(c) 	In the absence of persons contemplated in paragraphs (a) and (b), the occupier of the house in which to the person’s knowledge the death took place or an inmate of the house in which the death took place or any person finding or taking charge of the body of the deceased person or causing the body of the deceased person to be disposed of, in that order; to give notice to the registration officer of the area in which the death took place within such time as may be prescribed.

Section 45, Certificate of Cause of Death

(1) 	In the case of a death occurring in Uganda of any person who has been attended during the person’s last illness by a medical officer, the medical officer shall sign a certificate stating to the best of the medical officer’s knowledge and belief the cause of death.

(2) 	A certificate of cause of death signed in accordance with subsection (1) shall be forwarded forthwith by the medical officer to the registration officer.

(3) 	The medical officer shall, on signing a certificate of death, issue a disposal permit to the person taking charge of the body of the deceased.

(4) 	Where an inquest is held on the body of a deceased person, the magistrate holding the inquest shall forward to the registration officer a certified copy of such finding.

(5) 	A medical officer who refuses or fails without reasonable cause to comply with any of the provisions of this section commits an offence and is liable, on conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year, or to a fine not exceeding 24 currency points, or to both.

Section 46, Registration Officer to issue Disposal Permit

(1) 	Where a registration officer receives a report in the prescribed form, in respect of a death occurring in Uganda and in that report a magistrate or a police officer has certified that the death is not one to which the Inquests Act, Cap 11 apply, the registration officer shall issue a written permit authorizing the disposal of the body of the deceased person.

(2) 	Where a person notifying of a death does not produce to the registration officer a death report as provided for under sub-section (1), the registration officer or registration and identification agent shall forthwith fill up, so far as the particulars thereby required are ascertainable by the registration officer, a death report and forward the same to the nearest magistrate or Police officer, who shall, if after making the inquiries required by section 47(1) of this Act and is satisfied that the case is not one to which the Inquests Act apply, make in the prescribed form the report required by section 47(2) of this Act.
	
Inquiries as to cause of death

(1) 	Upon receipt of a death report from a registration officer under section 46(2) of this Act, the magistrate or Police officer, or any person specially empowered by the Authority in that behalf shall cause inquiries to be made as to the cause of the death as may be prescribed.

(2) 	If the case does not appear from the inquiries to be one to which the Inquests Act applies, the magistrate or Police officer or such other person shall report accordingly to the registration officer or registration, who shall then issue a permit for the disposal of the body.

Presumption of death:

    (1) Where it is proved that a person has not been seen and has not been heard of for seven years by those who might be expected to have seen or heard of the person if the person were alive, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the person is dead.

    (2) Where a person is presumed dead in accordance with subsection (1), any person who would have been under a duty under section 42 of this Act to notify of the death of the person being presumed dead may apply for an order of a presumption of death in a court of competent jurisdiction, and the order, once issued, shall be served upon the executive director and shall have the same effect as a Certificate of Death issued under this Act.

    (3) The executive director shall maintain a register of presumed deaths and shall enter therein all orders issued by the court and served upon the executive director in respect of presumed deaths.

Certificate of Death

    (1) The Director shall upon application and payment of the prescribed fee issue a Certificate of Death in the prescribed form.

    (2) A Certificate of Death issued under subsection (1) shall contain the:

(a) 	name of deceased;
(b) 	place of death;
(c) 	date of death;
(d) 	sex of deceased;
(e) 	cause of death;
(f) 	age of the deceased;
(g) 	nationality;
(h) 	identity card number or passport number or alien number of the deceased; and
(i) 	any other information as may be prescribed by the Minister in the Regulations.

(3)	The information contained in a Certificate of Death issued under this Act shall be presumed to be correct and the information may be received in evidence in any judicial proceedings.
	
No disposal without permit

(1) 	A person shall not dispose of the body of a deceased person without a permit issued in accordance with sections 45 (3), 46 (1) or 47 (2) of this Act.

(2) 	Where due to religion a body has to be disposed within twenty four hours, a provisional permit authoring the disposal shall be issued within seven days after the death at a prescribed fee.
	
General Provisions under Part V and Part VI 

Monthly returns

Within 10 days of the last day of each month, every registration officer shall forward to the supervising officer a copy of all entries made by him or her during the preceding month in the births register book and the deaths register book.

Searches

All registers, monthly returns and indexes in the custody of the Executive Director and the registration officers shall be open for inspection by members of the public during the prescribed hours and upon payment of the prescribed fee.

Certified copies

(1) 	The executive director and a registration officer of births and deaths shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, furnish a certified copy of any entry in a register or return in his or her custody or a certified copy of any extract from that entry.

(2) 	The copy of any entry in any register or return, or the copy of any extract from the entry, which is certified under the hand of the executive director to be a correct copy, shall be prima facie evidence in all court proceedings of the facts contained in the copy.

Correction of errors

(1) 	The executive director or any registration officer, when authorised by the executive director, may correct any error in any register, return, index or certificate.

(2) 	Any correction made under subsection (1) shall be done without erasure and shall be authenticated by the executive director.

Offences and Penalties

(1) 	Any person who, being under a duty to register the birth or death of any person, fails to do so within the prescribed period or refuses to state any of the prescribed particulars commits an offence and is liable to a fine not exceeding six currency points or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding three months.

(2) 	Any person who wilfully gives any false information or particulars for the purpose of registration is liable to a fine not exceeding 12 currency points or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months.

Regulations

The Minister may make regulations providing for all or any of the following:

    (a) The forms to be used and the particulars to be given under Part V and VI;
    (b) The fees to be paid under Part V and VI;
    (c) The mode in which particulars shall be given to the registration officer of births and deaths;
    (d) The manner in which any document shall be signed under Part V and VI;

MR EKANYA:  We need your guidance. We need to be in tandem with our chairperson. I am sorry to say that what she is reading is in the report and I thought that we are at committee stage where we need to adopt clause by clause and then we move. We adopted the report. Can you guide us on the relevancy of the chairperson reading the entire thing?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Members, what the chairperson is reading is the provision of the Births and Deaths Registration Act which is being repealed and is now being brought here. So, that is why she is reading it. Please finish. Hon. Members, why don’t you let her finish and then we shall go to the adoption? You have the report on your Ipads. Hon. Members, what she is doing is putting the proposal on the Hansard; that is what she is doing. It is at committee stage.

MR EKANYA: But Madam Chairperson, we are seeking for your indulgence. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Please.

MS NAMUGWANYA: I thank you. Honourable colleagues, I have only three minutes to go. 

    (e) The keeping of all registers, records and indexes and the making of returns under Part V and VI;
    (f) The inspection of registers, records and indexes to be kept under Part V and VI;
    (g) The provision of certified copies of records or extracts of records to be kept under Part V and VI;
    (h)  The hours during which births and deaths may be registered and inspection of registers, records and indexes may be made;
    (i) The places at which births and deaths occurring on ships within the territorial waters of Uganda shall be registered;
    (j) Generally for the purposes of Part V and VI.

Saving provision

    (1) The Minister shall, within one year of the coming into effect of this Act, by Statutory Instrument make provisions to ensure the registration of every birth and death within Uganda and until such a Statutory Instrument is made, the registration of births and death shall remain under the Births and Death Registration Act, Cap 309.

    (2) The Statutory Instruments under the Births and Deaths Registration Act, Cap 309 are here by saved.

Amend Parts V, VI, VII, VII, IX and X by re-naming accordingly and the justification is for proper referencing. I thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the provisions of Part V and Part VI of the Births and Deaths Registration Act be introduced into this Bill. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I agree that there are no minority reports here but there are small things to correct. They have talked about it at the beginning of registration of birth – [HON. MEMBERS: “Isn’t he a member of the committee?”]

THE CHAIRPERSON: Why are you debating your report? 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: I did not sign this report and I had a minority report.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Was it part of your minority report?

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Yes.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, it was not on this one. Do not smuggle. (Laughter)

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: But I wanted to give general information.

THE CHAIRPERSON: You will give information but you cannot contribute to your report.

MR FOX ODOI: I thank you. It makes sense to introduce this particular part into the law for one fundamental reason; that the law will not be complete without the provisions that the chairperson has just taken us through. Now that we have amendments to the provision of the chairperson, I am seeking your guidance on how you propose that we move. Do we go clause by clause to make our amendments or we -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. Honourable members, why I talked about what we are doing and why I said that is the question is because some Members did not understand what was happening. 
So I wanted them to know that we were bringing the other law into this one so that it becomes more complete. But we shall go clause by clause.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you.

MS BETTY AMONGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have no problem with the importation of the law except when it comes to the provision related to a man changing to a woman - (Laughter) - or a woman changing to a man. It is good that the chairperson indicated that those Acts were of 1973 and under our new law, the 1995 Constitution Article 31(2)(a), it states that marriage between persons of the same sex is prohibited. And the provision which talks about any law that contradicts the Constitution is null and void. So in other words, when we come to delete that particular one, it will be in tandem with it; in fact a law, which contradicts the 1995 Constitution would be in tandem with that particular one.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think we should be a bit careful. There are people who are hermaphrodites; who are born with two sexual organs and at some stage you must decide whether you are going to be a man or a woman -(Laughter)-honourable members, this is serious, it is not a joke. There are hermaphrodites in this country. These are born with two sexual organs. There are people who have both a male and female organ and it is the same person.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you, so much, Madam Chairperson. It is very true in medicine and hon. Dr Kiyonga will bear me witness that there are some genetic disorders that can lead to people having some organs, which may occur as if somebody is both woman and man. But in appearance, phenotypically, the person will have a predominant organ that will say this person is more of a male than a female and then he will have a small part of a woman but surely will be a man. (Laughter) 

However, we have some instances where people have got more genes of men than women and we call them super males. Those are people with babies, suicidal tendencies who can kill anybody anywhere -(Interjections)- I am still talking medicine, thre is no law in this. (Laughter) Then we have some others who have got Turner’s syndrome or Klinefelter Syndrome. Dr Kiyonga, you will just bear me witness. Still you will have the dominant feature coming out. One will be more of a female than any other person or somebody becomes more of a male. 

When it comes even to hermaphrodites, the features of a male will just be predominant. For that matter, unless Madam Chairperson, you want to tell me that we should have some transgender. Now, what do I mean here? We have some trans-genders; one is born a man, but decides to do bilateral discectomy. What do I mean here? This is the removal of both testicles and the man starts behaving like a woman. But when I was in India, even these trans-genders were telling me that you cannot reconstruct the organ and the person becomes a woman. They start even using their hands to create some organs as if they are there but they are not. 

Therefore, I do not know how we are going to start debating this thing of change of sex of a child. Unless you want to tell me that we start bringing these things which we refused here.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable member, you are a medical person, please talk like a doctor.

DR BITEKYEREZO: I am talking like a doctor, honestly, Madam Chairperson. Unless we become very clear that, when a hermaphrodite has been reconstructed to become a specific sex and then it is done by a medical doctor, we can agree. But when you say that change of sex anyhow, you are going to start having trans-genders here.

MR MIGADDE: Thank you, very much, Madam Chairperson. I am not medical personnel, but I have been able to read widely. Much as we are talking about hermaphrodites, there are cases in this world where we have had sex re-alignment and Dr Bitekyerezo knows it; and it is by choice. People have changed their gender from male to female. One of those common cases is actually George William Jorgensen in America who even served in American forces for 20 years and after those 20 years, the man chose to change into a woman and he became Christine Jorgensen. These cases are there because we are moving in a changing world where technology is changing every day.

MS ALASO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think that God has accorded us an opportunity in this Bill that we are considering to correct something which is now very explosive. I would like to take cognisance of the fact that there are Ugandans that are born hermaphrodites and there will be need for corrective surgery. But, for us to carry forward these 1973 anomalies in the law which talked of “Otherwise”; what does “Otherwise” mean in our time? We need to boldly contextualise this and read into the possible interpretation in our day and era.

My heart goes out for the children of this country that are being adopted by homosexuals. We read just a month ago, a little boy who was called Jack being told to change into a girl to be called Jacqueline and they took the little fellow who cannot consent, or understand the times, they cut out what they wanted to remove and turned the fellow into a Jacqueline. This is the time for us to protect the children of this country -(Applause)- who are going to help the people who are abused? For tonight, let us be very specific. If we want to say we want our brothers and sisters, who have a disability and anomaly at birth to have a corrective surgery, let us be very specific. But we can no longer leave it to chance.

Madam Chairperson, if you are born and your leg has a problem, and they correct it, it does not change you to something else. You just get facilitated to be better. That is the corrective surgery Dr Bitekyerezo has been telling us about. I think it would be very dangerous in this day and era to leave this provision which is even like hon. Betty has said – against the provisions of our Constitution! Let us amend it.

MR TANNA: Madam Chair, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. Clause 39(1) that we are talking about – change of sex of child – says, “If a child, after being registered, either through an operation or otherwise, changes from a female to a male, or from a male to a female and the change is certified …”

Madam Chairperson, the bone of contention here is “changing from male to female” or “female to male.” We are not talking about having both here. We are talking about an existing male changing into a female and an existing woman changing into a man. That is exactly what some of my colleagues are referring to. However, it goes ahead to contradict itself in the next statement and says, “The change is then certified by a medical doctor.” 

Therefore, I want to give the benefit of doubt to the drafters of this particular clause. I think they meant to address the condition that you have raised, which is realisic as I support. If somebody is born a hermaphrodite, but with a strong genealogy of either male or female, it may be certified by a doctor. 

However, the wording that we agree that somebody in Uganda can go and change from male to female or female to male, as my honourable colleague was quoting somebody in America, who did it a few months ago – I urge that we delete that sentence. Let us insert that, “Should somebody be born with such a condition, then such a person may…” However, to change from male to female, Madam Chair, we need to amend that sentence.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Make a formulation.

MR BENSON OBUA: Madam Chair, my issue is not on sex change. Therefore, I do not know whether we can first put this to rest and then I will come up. 

MS MUTONYI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I support hon. Alaso. Under such circumstances of a child that hon. Alaso was talking about, what will be done? This is because a lot of things are being done that we do not anticipate. A child may be hijacked and then we later discover the sex has changed. What shall we do? Why don’t we leave it open like the committee has suggested?

Madam Chairperson and members, we are not encouraging such changes, however, we are living in a funny world and these things may happen. What would happen under such circumstances?  For example, in the case of a child like the one that hon. Alaso was talking about, where shall we register it? What will happen?

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chair. This law also has provision for the registration of aliens. We are talking about prohibiting Ugandans from sex change. However, in the circumstance where you have a foreigner ordinarily living in Uganda and registered as an alien in Uganda, he leaves our jurisdiction and undergoes a sex change; which provision would enable you to capture that part of the sex change?

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much. I would like to thank the committee for lifting the old Act into this new one. However, my concern is that it seems the committee never sat down to analyse this Act. They have just decided to reveal it in front of us here. If you had analysed this Bill at the committee stage, this issue would not have arisen. Therefore, you have really transferred this challenge to us wholesale, yet you were supposed to go through and see which ones are the correct ones that should be lifted.

Regarding the change of sex, you know very well that this Act was made in 1973. That is the time when colonialists’ minds infiltrated our brains. They thought that it was normal to change from male to female. That is why they put that one.

I would say that we maintain it because we cannot know what will happen in future. As mentioned earlier – somebody has gone abroad and changed his or her sex – where do we put this one? Do we kill him or we change his name? Therefore, I think this one should remain for the future.

I strongly support the issue of the hermaphrodite being put in here. There is an example of a girl who was studying in Ediofe. She had both sexes; male and female. The child had normal breasts. The father thought the child was a girl and was even put in the girls’ dormitory. However, with time, the girl was discovered to be more of a man than a woman. She was taken for operation and the breasts were cut off. She is now called Edward. Therefore, it is normal. Let us leave this provision to cover that part. Thank you very much.

MS KAABULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I would like to concur with hon. Sanjay Tanna. You cannot change sex from man to woman in this case. If we are talking about hermaphrodite, I think we should be specific. Let us go to Section 32 of the report where we are talking about registration of that type: age and disability. Being a hermaphrodite is a disability. I think what we should do is to improve on the disability –(Interjections)– yes, it is an abnormality; it is a disability -(Interruption)

MR KABAJO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The issue here is that the parents, especially in our villages may hide the information. They may not declare the information that their child has both organs. At the beginning, the child may be registered as one of the sexes. The medical doctors deep in the villages may also not be there to advise the parent about the dominant organ; so, we should be careful about this issue. Then later on when the dominant organ comes out and maybe they have been able to consult with a medical professional, they are able to change. 

MS KAABULE: Thank you for that information. The moment you have two organs, you cannot be described either as male or female; that is why we have the word “hermaphrodite.” They will not hide it because - Madam Chairperson, I concur that we go with “the registration of the type and disability,” and delete the section of, “change of name or sex.” Here, we do not want to promote the change from male to female or from female to male. I would rather we delete 7 and quantify 32. Thank you.

MS MUTYABULE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I stand to support hon. Tanna’s view. When we talk about changing sex, we shall be going into other things which you would not like to hear or have here in Uganda and Africa. Let us come out and say specifically “hermaphrodite” but not to say that we change from man to woman or vice versa. What we can also add, medically - maybe Dr Bitekyerezo will be able to inform me further. There is a certain age when you can be able to tell that this one is a man or a woman if he is born with two parts and so, we can say that such a child who is born with two parts should be registered at a certain age and not at birth. 

DR BITEKYEREZO: I would like to inform hon. Mutyabule that this one should be titled as, “A child born with ambiguous sexual organs” then we shall change it and say, when a child is born with ambiguous sexual organs - and this one should be noted and genotyping of this child should be done by a recognised medical expert to ascertain the dominant sex and then it is noted later on. 

MS MUTYABULE: I think the clarification which Dr Bitekyerezo has given is what I am driving at. Let us come up with ambiguous sexual productive organ and then proceed as he has actually suggested. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Chairperson, I share in the concern of the honourable colleagues. I want to raise a procedural matter. The chairperson read out a number of clauses that she wants to be included in the new law. The one we are discussing right now is not even the first; it is the twelfth of the clauses that have been proposed. Given its importance, it has attracted the attention of most of us. I want to request that we are allowed to discuss these clauses as they follow each other. This is because we also have issues. Personally, I have issues right from the very first clause she suggested here. 

Madam Chairperson, are we procedurally moving on well to pick on an item that comes in the middle of the proposal instead of starting with those that come first before this very important clause whose concern I also share? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you listened to the presentation in full. What you have done is concentrate on one. You are the ones choosing what to say. I have no problem going clause by clause but it is you who shot first and jumped into the arena. 

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. When Galileo said the world was round, the church decided to despise him. He was right and they were wrong. At that time, it was blasphemy to say that the world is round. We are now debating about hermaphrodites but the phenomenon of sex change is real. If a Ugandan went abroad, performed a sex change and came back, are you going to put them in jail or murder them? 

Ladies and gentlemen, much as it is abhorrent or obnoxious, let us accept reality - (Interjections) - when you were talking, I sat down. Protect me, Madam Chairperson. Let us listen to each other. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Order, Members. Resume your seats.

MAJ. GEN. (RTD) OTAFIIRE: I am not supporting sex change. I am only talking about reality. God said, “Thou shall not murder” don’t we have people in jail for murder? Every Sunday the church says, “Do not commit adultery” but people die of AIDS. I do not support it but it is real. Ladies and gentlemen, we live in a world where things unpalatable have happened. Dr Bitekyerezo, I wish you could be realistic as a scientist. Whether the change is effective or not, it is real. Let us not argue from points of ignorance or what we want. We are legislating for reality.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, Parliament is a place for exchanging ideas. Please listen to one another. You may not like or agree with everything but listen to one another.

MR EBIL: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. In this Parliament, we bring the views of our people because not all of them can come into Parliament. Whatever we are debating here, must rhyme with what our people think. Legitimising change of sex orientation is something that our people do not believe in and we are saying that in the strongest terms –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I want to give hon. Ebil is that there is a misconception and I have seen it being carried by hon. Otafiire, about sex organs and sex. Sex organs are just a symbol of what you are; a symbol of what a human being is. They are not the sex; they are gender themselves. Even if one changes the sex organs, one may not have changed their sex and I want this to go directly to hon. Otafiire. You could go and change your sex organs from a male organ to female but hon. Otafiire, you will remain male. Thank you very much.

MR EBIL: Madam Chairperson and honourable members, this is a historic moment. This is a great opportunity for us in Parliament to say “No” to what our people say “No” to. We must move forward by saying that -(Interruption)

MR TANNA: Hon. Ebil, I would like to thank you for giving way. Madam Chairperson and honourable colleagues, I beg to present and differ from the submission of hon. Otafire. He said that we have legislated against murder, are there no people in Luzira for murder? Should we therefore legislate and legitimize murder? Should we legislate and legitimise rape? Should we legitimise sodomy? Why should we sit in this House and legitimise a change of sex that was given to you by birth? (Applause) 

MR CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go back to provision 29 as proposed by the chairperson. I put the question that part 5 of clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, I find it very strange in this House when as members of Parliament, we do not listen to one another. I think even if we differ in opinion, the freedom to speak must be protected. At the end of the day, we are required to take decisions in this House but for someone who has not even allowed listening to the other, what decision can that person take without necessarily undermining Parliament? That is also another matter.

I am only wondering whether at this moment we should not allow debate on this subject so that we take decisions basing on information raised from both sides. What has actually happened is that we stifled the debate without proceeding to debate.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Who has stifled the debate? Please hon. Mwiru, you cannot accuse me of stifling the debate. We have been debating that matter for almost 40 minutes. Let us go to the new clause 29. Honourable members, I put the question that clause 29 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 30

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment on clause 30. In respect to clause 37(2), the National Identification Register (NIR) shall be maintained in an electronic manner. In this case, the committee proposes a birth register book. There is no need for special mention of a birth register book since under clause 38, the content of NIR, being created under this Act, includes this information on all persons required to be registered under this Act.

In addition, while the title of clause 30 is “Birth Register Book”, the details of this clause make reference to death as well. This should be deleted from this clause and death registration be handled appropriately under part 6 of this Bill. I, therefore, propose as follows: 

The headnote of this clause to read, “Birth registration.” Clause 30 be re-drafted as follows, “A registration officer in charge of this registration area shall register birth and shall enter into the register or cause to be entered the prescribed particulars of every birth notified.

I also propose that we amend and add a sub-clause to clause 30 as follows, “Upon registration of every birth by a registration officer, the authority will allocate a national identification number to a child identified as a citizen of Uganda, or alien identification number, to a child identified as an alien.” I justify this under clause 37. Only one register is being created under this Act and the birth information is just like any other information being registered and stored in the register as a result of harmonisation.

Allocation of a unique number at birth registration will help sort out the problem of identification and this number shall be the one such a child carries throughout their life as a citizen or as the case may be in Uganda. This is possible since it is the same authority that will be registering birth and issuing national identity numbers and cards.

It makes sense that those whose birth is registered under this law are assigned numbers at birth and they should appear on their birth certificates. I make that amendment, Madam Chairperson.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, you have heard the minister’s proposal.

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: Madam Chairperson, I oppose this arrangement. I think the minister is stretching it too far. This is a birth register book and if you read the provision, a registration officer in charge of a registration area shall keep a registration of birth. Of course, I tend to do away with death at this level - that is wrong to have death at this level and shall enter therein.

Much as we talk about the electronic register and we shall have it, even when we went to register during this exercise under the electronic register, there was a registration book. It is under it that I was given a registration certificate I hold, before I held a card and my name was entered there.

We are in Uganda and we are in this world. It is okay at a parish level or village level to have a registration book for either birth or death. From that book, one can extract and draw the electronic register and there is nothing harmful to this word. 

I beg the minister not to go back on his amendment because I believe this is the way to go. I was in Britain and they have advanced so much in technology but to date in the UK, votes are counted manually. They have resisted electronic voting for obvious reasons. Therefore, we are having a hybrid and it should be carried forward. I am requesting the honourable minister to agree to have a birth register book at registration level and from that we can extract information and feed it in so that you have a fall-back position - in any case, it does no harm at all.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I think the minister needs to clarify; for instance, if a child is born in hospital, the hospital will issue the child a birth certificate. If a child is born in my village, I am sure the registration area would be the village; it will be the LC I who is in charge and will be responsible for the registration of the child. In that residence, there could be no computer. How can you register a birth and death of a villager? 

I am informing you that if you say that it should be electronic registration, you are making a big mistake since registration areas are going to be very many; even health centres I, II, III and IV will be registration centres. Are you telling us that you are going to computerise all these areas such that when a child is born in hospital immediately he or she is registered? I would like to inform the minister that you are free to maintain both where it is practical but I think it is important to have a backup.

MR LUBOGO: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi. We are trying to process and pass this Bill. I believe it is not going to take long when passed for it to be assented to and it becomes law. Once it becomes law, it will mean that the provisions we have inserted shall become enforceable immediately. I wonder how prepared the minister is, that immediately this Bill is passed, we shall be able to make this effective given the consideration of our country.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, it is in that regard that the minister’s proposal - if we have erred and passed “Electronic” we are making a mistake. I am objecting the interpretation; we can define a register book. This book can be maintained both manually and electronically. You should not get confused. Therefore, Gen. Nyakairima, do not get worried. You may not be prepared since the Bill is going to become law immediately. My colleagues have raised that it is not possible even in my village Busamaga that the computer will be available to register children who are born on that very day. I would like to plead with you to allow and pass what the committee has proposed with the amendment of removing death since death will be under the day.

MR RUHUNDA: Thank you, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. As a country, we are aiming at modernisation. There are a lot of efforts geared towards information and communication technology. Right now, if you went to the village, there is exchange of money through mobile money and other facilities. Now it is much easier to manage information using computer or any other electronic device than the books which are very cumbersome. This is why I support the minister’s proposal to see that we modernise the handling of management -(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am happy with your information but you should debate substantively; do not give me such information again. (Laughter) I agree with you that soon mobile phones will become computers. For instance, those who use iPhones can use them. However, those iPhones can have limitations. Some cannot download pictures or pdf files, which are more than five pages. Supposing we want data on an individual, you will need a computer in most cases to deal with it. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with the committee that we maintain what he is saying that the registrar will be both manual and electronic. In future, you can remove it. I wish to plead with the Minister for Internal Affairs to concede and then we can move.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform my colleague that most governments world over have invested seriously in establishing modern identity management systems –(Interjections)– yes, this Government has invested.  Today, I would like to say that we have 15 million un-forgeable finger prints, 15 million electronic photographs and 15 million electronic signatures.

The budget that we are talking about is supposed to put in place an infrastructure from a sub-county up to the national level to register citizens and aliens living in this country. Time is coming when there will be no one living in this country that will not be registered. The fear is taken care of; there are investments we have put in place to register persons at birth electronically - we have invested and we have the equipment. 

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add some beef to the reality. We are talking about a register that should be manual or electronic but my considered opinion is that we should go in for both. Even the mobile money we are talking about has a manual register where you write the amount of money and the cash that comes to you. You do not go and get the money like you are using a credit card, as we would say –(Interjections)– yes, we are not hyper modern, like my honourable colleague was assuming. 

Also, if you went to most developed countries, especially those with the best lifts ever, they still provide for the manual step for you to climb. It is just a precaution that in case the electronic system fails, we can use the manual. 

Madam Chairperson, I would like us to address our minds to a scenario in a bank – you may not have experienced it. One time I went to a bank and I sat from 3.00 p.m. to midnight waiting for the network in order to use an ATM machine. That is the hazardous bit of the modernisation we are talking about- (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the information I would like to give to the House is that if today you went to URA to pay taxes, you can wait for a full week being told the network is off, yet you continue to pay demurrage. I do not know whether the minister is aware of that.

MS ALASO: Thank you, hon. Anywarach. The information I would like to give you is what I should have given the honourable minister. During the national ID registration, those super powerful gadgets of the Ministry of Internal Affairs would collapse, there would be no batteries and for one week the electronic system would be down. Now if that happened at the primary level and people were left to fill forms, go home and wait until they announce that the battery and the computer have come back to life - if you do that for a baby that is being born in hospital in the morning, are you going to keep the mother and the father in that hospital for the next one week? I thought the honourable minister would reflect on the lessons of the registration exercise that has just been concluded. Thank you.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like clarification on the dangers of having both systems so that we guard against them. Otherwise, I appreciate that we have to modernise but I also know that modernisation is a process. We can plan to fast track the process of modernisation but taking into consideration what members are raising and the experience we have gone through.

Even in this House, we appreciate the iPads given to us as we try to modernise but you find that some of our colleagues still need to use the hard copy as we catch up with those who are very fast. What are the dangers of maintaining the two systems?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, the members are concerned about how you will deal with the transition. When will you actually complete your processes? What will be happening in the meantime?

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Chairperson, as I conclude, the answer is very simple. For the transition, of course you have the statutory instruments that even within this we can provide for the minister to provide for the transition period, effective time and so on. However, let us be a little bit considerate to the realities on the ground in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I support your argument; we need to address the transition from this situation to the final e-voting, when we are completely 100 percent.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We are talking about biometric registration. I do not know how you will manage to keep the record of 15 million fingerprints in books. I do not know how you will manage to manually finger print little kids of a week or a month old. The fears of my colleagues are taken care of. 

The primary stage has to deal with 15 million citizens registered. Moving forward, you will only register new-born kids and aliens, the numbers are not that big and you have a timeframe within which to register.

The minister makes a very legitimate point; the register ultimately will be an electronic data base and that process has already begun. If you want corrupt data, go for exercise books. I will tell my own experience during the NRM primaries. On a particular day, a particular candidate pulled out several pages from the manual register. So, you turn up at a polling station and your name is not in the register because it has been plucked out. The best way to secure data is to keep it in electronic form. Since we are dealing with biometric data, let us keep it in electronic form. 

MR MULONGO: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 35(e) alludes to the fact that at the end of every exercise, the registration forms in addition to other materials shall be returned to the headquarters of the authority meaning that the primary information captured manually will be maintained at the primary source. That has to be maintained by the authority. The information that may have been extracted for digital purposes is the one which will be maintained electronically for easy access, retrieval and reference by other agencies including the authority itself.

As hon. Odoi-Oywelowo said, what is supposed to be maintained is the electronic database but the primary material shall also be available and maintained at the authority headquarters.

MR FOX ODOI: Thank you, hon. Mulongo. The other misconception I would like to correct is that an LCI Chairman will be the person registering births. The registration officer will be an officer of the authority, facilitated with that equipment as the authority requires for purposes of registration.

It will not be my LCI Chairman, Mwenge-Nyamainga in Kirewa Sub County where I come from. It will be an officer of the authority, with equipment capable of capturing biometric information of a person being registered.

MS NALUBEGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I agree that we need to digitalise our systems and the minister has informed this House that they have a data base which has over 15 million biometrics and still photos. I want to challenge him for the authentication of such data. In this country, we do not even have a Data Protection Act. Anybody can hack into this system and disorganise the information stored.

Madam Chairperson, when we were registering for national IDs the first time, our pictures and the dates of birth were not captured well. The second time, people are still being issued IDs with unmatched information. I agree that we keep two records.

The Government of Uganda has been implementing the e-governance programmes but to date, nothing is effective. Look at the Alfresco in this Parliament; you may want to download a document that is before the House but a technician hassles to connect your iPad for you to access that information.

Madam Chairperson, there is no harm; let us maintain both the manual and digital register.

MS NTABAZI: Thank you, hon. Nalubega. Through the Chairperson, I concur with her. When I look at the amendment of the minister, there is no problem yet because the (a) that he proposes is that the headnote of clause 30 should read “birth registration”. A birth registration can either be electronic or paper. I do not see any problem with that.

Secondly, on clause 30(b), the redrafting should be “a registration officer in charge of a registration area shall register the birth and shall enter them in the birth register.” It may be an electronic register or a paper register. I do not see any problem with leaving the amendment the way it reads.

MR BIREKERAAWO: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I would like to support the issue of maintaining the two systems. There are two very important organisations I know of; the traditional Christian churches: the Catholic Church and Protestant Church, which maintain the old system of a register. Today, if hon. Odoi goes to the church where his father was baptised, he will find that they have a register. Go to Rubaga Cathedral and look for the first baptised Catholic or in Namirembe Cathedral, you will find them in a register.

Therefore, even if we are going to have an electronic data base, we should have a backup. In the Catholic Church today, when a child is baptised in a parish or a village, the record is brought to the diocese. That is when they can enter it in an electronic data base but the parishes maintain the register just in case, as a fall back. 

I would like us to emulate these two examples of the traditional churches. (Interjections) Gen. Joseph Aronda Nyakairima – (Laughter)- if you go to the church where you were baptised, you will find your name, the day you  were baptised, the day you got married, all this record is there. I think we should maintain the register as a backup position for the electronic database.

Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR SSEBUNYA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think we need to focus on the clause the minister read so that we can move. I have not seen a manual register for our passports. We have gone all over the world and our data has been captured electronically and we have always accessed information in a passport in a databank. We can only move forward.

I am here to support the idea of hon. Odoi. Since we have managed to create a databank or database of 15 million Ugandans on a daily basis -(Interruption)

MS NALUBEGA: Madam Chairperson, if I have heard properly the honourable member who was holding the Floor he said that we have a databank and I am informing this House that this country does not have a databank. Is it in order for the honourable member to tell lies to this House that Uganda has a databank yet, this databank is supposed to be created by the National Information Technology Authority, which is in the process of making one? Is the honourable in order to tell lies to this House?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable member, where is the databank? (Laughter)

MR SSEBUNYA: Madam Chairperson, every institution has a databank. There are many different databanks. This one we are creating is specific to registration of persons. So, there are different databanks. My reference was to the passport that people have managed to have an electronic databank on passports; we have started on building a databank for registration of persons and we have already advanced the money. 

Our land titles are already being converted to electronic and that is also another databank -(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I know that debating the issue of a register at this age where we are still transiting from paper to digital, I can appreciate the difficulty of members when we think of leaving the paper register and going digital. The register in this proposal is not saying there will not be any paper work but the recognition of the register would be the register that you would have an identification number.

Madam Chairperson, I would like to inform the House that a register is not necessarily a compilation of papers but we also have to recognise that every digital register in the computer has a backup. Should we now legislate on the backup as a transit? That should be the question. However, saying we should task government or the minister to have both, we would be still defeating the very purpose of this very good law.

That is the information I wanted to give to my honourable colleague.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, let us go back to the minister’s amendment. He wanted to amend the headnote to read “birth registration”; is that okay with members? I put the question that headnote be amended as proposed by the minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now we go to the body. Can the minister read the proposed amendment so that we take a vote? Read it again, just the text redrafting clause 30.

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: While the title of Clause 30 is birth register book, the details of this clause make reference to death as well; this should be deleted from this clause and death registration will be handled appropriately under part 6 of this Bill.
I, therefore, propose the following: 
“
    a) The headnote of clause 30 read ‘birth registration’”
Clause 30(b) was redrafted as follows: “Registration officer in charge of a registration area shall register birth and shall enter in the register or cause to be entered, the prescribed particulars of every birth notified.”
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us first dispose of that. Honourable members, this provision does not talk about e-voting it talks about keeping a register. So, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed by the minister?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Now, read the next one. 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I propose that we amend and add sub clause (c) to clause 30, as follows: “Upon registration of every birth by registration officer, the authority will allocate a national identification number to a child identified as a citizen of Uganda or alien identification number to a child identified as an alien child.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new sub clause be inserted as proposed? 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, in improvement of Clause 31 (2), should not make provision for levying of a fee for late registration of a birth; we want to remove that. However, a person should make an application for late registration and as a current Cap 309 of Birth and Death Registration Act, a general provision was made to that effect. I propose that we borrow from that and insert a similar clause in a general provision under Part 5 and 6 after the proposed clause 56 of the committee to read as follows: a) “A person giving particulars of birth of any child or death of any person under section 31 of this Act, shall not be required to pay any fee for late registration.”

b) I further propose that in Clause 31 (2) we should delete the phrase “and the prescribed fee has been paid.” The new clause 31 (2) should therefore read as follows: “A birth not registered within six months from the date of that birth shall not be registered unless the registrar is satisfied as to the truth of the particulars and is directed to register them by the executive director.”

Sub clause (c) of the clause 30 should be deleted. It is not necessary since registration under this Bill is a continuous activity by the authority. 

I would like to amend_

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment on clause 31. A child must be registered immediately or not more than two days. I have seen this and it used to happen in the villages. As soon as a child is born, the following day, if you do not report that child, you are arrested.

The Mutala Chief was responsible to ensure that you report and the information is taken immediately. If you say six months - supposing somebody has brought a child from Congo and claims the child was born here. The reason it should be immediately is to avoid people bringing children from elsewhere to be registered in the country; and to make sure that those who have delivered from the hospital are immediately registered. 

Madam Chairperson -(Interruption)

MS NAMBOOZE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The information I would like to give is that we are now dealing with the situation where we have already experienced problems, where parents have lost children, people are stealing other people’s children even to the extent that they even connive with medical officers.

When you give these people a lot of time to register births, you are in fact facilitating the crime of stealing babies. In modern society, children are registered in most countries within the first 30 days of birth.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, assuming we agree with six months and the child has not been registered and it dies, what happens? Do you register both birth and death at the same time? There is a conflict and that is why it must be immediately after birth, in fact it should be within 24 hours. If you have not registered the child in 24 hours – (Interjections)- it must be automatic. This is because for a child, you cannot not take a fingerprint. Will you?  If you are not going to take a fingerprint of a child, you can get some people registering multiple children. If you say I was born in Kama – (Interruption) 

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson – 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I have not given you. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, this is a minister in charge of births and death registration. At least give him.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: No, I have given hon. Odoi. (Laughter)

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Nandala, for giving me the Floor. Madam Chairperson, there is a duty which falls under Clause 32, which we are about to deal with; if you permit me, I will read it verbatim. It takes care of hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s concern: “Upon the birth of a child, it is the duty of - a) both the father and mother of the child; b) In the absence of the father … to ensure that the parent or guardian or person being in charge of the child notify the registration officer of the birth.”

The principle here is that you have a duty to notify the registration officer of the birth of the child. What we are dealing with looks to be an exception to the general rule and the exception is that a woman in West Budama North living in the village, where there is no telephone and the roads are bad, she gives birth through a C-section attended to in a remote health centre, fails to have this child registered and six months elapse, there is a standard given that, that child will only be registered when the registration officer is satisfied as to the truth of the particulars given.

There must be a verification exercise. You cannot, therefore, import a child from Kenya, which is the fear of hon. Nandala- Mafabi, and have him registered here.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: What I was raising is that a child is born, the mother will not be in position to go and report, the father should do so. If the father is in Kampala working and the child was born in Busamaga, they are saying that in the area, where the child is possibly born, in that home, somebody should go and report the birth of the child.

I do not think in West Budama, you do not have people who can walk to the sub-county to report that a child has been born in that area; I know North Budama. (Interruption)

MS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, for giving way, hon. Nandala. I would like to inform you that in certain cultures, the child is not named immediately. Therefore, we need to give a bit of time so that the child’s name is given and the correct name is registered. I remember I was in the hospital when I delivered my third born; we gave no name until I went home. We should give a bit of period of time, maybe, a month so that we can register the children correctly. Thank you. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, that is true. Children are born in hospitals; what they usually do if you have not known, they will say a baby born to Madam Flora Nandala and this is one of the notifications and that is the name the child will carry. Children who are born in hospitals, if they have not been named by the parent, they will put the name of the mother and they give them the immunisation card of that area. That will be the identification at the time when you will say the child now has changed the name from baby Flora Nandala to Andrew Werisa. That is how it happens.

Madam Chairperson, the cultures we are talking about, if they are supposed to help us to register Ugandans, will be changed because sometimes - I will give you an example. In our area, you must be one year and above to call the clan people – for me who did CRE 223, I know how they name in the African culture; there is a period after one or two years, where the child is renamed in the local way – because if you are saying the name of the child, did they baptise the child there and then? No, it will only have a surname name and yet, the child must have the Christian name and pagan names. So, in such cases, there are serious notification periods. 

I would, therefore, like to propose that what the minister is raising for now – we do not want to give people chance to steal children not named immediately in the register without our knowledge as hon. Nambooze has said, or for people to bring children from DR Congo and other areas that I will not name but you know, to come and register them in Uganda.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister, how do you respond because we need to move?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: I do not know children who are coming from DR Congo but immediate registration is the way to go and that is the principle behind this proposal. About the three and six months we are talking about, it is a fee that is charged to those who will be registering late. But we concede on immediate registration. (Applause)

THE CHAIRPERSON: So, are you abandoning your proposal of the six months?

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: We abandon that, Madam Chairperson.        

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 31, be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 31, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 32

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the minister has abandoned 31 (2). Let us go to Clause 32 -  

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I thought that we are on 31.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We have finished that.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: So, we have agreed on “immediately”?

THE CHAIRPERSON: Yes. He has abandoned the other one. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: But, Madam Chairperson –

THE CHAIRPERSON: We are on clause 32. He has abandoned that one. I now put the question that Clause 32 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33

GEN. NYAKAIRIMA: Madam Chairperson, “Since there is need to authenticate and prove the identity of whoever will be providing information to be registered under this Act and the fact that all people will be registered in this country, it is important that only the National Identification Number (NIN) in case of citizens and Alien Identification Number (AIN) in case of aliens, is the number that we record for purposes of registration under this Act and not a passport number as is being proposed under Clause 33 (2) (b) and (c). 

Further, in 33 (2) (d), in respect of the informant, he or she should also provide his or her National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number as the case maybe.”

I, therefore, propose to redraft 33 (2) (b), (c) and (d) as follows: 
“ 
(b)	In respect of the mother, the name, age, marital status, usual residence, nationality, National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number for citizens and Aliens respectively, level of education, profession or occupation, and previous births;
(c) 	in respect of the father, the name, age, marital status, usual residence, nationality, National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number for citizens and aliens respectively, level of education and profession or occupation; and
(d) 	in respect of the informant, the name, capacity, nationality, National Identification Number or Alien Identification Number for citizens and aliens respectively and signature of informant and date of notification."

I thank you.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: The minister has very lengthy amendments that he is reading but we are following and yet, we want to internalise them. Isn’t it procedurally right that the minister brings to us written amendments in advance so that we can also look at them? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have been moving well and I think members have the amendments of the committee but not the minister’s. Did you distribute them?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the minister is raising very good amendments to what the committee has raised. As far as we are concerned, we are concentrating on the committee’s and his is about reading and passing. The reason we are not picking it very well sometimes is that at the end of the day, we may be arguing and yet, we would want to support the minister. 

Would it not be procedurally right that the minister distributes his amendment in addition to the ones of the committee because the committee report has been here for more –(Interjection)– I hope you can read from the IPad that you are talking about –(Laughter)– otherwise, for me, I have a hard copy. I have a hard copy that I always download. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that the minister gives us those good amendments so that he gets our support and we do not waste so much time? 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister, can you circulate your amendments because what they have, I think, are the ones of the committee so that we can move together? Maybe the Clerk can run the copies and then we can continue on Tuesday.  

Honourable minister, please, move for the House to resume.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

6.27
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.28
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Gen. Aronda Nyakairima):  Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Registration of Persons Bill, 2014” and passed clauses 24, deleted 25, passed 26,27,28 with amendments and passed clauses under births and deaths clauses 29, 30, 31 and 32 with amendments. I beg to report.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: The ones the minister is reading are new clauses from the committee. They are not the ones - if you say like that, you are telling us that we have passed the clauses in the Bill. You say, “With the new clauses inserted by the committee.”

THE SPEAKER: Numbers will be handled later.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

6.29
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

 THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you very much. The House is adjourned to Tuesday, 24 February 2015.

(The House rose at 6.30 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 24 February 2015 at 2.00 p.m.) 

