PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTFIRST SESSION - THIRD MEETINGWEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 20222377Wednesday, 2 February 20221. The Market Bill, 2021 was sent to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government. 2. The Mining and Mineral Bill, 2021 was sent to the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources. 3. The Succession Bill, 2021 was sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. 4. The Supplementary Appropriation (No.2) Bill, 2021 was sent to the Committee on Budget. 5. The Supplementary Appropriation (No.3) Bill, 2021 was sent to the Committee on Budget.6. The Physical Planners’ Registration Bill, 2021 was sent to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 7. The Fisheries Bill was sent to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.Honourable members, recently, we approved the National Budget Framework Paper 2022/2023-2026/2027. As a House, we reiterate our commitment to comply with the legally stipulated timelines in the budget consideration process. However,  our efficiencies  interlink  to the efficiency  of the Executive  that constitutionally IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentFIRST SESSION - 4TH SITTING - THIRD MEETINGParliament met at 2.10 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Anita Among,  in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I apologise for coming late by 10 minutes. As you are aware, rule 129(2) of the Rules of Procedure requires committees to report back on the Bills referred to them within 45 days. Most of the Bills were sent to committees and have not been brought back. Of the nine Bills, only two are still within the 45 days. The seven have expired. Therefore,  I expect the seven Bills to be brought back to the House as per the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament. We are granting the committees more time up to the 10th of this month to have the Bills processed in the House. The rules also allow that if you do not bring the Bills within the set timelines, the House can go ahead and have the Bill read for the second time. I would like to remind you of the Bills, which ought to be brought to the House. They are: 2378 2379THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTthe timelines stipulated in the Public Finance Management Act. I also want to thank you and the House for passing the Budget Framework Paper within the legal timelines. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I hope you consolidate as we agreed. Look at the other issues that were pending  -(Members rose_)I know you all have procedural issues. I am coming to you. However, do not smuggle in a matter of national importance.2.22MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I do not intend to raise a procedural issue on your communication.Madam Speaker, you have directed that the committees’ chairpersons should come back and report or ask for an extension.  I belong to the Committee on Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. The chairperson has previously  asked for an extension.  We are considering the Fisheries and Aquaculture Bill. This is not a boardroom  Bill; it is a field Bill. Madam Speaker, I would like to be very clear. I do not want to say that you have committed but that Parliament committed to provide the resources. That is why some of these Bills are delaying. I am the Vice-Chairperson Committee on National Economy. Previously, we have gone to the field and have had to solicit for fuel from Members, that the money would come later.My humble appeal is that it should not be a matter of saying that we should come and ask for extensions,  where we clearly know that even if we asked for extensions,  minus resources, we shall just be asking for – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Robert Migadde, I do not want you to mislead this House. We have never failed to have money for inland travels. Unless you are saying – hon. Bahati, do you have something to say?2.24THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I would like to make reference to the Communication from the Chair regarding the point, which was raised by hon. Macho about the traffic.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I thought you wanted to say something  to him. Let me first finish with hon. Migadde  Robert. There is no committee that has asked for money for inland travel –(Member rose_)-  kindly sit, my OB. There is no committee that has asked for money for inland travel and failed to get it. I do not think you need to go out for you to complete the Bill. If the issue is on the money, have you come and asked or raised that issue? The inefficiencies  in the committee should not be brought to us. If you have financial problems,  come to us. What we want is the report on the Floor. MR MIGADDE:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker.  Personally,  I do not have financial problems. (Laughter)  It is the committee – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  If there is a financial  problem  in the committee  – that is what I am saying. (Laughter)2.26THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am standing as the acting Government Chief Whip. First of all, there should be no room for negotiating these issues because the rules are very clear on the timelines. If the committee is constrained for various reasons, like you have guided, the rules are clear that the chairperson should come and seek extension and we allow it or not. If it is the ministers who are constraining the committees, the chairpersons should come to the office of the Government  Chief Whip to ensure that the ministers, who usually [The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRbears the responsibility for the budget formulation.  We ask the Executive  to help us so that we are able to support them. I hereby put the Executive  on notice that the timelines of the remaining statutory timelines for the budget process are:1. 15 March 2022. We expect the Ministerial Policy Statement for the Financial Year 2022/2023. You can even bring it before that date.2. On 1st April, we expect the presentation of the annual budget and tax Bills to Parliament.3. On 31st May 2022, this House will approve the budget for the Financial Year 2022/2023 to pave way for its operationalisation on 1st July 2022. I, therefore, urge the frontbench ministers to adhere to the timelines, especially my brother, hon. Henry Musasizi. Honourable members, during yesterday’s sitting, a matter was raised by hon. Geoffrey Macho on delayed clearance of incoming cargo trucks by customs authorities at Busia Border. The honourable minister promised to give us a statement  today on that issue. We expect a statement from hon. Bahati before we move forward. I also want to vary the Order Paper to bring forward item No.5, before item No.3. Yesterday’s debate was stayed because we needed item No. 5 to be presented to the House first so that we can verify what happened  in the previous process and what should be done for this process to work out: that was on COVID-19 funds. This is a joint report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments).  We will get that report first before we get a report on the cash relief. Thank you very much, Members, for coming. Your presence has enabled us to have a full House. For now, we can still have free sitting. MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My procedural matter originates from your communication. You have talked about Bills, which have expired.  Indeed, this Parliament provides facilitation for committees to carry out their work. Actually, the committees have an allowance whenever they sit. Therefore, wouldn’t it be procedurally right to know from the chairpersons of these committees  who have rendered  Bills expired - yet our major role here is processing of Bills? That one alone makes us incompetent and maybe, the chairpersons of those committees. We are aware that Members lobby to be chairpersons of committees. Therefore, if a Bill is given to a committee  and it expires within 45 days – yet, there is also a provision in the Rules of Procedure that you can come and seek for extension  of time at the discretion of the Speaker; Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right for us to know these committees? Similarly, the chairpersons should give you an explanation  so that the House knows why they did not process those Bills? THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Members, as I said before, I am requesting the chairpersons to bring their reports to the House. There are only two Bills that still have the 45 days outstanding. If they have a challenge, let them come back and ask for an extension. Short of that, we will be left with no option but to take action on the leadership. 2.21THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  In your communication, you reminded us about our legal timelines, especially in the processing of the budget. I want to appreciate you for that and I would like to make a commitment before the House that we are working round the clock. We are aware of the 15th, the 1st of April and the 31st of May. I would like to commit that, as a ministry, we will try as much as possible to adhere to 2380 2381THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  It cannot be a law if you have not received the assented to copy. It is implied that if you hadn’t received it by the time Parliament elapsed - if you are not sure of what happened to the Bill, then apply Rule 235 of the Rules of Procedure.MR OPIO:  Madam Speaker, I would like to respond to your communication and state that issues of delays are not only about the Bills but on other reports too. There are several actions, for example,  that this House forwarded  to committees but we have not received reports.Today, on the Order Paper, we are discussing the COVID-19 cash but we also have the private transfer of cash to the teachers. If these reports had come in earlier, perhaps we would avoid repetition.Therefore, my prayer is that a deadline be provided to committees with overdue reports to file them to the House.  Thank you.2.33MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru):  Thank you, for giving me this opportunity. On 8 December 2021 -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Was it in my communication?MS LUCY AKELLO: It is on the laid reports; I am first giving a preamble.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Okay, proceed.MS LUCY AKELLO:  Thank you. On 8 December 2021, I tabled an issue about the curriculum that is being taught to our children in schools. It is four weeks now since our children went back to school but we have not received a report from the ministry regarding what actions have been taken to ensure that what has been in the curriculum, which is dangerous to our children, is removed.I am worried for our children because we have not yet got any report. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Government Chief Whip, this is an issue that was raised on the Floor - the minister is around.2.35THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Indeed, my colleague raised that issue last year in December as she stated, and I pledged to follow it up after receiving a written document, following the issue that was raised. This morning I spoke to my colleague about the same issue and told her that there was no written –(Interruption)MR SSEWUNGU:  Madam Speaker, I thank the honourable minister, for her good response, which is not so useful now. Anyhow, this House raised a number of issues concerning education;  for example,  I raised an issue about the way you are transforming grade III teachers to those who are bachelors’ holders in primary schools, in addition to transforming teachers’ training colleges.You still promised to give the same responses but nothing has come about yet schools are beginning to operate. Teachers’ training colleges have been closed and you do not have teachers in schools because some of them left for better jobs.Honourable minister, don’t you think that you need to find better time and look at the Hansard to pick this information properly? That is important because at that time, you were a minister in the health sector. That will help you to look at all the issues we have been raising so you can handle them here comprehensively for us to have a better debate over them other than coming here to give excuses, thinking that you are giving answers but which cannot justify the unhappiness and the need within your docket? Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, this matter was raised on the Floor and it was very pertinent. The curriculum of primary five and six had very funny content in the books approved by the ministry. It would [Dr Baryomunsi] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRbring these Bills, can comply and attend the committees’ meetings. On our side, we are going to meet the committees’ chairpersons who belong to the ruling party – (Interjections)- y es, because there are committees whose leadership is from the ruling party and there are committees whose leadership is from the Opposition, courtesy of our rules. We shall guide our chairpersons appropriately, to respect the rules – to comply – and make sure that we do not have a challenge of failing to get the business when the committees have a lot of work that they are doing. Thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, Government Chief Whip. When we are in Parliament, all the chairpersons belong to Parliament of Uganda. (Applause)  We agreed that we do not have parties here. We agreed there are no parties here when it comes to work. If you are meeting the chairpersons, we will meet all the chairpersons as the Business Committee, where all the chairpersons come. This is because if a Bill is in a committee that is headed by a Member of the Opposition, that Bill is still for Parliament. For example,  now, we want a report from PAC. PAC requested for money and we facilitated them. They are all our people. Thank you –(A member rose_)  No, I have already responded to it. I do not want exchanges in the House. 2.29THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Godfrey Onzima): Thank you. Madam Speaker, indeed, the Markets Bill, 2021 was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government at the end of last year. When we started considering the Bill, there was also more work, which was referred to the committee. Now, when we came back after the recess, we were told that the issue of the Budget Framework Paper – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable chairperson, with due respect, if you have challenges, put it in writing, come and seek for an extension. MR ONZIMA:  That is why I have stood, Madam Speaker. We were already considering the Bill and are left with only a week – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Listen, Members. We are not giving you an extension  by you talking. Come back and officially  ask for an extension.  We will have to do that in writing. I am not asking you, chairperson,  to explain why you have delayed.MR ONZIMA:  Madam Speaker, if you could allow me to finish – (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, if I got you right, you reminded committees to bring Bills within the realms of rule 129(2); you did not invite every chairperson to come and tell us the problems in their committees but only reminded them of their responsibility.Is the chairperson, therefore, in order to engage Parliament in unnecessary debate over a matter that was settled by your ruling and our rules?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think hon. Onzima was a little absent-minded.  So, next time listen to the ruling.2.31MS SARAH OPENDI (NRM, Woman Representative, Tororo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue I am raising arises from your communication. You will recall that the Employment Bill was passed by the 10th Parliament in April 2021 and sent to the President for assent. It is not among the Bills that were returned yet it is very important to the domestic workers and the women in this country.I now seek your guidance on what happens because it not among the Bills that were returned yet it has not been assented to by the President. Or is it now already a law according to our Rules of Procedure? Thank you.2382 2383THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ssewungu, I have already ruled on that. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, have a seat.2.43MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance that requires urgent attention.Today, I was at Namboole National Stadium, where the Minister of Sports presided over a ground breaking ceremony. I have learnt that even when you are renovating, you do ground breaking – (Laughter) - but I was there. I was invited as the area Member of Parliament.Madam Speaker, part of my village, Kireka B, sits on part of the land belonging to Namboole. There are tenants there and the policy of this Government is they have just said they are going to spend Shs 4 trillion on helping “bibanja”  people. I read that in the newspapers. However, it is a pronounced policy that you do not evict people.The matter I am raising is for Government to explain what will befall those people who occupy part of the land that belongs to Namboole as tenants in Kireka because they are worried. Construction is going to be done by gun-wielding men. I later learnt they are from UPDF Engineering Brigade. This is the first construction  I have seen where contractors carry guns all over the place. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, it is a very serious matter; we need Government to help us know how you are going to resettle these people who are going to be affected by the renovation.  Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju, did you say they are tenants or squatters?MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, they have an interest on that land because our law provides for multiple interest. I may not establish; some are tenants, others might be squatters, but there are people who are on the land that need to be resettled. I may not establish the legal status of each one of them.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If somebody was a tenant – Yesterday, we just passed the Landlord and Tenant Bill that you can give a notice and it is terminated. However, there is a difference  between a tenant and squatter. Let us hear from Government.2.46THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague for raising that very important matter. Indeed, it is true this morning, my colleague, hon. Hamson Obua was at the ground breaking ceremony, together with him and the rest. That is a big milestone for all of us and we appreciate you and the Members of Parliament for that support.I request for the specific issue that he has raised concerning the people who probably might have been displaced, that you give us time to bring a report on Wednesday, if at all it is true, with evidence so that we can place it here on the Table. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Who may have been displaced and who are going to be displaced because more people are going to be displaced. So, we need a report on all that. How did those people acquire that land, how did they enter into that land and what is the plan that Government has on settling them because they may not have anywhere to go? Much as we want Namboole to be worked on, we also need those people to be resettled somewhere.DR MORIKU: Thank you. We will do that on Wednesday.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You may find some people are encroachers. I know some Ugandans, when they know there is something taking place, they rush very fast and encroach because they want to be compensated.[The Deputy Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRbe prudent for you to bring a report on the actions you have taken on this. You do not just come like that.DR MORIKU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I stated before, I discussed this with my colleague, hon. Lucy Akello. I told her that we had not received communication on the issue, which she had raised. I requested her to bring that issue – yes, a statement was made but I would like to refer to that letter. I pledge that next week, on Wednesday,  I will bring that information even without a written communication from here being submitted to us. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, when the issue was raised, you were in the House. I do not know the communication you want us to give you. If you were not sure of what was asked, read the Hansard ; it is a public document and so, we are not going to write to you. We can only give you an extract of a resolution of the motion but in this case, there was no motion. You were in the House and you responded.2.39THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Kasule): Madam Speaker, the issues that you raised on the - (Interruption)MR SSEGGONA:  Madam Speaker, it has increasingly become a fashion for ministers to disregard the COVID-19 Standard Operating Procedures in this House and it sends a very bad signal. Out there, the boda bodas  have continued to restricted even when they are not spreading COVID-19, but you see a minister jumping up and getting to a public microphone which is not sanitised – (Laughter) - and speaking. First, this embarrasses us as leaders in a country where we have restricted other people.Is it in order for my very good friend, hon. Justine Kasule Lumumba – (Laughter) - the Minister without Portfolio, to proceed on the microphone without sanitising, even when the sanitiser is provided?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know, hon. Sseggona likes hon. Lumumba very much and wanted to show her that he is around. (Laughter)  MS LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I thank hon. Sseggona for being very kind and loving Ugandans that he minds so much about their lives, including Kasule Lumumba. Thank you; I appreciate.On behalf of the Prime Minister, I have heard the discussion. I want to make a request to you that the Minister of Education  will be here next week, if you accord us time on the Order Paper - because that lies within your hands - to come and bring written responses to the issues that have been raised about education.The issues that have been raised are pertinent. Some of them are time-bound because we have opened schools after having them closed for the period you are all aware of and then we have moved into the new curriculum. You are talking about issues to do with P.5, P.6 and P.7 but we also have a new curriculum for secondary education. It will be a big issue but they will present a summarised report to us, so that all of us as stakeholders - because education is good for all and is the gateway for everybody to good life and to open gates to the different parts of the world. On behalf of the Rt hon. Prime Minister, Madam Speaker, I pledge. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. We will give you space on Wednesday and kindly, we want action taken.MS LUMUMBA: Most obliged. Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you too. MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I want to find out how different her submission  is from the minister’s response.2384 2385THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT2.54THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising the matter about the nature of the road between Tororo and Mbale and we condole with the families that have lost their dear ones. I will relay information to the Minister of Works and Transport to come and brief this House on the plans to rehabilitate that section of the road - (Interruption) MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the hon. Chris Baryomunsi for giving way. As he informs or instructs the minister, since he is the chief whip, I have received information that there is a presidential directive barring the construction of humps on highways. Secondly, before the hon. Ssemujju agrees with him, is that Karamoja and Mbale, surely, if you are getting the raw materials from Karamoja, what stops you from putting the factory in Karamoja? This is how we have failed to equitably develop the country. If people are dying, and you are not going to put humps on the roads to reduce speed, how else do you want the minister to help? However, the information is that there is a standing instruction not to put - (Interjection)-  that bars the construction of humps on highways; just in case you missed the Cabinet on that day.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not just an instruction; it is in the Road and Safety Act, that humps should not be on the highway. And there could be a problem that he is talking about that maybe the Minister of Works needs to go and check.DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much for the information and also the guidance from the Speaker. Like I had said, I will relay this information to the Minister of Works and Transport who should be able to dispatch the technical team to assess that section of the road, and satisfy himself with why there are those accidents. He will report to the House at the earliest and tell us what the ministry is planning to do to address that challenge. Regarding the issue of the humps, yes, like the Speaker guided, the guidance also has to do with the size of the humps, which can be a problem.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The problem is that the road is very narrow and maybe in the next design they have to expand the road. There is a contractor that has been given that road and is supposed to work on the road from Tororo to Lira. As we have agreed, you give information  to the minister to that effect, and then the road should be handled. 2.58MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance and I would like you, if you would allow me, to read a few names in the process of my submission. Madam Speaker, since 2010, Ugandans traded with South Sudan and it was recognised by governments on both sides that Ugandan traders supplied goods to South Sudan, which were not paid for. There have been many discussions in this House, outside this House and in the State House, regarding the payment of Uganda-South Sudan traders. An agreement was struck - (Interjections)-  can I make a submission then I will -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Silas Aogon, you wait for hon. Ogwal to finish then you give your clarification. MS CECILIA OGWAL:  I will give you time. A memorandum of understanding was signed between the Government of Uganda and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. It is true that the Government of the Republic of South Sudan has been generous enough to agree that the Government of the Republic COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMR SSEGGONA: I am seeking your guidance, Madam Speaker, because this is not the first time a matter of this nature is being raised in Parliament. There is something called a Land Fund for which we appropriate  money every financial year. As we speak, the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development is in shambles and tatters. When you see the chairperson of the Uganda Land Commission all over news saying that when they failed to evict her, they resorted to witchcraft - (Laughter)  There are outstanding questions, which have been put across for the Minister for Lands to come here and explain. Since the establishment of the Land Fund, we are appropriating money but there are no guidelines  on who qualifies to benefit from it; which lawful or bonafide occupant  qualifies  to benefit from the Land Fund. There is no policy guiding how the Land Fund is disbursed.I am glad the Rt Hon. Prime Minister is in Parliament. Is it not procedurally right that we have an explanation  from the Rt Hon. Prime Minister  on how they decide who benefits? You just see people getting billions.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Medard Sseggona of Busiro, we may not rush into the Land Fund issue before determining the ownership.  Let us first make analysis of how these people acquired this land. Who are these people? Are they encroachers? Are they squatters? Are they tenants? Then we will now say, “The land commission should sort out the rightful people.” The issue of the Land Commission is still outstanding; I know you really need answers to that. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there was an issue that was raised by hon. Sseggona on the Land Commission that you may need to inform your minister about to come and respond to. However, I also feel that those issues, especially on the land commission, have been overtaken by events because there is a court matter; that would amount to sub judice .2.51THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Justine Lumumba):  Madam Speaker, you have told me to inform my minister; most obliged. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 2.51MR RICHARD WANDA (NRM, Bungokho Central County, Mbale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. We have got a section of the road from Tororo to Mbale, which has become a death point; the section between Busiu and Bumageni Barracks. We raised this matter at one time and the minister visited. A report was made and the UNRA was instructed - as a short-term measure - to build speed-limiting humps such that we do not lose lives but up to now, nothing has happened.Just to illustrate the magnitude of this matter, on 20 January this year, a fuel tanker crashed and got burnt, killing four people on the scene and two other people were crashed by other rescuing vehicles. In August 2021, a speeding truck hit and killed six people. Madam Speaker, in the same period, another cement-carrying  truck from Tororo, killed five people from one family. Just to cut it short, in 2017, a cement-carrying vehicle killed 22 people in minibuses. Therefore, I bring this matter to this House, with this prayer; that the Minister of Transport hastily rescues my people by constructing humps on that road. Secondly, the road is being redesigned. It is my prayer that they include a flyover on the road that comes from Butaleja to Nabumali, as that is the biggest spot of the accidents. I thank you, Madam Speaker.2386 2387THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the issue of South Sudan payment was a hot issue in the 10th Parliament. We agreed that we get money to have these people paid. An agreement was reached upon by South Sudan and Uganda on the payment. The House made an amendment to add other people. Originally, there was a list of people who were supposed to be paid $40 million. However, there was an adjustment that was made and approved by this House. That adjustment was bound to be approved by the Parliament and the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. What we need to find out is: was it approved? How far have you gone with the payment of the people who have not yet got the money?MS CECILIA OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, I wish I could make my prayers, and then you ask Members to access the decision of Parliament that was passed in the motion dated 18 March 2018. The 23 companies,  which were verified by South Sudan and Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) were directed to be paid. Up to now, these companies remain unpaid. The 10 companies - the leader, of course, is Aponye (U) Ltd and others. Up to now, these people have not been paid. The 10 have been paid but the 23 - the villagers like me - have not been paid. We have also come to realise that the 10 companies, which have been paid are multibillionaires, who have big powers behind them. You can investigate them. My concern is: I do not mind whether anyone or Ms Ogwal has gotten money. All we want is: can those villagers, who supplied maize to South Sudan and were supposed to be paid by the Government of the Republic of South Sudan and the Government of the Republic of Uganda - can this Parliament ensure that they are paid? Otherwise, they spent their money and their properties have been sold. Some of them have even been to the State House.There is a particular incident of an Acholi woman, who was raped by Sudanese soldiers. The woman lost everything; she lost her properties including her vehicles. They even went up to State House but up to now, the lady has not been paid. Very many of our traders from Lango keep knocking at my door because they have not been paid. Regardless of who is involved, my prayer is that those 23 companies and others must be paid since that decision was taken. The Government of the Republic of South Sudan has allowed the Government of the Republic of Uganda to use that money for paying our people. Therefore, it is important that these people are paid – (Interjections) - Yes, I will give you a chance – (Interruption) - MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. When I die, I should be remembered for one thing called fairness. Hon. Peter Mugema, otherwise known as Panadol, has come on the Floor of the House and stated that the beneficiaries are ministers seated here. He specifically  mentioned  the name of my brother, hon. David Bahati. He did not substantiate and neither did hon. Cecilia Ogwal give us the particulars of directors of those companies she mentioned. To me, it is a mark of unfairness that a name of our very own could be mentioned and he is not given a chance to defend himself. Fairness is not a right in  -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He is on procedure.MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, hon. Sseggona, one of my counsels in many cases when this Government has taken me to court –(Laughter)-  knows that hon. Bahati is a Member of Parliament, with the right to use the relevant Rules of Procedure - because sometimes, people are guilty, so, they may choose to keep quiet. (Laughter)  So, is hon. Sseggona in order to force hon. Bahati to say something?[Ms Ogwal] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRof Uganda pays the traders, as a loan, to the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. This matter has been discussed over and over. For those of you who are new, you can read the Hansard  and get the details of what was discussed in the various meetings held in this Parliament.  My concern – (Member timed out.)  Madam Speaker, could you ask the technicians to give me time because we cannot take a decision unless I give you information. My concern is that the Government of the Republic of South Sudan agreed to release two disbursements. The first was $15 million. That followed  a delegation that was led by Maj. Gen. (Rtd) Otafiire to South Sudan. The second was a release of $41 million. Madam Speaker, my concern, your concern and the concern of the people of Uganda is that whereas His Excellency  the President,  in a letter addressed to the Minister of Finance, directed the Minister to pay the South Sudan traders - the President went further to say, “If they were not paid, they would face financial disaster”. Indeed, Parliament was able to learn that there were some traders, particularly from Acholi and Lango, who were actually sleeping at the bus park because they had lost prime property that they had mortgaged to the banks. These details are on our records. Madam Speaker, I want to read this list. When the President directed that people be paid - these are the people who received the payment. Allow me to read it:1. Rubya Investors Ltd.2. Kibingo Enterprises Ltd. 3. Kibingo - I am reading in the order they were paid. If I read twice, it means they were paid twice. (Laughter)  Do you want me to give you the amount? If I am to read the amount, it may take a bit of time; if you do not mind. Okay, let me start again. 1. Rubya Investors Ltd received the 26 per cent agreed upon, an equivalent of $865,962.03  2. Kibingo Enterprises Ltd received $577,3083. Kibingo Enterprises Ltd received $1,443.2704. Aponye (U) Ltd, received money three times so I will read the figures also three times. The first time, Aponye  (U) Ltd received $1,546,319.52, then $721,635.02 and $288,654.015. Afro-Kai Ltd received $288,654.016. Swift Comm-Est Ltd received $288,654.01  7. Aponye (U) Ltd again received $249,974.018. Sophia Omari received $285,373.859. Aponye (U) Ltd again received $57,730.8010. Aponye U) Ltd received $721,635 million11. Apo General Agencies Ltd received $1,151.33512. Afro-Akai Ltd received – (Interruption)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Procedure.MR MUGEMA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and thank you, hon. Cecilia for giving way. Hon. Cecilia is giving us good information, but we are not proceeding well. As she is mentioning the names of the companies, which received the cash, she is not naming the directors of those companies. This is because at the end of the day, the majority of the directors are these ministers seated here. I remember that time I was on a Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry and the majority shareholders and directors of those companies were ministers, some of whom are seated here. Even hon. Bahati was one of those owning those companies. (Laughter) Therefore, are we proceeding well, when hon. Cecilia Ogwal is not giving us facts about the directors of the companies? We could end up with even hon. Cecilia Ogwal with a company, which did not receive cash.2388 2389THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTstatement on the Floor of this Parliament, - the indication  was that there was a first installment of $15 million, which was deposited by the Government of South Sudan. Out of the agreement, the Government of Uganda paid another $10.8 million. Therefore, this brought the total payment to $25.8 million, out of the $56.4 million. Therefore, my question is –(Interruption)MS OGWAL:  Madam Speaker, correction. I said that $15 million was paid first and the second payment was $41 million, not $10 million. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  That gives you $56 million.MR MIGADDE:  Yes, that is the total arrears by then. Therefore, $25 million has so far been paid, out of the $56.4 million – if we are to go by the statement produced by the minister in March on the Floor of this Parliament. Therefore,  the clarification  I am seeking is whether the $25 million went to the 10 companies. Is that the case? Thank you very much.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Maybe we need to get information from the minister. We are really debating in anticipation. Let us hear from the minister. Let him tell us what is happening.3.19THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES)(Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you are aware, the issue of claims by our people against the South Sudan Government is not new to some of us who were in the previous Parliament. It is true that the total claim for the 10 companies, which we have just mentioned, was $ 56 million. A total of $15 million was paid in the arrangement that the hon. Cecilia Ogwal talked about. Thereafter another arrangement, which was approved by this House, was arrived at for the $ 41 million. We have been paying this money in instalments. Madam Speaker, I wish to inform this House that to date, we have paid a total of $ 29 million. There is still a balance of $ 12 million to be paid -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  How much have you paid?MR MUSASIZI:  A total of $ 29 million.MR GILBERT OLANYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister stated that they have been paying. I pray that he brings the list of those companies that they have already paid to the august House.In addition, I remember there were associations of traders from northern Uganda that also lost their properties; they were from Lango and Acholi subregions,  specifically.  They met His Excellency,  the President  and the President gave directives. However, from the list that we are seeing, there is no company from Acholi or Lango subregions on it. From the list, the companies that have been paid are from this side of the country. Madam Speaker, we need fairness in this country. The Acholi people live at the border with South Sudan. The Langis lost properties but when it came to payment, you were so selective; you are not fair at all to this country. We need fairness!THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when you start tribalising these things – honourable minister, I want the people to be paid irrespective of where they come from. First of all, can you lay, on the Table, the list of the people who have been paid and how much has been paid together with the list of those yet to be paid? MR MUSASIZI: Madam Speaker, I will confirm the list as you have read because it is not different from what you have read. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  No, hon. Cecilia Ogwal went on a fishing expedition.  I want your list laid on the Table tomorrow.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I participated in this debate on the additional 23 companies. I personally witnessed the 10 that were approved for $40 million. Now, for us to start naming - what we need to find out from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is: how far have we gone with the 23?  Aponye being a Mukiga and Bahati being a Mukiga does not mean that Bahati is Aponye. If there is any relationship – is there any law that stops Bahati from doing business? (Applause)  Let us be fair to ourselves. What was approved was for the 10. Fine, they have been paid: what have you done for the 23? Minister, what have you done for the 23?MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker – if you allow – the problem would be that hon. Bahati was the Minister of Finance. Therefore, if he chose to pay himself – and I am not saying this because I have information. If the information supplied here is correct, that we passed the money and he went to serve himself, that would be the problem. However, I have no evidence that hon. Bahati paid any of the companies where he belongs.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  We all do not have evidence. That is why I am saying we must have evidence  to that effect. Let the man defend himself.3.13THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, now that my friend honourable - I had not actually heard that he mentioned my name. (Laughter)  It was a little bit malicious. Colleagues, I do not have any company under this agreement – that supplied South Sudan and was paid. I would really want hon. Panadol to bring evidence here on the Floor or withdraw my name from this now. Therefore, he either brings the information here or withdraws so that the record is put clear. Thank you.MR AOGON:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to seek clarification  from hon. Cecilia Ogwal. You know, this is a House of record and reference because in the future when somebody wants to use information on the Hansard,  recorded on 2 February 2022, they will read exactly what was said. The honourable colleague continuously referred to “Sudan”. I am quite aware that Africa has two Sudans: South Sudan and Sudan. Legally, if you insist on Sudan, Sudan is Sudan. If you are talking about South Sudan, it is South Sudan. There is Juba and there is Khartoum. Therefore,  I would like to find out from hon. Cecilia Ogwal: which Sudan did you mean for the purposes of proper records of the Hansard  because it has legal implications. Usually, when you are driving and somebody stops you, take time and stop; there could be a pothole ahead of you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. The country that we are referring to is South Sudan. The first 10 companies  that we approved  for payment are:1. Rubya Investors 2. Kibingo Enterprises 3. Aponye (U) Ltd4. Afro-Kai Ltd5. Swift Comm. Est Ltd6. Sunrise Commodities7. Sophia Omari8. Apo General Agencies9. Ropani International10. KK Transporters Ltd.Those were the first 10 that have been paid. However, this House passed a resolution and included another 23 and that gives you a list of 33. We have the documents  on file. Let us hear from hon. Migadde and, then, the minister.MR MIGADDE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Thank you for reading the first 10. The clarification  I need to get from hon. Bahati, who was the Minister of Finance by then - because in March 2020, we got a 2390 2391THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTMR PETER MUGEMA: Madam Speaker, it is on record that the minister said it himself that he did not even hear it. Secondly, I was on the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and so, I do not need to substantiate it. If given time, I can prove this by bringing a list of companies and their directors - it is not bad for you to do business. Do you think you only eat from the ministry; you do not do business outside this? (Laughter)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Bahati, let him bring for us evidence tomorrow. If he cannot bring evidence, then he will have to withdraw it  - I have said that let him bring the evidence. 3.29MR JOHN-PAUL LUKWAGO (DP, Kyotera County, Kyotera):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise under rule 49. With grave concern, I wish to bring to the attention of this House a life-threatening situation evolving in Kyotera District. On 1 December 2021, the District Internal Security  Officer reported  14 deaths that had happened at Kijonjo Village, Kasasa Subcounty, Kyotera District. As of today, 15 people have died and it is purported that the symptoms are the same. What is very threatening is that the locals are currently shunning going to hospitals, claiming that whoever goes to hospital dies. It is very unfortunate that there has been no formal statement from the Ministry of Health. Well aware of what happened in the early 1980s, still in Kyotera and Rakai when the AIDS scourge was starting to ravage this country, it is very concerning to all Ugandans.My prayer, therefore, is for the Minister of Health to make a statement to this House over what exactly is happening,  and if there is anything they have done to avert the situation in Kyotera. I beg to submitTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Minister of Health, come with a report. Government Chief Whip?3.31THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising that matter, which is very urgent because it involves the death of Ugandans. We send condolences to the families.I will undertake to raise this matter with the Minister of Health. Maybe she should be given time between now and Tuesday, if they have not got sufficient  details from a team on the ground.On Tuesday, the minister should be able to give us a report of what has been done and what the problem could be. Is it a new disease or something else? On Tuesday, the Minister of Health will come and give us the report on what she has done and what the problem is.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Minister of Health, it is within your mandate to assess the impact, together with the technical people, and then report on the action that has been taken. 3.33MR PETER OCAN (Independent, Kole South County, Kole):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise on an urgent matter of national importance regarding the state of insecurity in Apac Municipality. Within the last 10 days, we have lost three people under unclear circumstances but in a similar manner. On Wednesday, 19 January 2022 a 30-year-old Michael Acot, a resident of Barawell Cell, Awir Ward, Agul Division, Apac Municipality,  left his home briefly and was waylaid by unknown assailants who killed him. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRMR MEDARD SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, allow me raise a point of order. The hon. Cecilia Ogwal’s concern is a matter to do with equity in this country. It is true that we ammended and eventually approved the list. The Member’s question is: how come some companies were paid three times? There are those whose property is being taken over by banks because they are waiting forever to be paid. First, by the minister not answering the question of equity, he is not solving anything. That is why the tribal tone is coming in. I do not want to talk about the Baganda companies, which did not benefit because it would accelerate  the same debate. May the minister, therefore, save us the trouble by tabling the names and the criteria used in determining payment. What criteria did you use before you paid somebody a second time when there were others that had not received a coin? Is he, therefore, in order not to tell Parliament the procedure and criteria used even before he brings the list?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Lubega Sseggona, the $41 million that was approved to be paid out was tagged; I am saying it was ring-fenced to 10 companies. Can you bring that agreement where that money was ring-fenced to those 10 companies? MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your guidance. I undertake to bring all this information to the House tomorrow. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Bring the 23 companies  together  with an explanation  as to why you have not paid them. We made a provision in this Parliament for payment of those 23 companies. There is a lady from Gulu who came to my office crying. Her house has been sold off and her business closed. She was thrown out of the house. Therefore, we need to see how we can help these poor Ugandans. They were trying to earn a living and we are kind of trying to frustrate them. Hon. Bahati, it seems you have more information because you are interrupting my Member. Can we have that information? When do we pay the 23 companies?MR MUSASIZI:  Madam Speaker, can I respond in writing tomorrow? I need to bring to this House, a detailed statement and the way forward. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, Parliament passed a resolution and directed the Government on what to do for the 23 companies across the country. I met very many traders from Bunyoro. They were not from Lango or Acholi but they were equally concerned –  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, I think age is catching up. We have said that we wait for the list tomorrow. So, you be here tomorrow and receive the list of the 23 companies and the way forward. If it means supporting a supplementary budget for those people, we do it. The powers are with us and we must help those people get what they are supposed to get.MS CECILIA OGWAL: My surprise is that after we passed a supplementary budget for the 23 companies - and hon. Bahati knows this - what happened to the money? MR SILWANY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Cecilia Ogwal is one of the Members of Parliament I respect so much in this House, and I look up to. She understands the rules of this House very well, having been here for a very long time. Is she therefore, in order to continue arguing and talking when you have already made a ruling as the presiding officer of this Parliament?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I always tell my Mama  that I sympathise with my old man; she likes quarrelling a lot. Hon. Peter Mugema would you like to substantiate your statement that hon. Bahati – and if you cannot substantiate it then we will expunge it from the Hansard ; you will have to withdraw it. 2392 2393THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORThaving lost a leg. The Government Chief Whip committed that he would come to Parliament on Tuesday – which was yesterday – and give Parliament a report. It is on record.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I am surprised that the commissioner is now losing memory. The Government Chief Whip talked of two weeks and I approved the two weeks.  MR SILWANY: Much obliged, Madam Speaker.  (Laughter)3.39MS MARY BEGUMISA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule):  I am rising on an issue of a national concern about our school-going children who are pregnant. I am well aware of Article 34 of the Constitution of this country and clause 3 of the same, which says; “No child shall be deprived by any person of medical treatment, education or any other social or economic benefit by reason of religious or other be -”THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable Pastor, it is unfortunate that you were not in yesterday  but there is a motion to that effect; so what you will do is to debate. I know how you are passionate about the girl-child but wait for the motion; it is item No.6.MS BEGUMISA:  Much obliged.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Next item.  (Hon. Bahati rose_)  Do you have something to say?3.40THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati) : Madam Speaker,  this is as requested  about the traffic of cargo at Malaba and Busia border posts; which was raised by hon. Macho. The situation at Malaba as we speak now, is normal; all issues which were there have been resolved - according to our customs a few minutes ago. I want to thank the -(Hon. Ekanya rose_)  Do you have new information?MR EKANYA:  I thank hon. David Bahati, the Minister of Trade. Whereas his statement has some degree of accuracy, the situation in Malaba and Busia border posts cannot be handled just by a statement because the customs entry points of Malaba and Busia were built in the 1960’s for a capacity of 200 trucks in a week; they have one entry and one exit.Currently, Uganda cargo transits across Malaba are 200 trailers a day and they might be more or less in Busia and Malaba but you have one desk of the revenue authority, one desk of immigration and one cargo scanning system.I stated here last week that the two heads of state engaged each other when the cargo on the Tororo side was in Busitema; the other side was about the same number of kilometres.Madam Speaker, if you are travelling to Kenya or there is a Kenyan guest travelling and there is an emergency  - even in case of a fire, there is no way of evacuating. Those trailers are carrying fuel – which is dangerous - and other goods.Uganda Revenue Authority and-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ekanya, we still have a debate on fuel; I wish you could reserve your energy for that. When you say that the situation is now normal, how come fuel prices are still high? Those are questions you will answer when it comes to the fuel issue.MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, I want to make it clear that the question, which was asked by hon. Macho was that the situation was as it was three weeks ago with a backlog, but I am informing Parliament that it has been resolved.Going forward to accommodate the future demands of this border is a debate that hon. Ekanya is referring to. As we speak today, the jam of the cargo is cleared. Thank you.The second incident was after five days when a 28-year-old businessman, Innocent Anyeme, who also left his home briefly at about 9.00 p.m. was waylaid on Apac-Lira Highway at Aka Village, Olili Ward, Apac Municipality. He was left with deep cuts all over his body. He was rushed to the hospital and pronounced dead the following day. The last incident was on Monday, 31st when a one Joel Okello was attacked around the same spot and killed instantly. The body was cut and packed in a polythene bag and dumped at the deceased’s home. The situation is not good in Apac. It has caused a lot of anxiety in the community. People are nervous. They are worried and the trend is very consistent. My prayers are; one, that the minister in charge of security and that of internal affairs should intervene urgently and we need a report to this effect.Secondly, we need speedy investigations into this matter so that the perpetrators could be brought forward to face the due process of the law. Three, Madam Speaker, the families of the deceased should be compensated by Government.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Compensation has become compensation. 3.35THE MINISTER OF INFORMATION, COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY AND NATIONAL GUIDANCE (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very  much, Madam Speaker. I thank the honourable member for raising this matter in Parliament. Also, as a person who has been in this Parliament for some time, even before Parliament convenes, it is good to directly raise your issue with the minister. This is because matters which involve death usually require quick responses. However, it is good you have raised it on the Floor of Parliament. Unfortunately,  the Minister of Internal Affairs and the one of security are not in the House -  (Interjections) -  they are not in the House. So, I will inform the Minister of Internal Affairs to take this as a matter of urgency. He should also link up with the Member of Parliament  to find out the details, to intervene, and also to report back to Parliament.MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, we have the two Deputy Prime Ministers seated in front of us, but I have seen hon. Chris, a minister, taking over the job of the Prime Minister and the Leader of Government Business. I wonder under what rule of procedure we are operating and who has granted him the authority - whether it is the President and whether he has that instrument.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  He said he is the Government Chief Whip.MR EKANYA:  Madam Speaker, even in the presence of the Government Chief Whip, the Prime Minister takes lead. He reports to the Prime Minister, under our rules.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members,  the Minister of Internal Affairs will make a follow up on that and give feedback to this House on what is happening. We do not want the Masaka issue to move the other side. So, the earlier we address the issue, the better. Let us have hon. Mukisa, and then we get the report from PAC. Those remaining will bring their issues tomorrow.DR BARYOMUNSI:  Madam Speaker, it is not good for hon. Ekanya to challenge the Rt Hon. Speaker when you appoint somebody to work.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You know, hon. Ekanya had gone on leave for one term. Maybe he had forgotten the rules - (Laughter)3.37MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central Bugiri): Madam Speaker, last week, I came here and raised the issue of the police officer who was shot and was in hospital [Mr Ocan] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR2394 2395THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTdeadline  delays for certain tax payments  and compliance  obligations,  to ensure taxpayers and especially businesses preserve their cash flow and organise their tax and other business affairs in these very trying economic  times, cannot be over emphasised. Beneficiaries’  identification,  registration  and validationIn a circular to the Executive  Director KCCA and all town clerks of cities and municipalities, dated 30 June 2021, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development communicated a Cabinet proposal to transfer cash to vulnerable persons in Kampala Metropolitan Area and all cities and municipalities who depended on daily income and had their livelihoods disrupted, as a result of the lockdown. The approved categories included the following:1. Bus/taxi drivers, conductors.2. Baggage carriers, wheelbarrow pushers, touts, traffic guides and leaders in taxi, bus parks and stages in other major commercial centres such as Kikuubo.3. Barmen, DJs, barmaids, waiters and bouncers.4. Bar, gym and restaurant workers.5. Food vendors  in bus/taxi  parks and arcades.6. Artistes (musicians and comedians, etc.)7. Boda boda  riders, special hire drivers and Uber drivers.8. Salon, massage parlour workers.9. Teachers  and support staff in private schools and teachers in government schools who are not on government payroll.10. Car washers.11. Slum dwellers/ghetto residents, and12. Street and food vendors, shoe shiners and cobblers.The circular instructed them to compile a list of vulnerable persons within their urban areas, with the technical support of Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), National Information Technology Authority-Uganda (NITA-U-) and National  Identification  & Registration Authority  (NIRA),  using their existing administrative  records. Those who qualified to be registered and in possession of National Identification  Number  (NIN), but had no telephone number were supposed to be paid through Post Bank, upon presentation of their National ID or NIN slip.  The circular further instructed the town clerks to display the lists generated in public places within urban areas for purposes of updating and verification.  This was to be supervised  by the ward administrators, with the support of village health teams.Terms of reference, Madam Speaker, are stated on page 5 to 6. Methodology The methodology adopted to accomplish the aforementioned terms of reference:1. The committee met with the Minister responsible for Gender, Labour and Social Development in her capacity, but also representing the Rt Hon. Prime Minister. 2. The committee further met with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; the Minister of Internal Affairs, NIRA, the Minister for Kampala, the Lord Mayor and Division Mayors of Kampala, Resident City Commissioner (RCC), UBOS, Post Bank Ltd, MTN Uganda Ltd and Airtel communication companies. 3.44MR NAMBESHE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Our Rules of Procedure clearly stipulate that a minister - it was yesterday when the minister undertook to come with a statement today and indeed he is making a statement. But the rules stipulate that such must be in a written form and uploaded on the intranet.That is rule 52(3) and the word is “shall”. Are we proceeding well with the minister just coming here to give verbal interaction?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, come with a written statement tomorrow and not a casual one.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS) ON THE EXERCISE TO VERIFY THE LIST OF BENEFICIARIES OF THE COVID-19 RELIEF FUNDSTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Chairperson of PAC (Local and Central Government). Hon. Sseggona you may need to stand up because the microphone is high. (Laughter)3.46MR MEDARD SSEGGONA  (NUP, Busiro County East, Wakiso):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have had the trouble of borrowing a sanitiser from the other side and I am told that hon. Musasizi is a very kind man in supplying the same. As to standing up, I undertake to do so. However, the leadership of Parliament must equally provide facilities  that are flexible and friendly. (Laughter)The two committees of PAC - central and local Government - were assigned with the responsibility of investigating and informing Parliament in accordance with the terms of reference  issued by your office with respect to the list of beneficiaries  of the COVID-19 Relief Fund.Before I proceed with the report and motion, permit me in accordance with the rules, to lay on the Table both the minutes of our proceedings as well as annexures  that were recovered  and relied on in the course of our proceedings. I beg to lay.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, do. Thank you.MR SSEGGONA: The report is a lengthy one but as guided earlier and because it has been uploaded and read by colleagues, I would like to summarise  it with, first, an introduction  which runs from page 1 to 2. The second is that we discussed and observed the social protection in Uganda and I wish to read that one because of the importance at page 2 and that is section 2.Social protection is fast becoming embraced as a strategy by most governments world over in ensuring an egalitarian society. In Uganda, the social protection system comprises two pillars: social security and social care and support services. It is an important policy decision, as it protects the vulnerable against livelihood risks, enhancing the social status and rights of the marginalised with the overall objective of reducing economic and social vulnerability of the poor, hence reinforcing the state-citizen contract for a more cohesive society.Uganda launched the National Social Protection Policy in 2015, with the objective of guaranteeing for every Ugandan social protection in the circumstance that they are faced with risks and vulnerabilities, which would render them unable to meet their basic needs such as food, housing, medical care, among others.The response by the Government, therefore, to cushion Ugandans against the harsh impacts of the lockdown, through providing a cash relief fund, was a well-motivated response that ordinarily should have been encouraged. The need for other support mechanisms to be extended  to tax reductions,  waivers and 2396 2397THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTThe committee discovered that in Gulu City, the local leaders/ politicians, such as councillors that were meant to supervise and provide oversight, took over and abused the process by registering their relatives and themselves  as beneficiaries.  In situations  where the local councils rendered support through identification  and registration  of beneficiaries, these lists were put aside during data entry and replaced with other beneficiaries. When the committee interrogated further, it was discovered that over 10 councillors, the speaker and former LC III chairperson of Layibi Division,  for example,  registered  and benefited from the fund.Arua City and Kitgum Municipality had almost similar cases of abuse of the process by administrators. In Mbale, some city council staff were registered  and benefited.  The Lord Mayor Kampala Capital City Authority revealed to the committee that in Kampala, the DISOs abused the process by registering beneficiaries along party lines. The committee further noted that in some cases, the compilation of the list was left to chairpersons  of associations  of the different trade categories, in total disregard of the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, instructing that the compilation be carried out using existing administrative records. In Tororo Municipality,  for example,  the chairpersons  of different  trade categories took advantage of this loophole by registering beneficiaries  along political party and social relation lines. There were also allegations of extortion  by the chairperson  of the boda boda association in Tororo Municipality, who was alleged to have been asking beneficiaries  to part with Shs 15,000 to be registered.Relatedly, in Fort Portal City, some town agents were also accused of asking for between Shs 30,000 and Shs 40,000 before one was registered or their national ID would be retained until the money would be cleared. Recommendations1. The committee recommends that the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development holds accountable all Town Clerks who negated on their roles and responsibilities during this exercise  by delegating  their functions without proper supervision, as this amounted to neglect of duty. Additionally,  all officers responsible  for the abuse of this exercise by registering themselves in disregard of the vulnerable, be reprimanded.2. The committee further recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social development should ensure that administrative  records like tax registers in all cities, municipalities as well as other administrative units are updated by registering all formal and informal businesses.  This would ease identification and verification  of beneficiaries  of such an exercise in the future. Term of reference No.2: Ascertain the criteria used to select and identify the beneficiaries According to the National Social Protection Policy, 2005, vulnerability  is defined as “limited ability to manage risks or cope with shocks that may lead to undignified  lives”. While appearing before the committee, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development submitted that the Cabinet defined the vulnerable  in the context of the lockdown  to mean “those who were engaged in employment at the time of COVID-19 lockdown and depended on daily earnings, which were disrupted”.The committee notes that there was no standard selection formula used in selecting beneficiaries in the targeted areas. In most of the cities and municipalities,  the principle  of “first come, first served” was applied. As a result, many categories  of would-be  beneficiaries  were left out and for those who benefited,  resources were not equitably distributed amongst the categories.  For example,  more people [Mr Sseggona]3. We met with the town clerks, city/municipal mayors, RCC/RDCs and other stakeholders in the following locations:a) Soroti City, Mbale City, Arua City, Gulu City, Lira City, Fort Portal City, Hoima City, Mbarara City and Masaka City.b) Tororo Municipality, Masindi Municipality, Ntungamo Municipality, Kumi Municipality and Kitgum Municipality.i) The committee also carried out on-spot visits and verification  at a number of boda boda stages, taxi parks, street vendors and special hire operators to try and ascertain the terms of reference.ii) We analysed documents submitted by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the town clerks of municipalities/cities, KCCA Lord Mayor and other stakeholders that the committee interacted with.iii) The committee also carried out random telephone calls, which were made to the selected beneficiaries  from the list provided by the Rt Hon. Prime Minister.  Whereas, the committee was desirous of visiting all cities and municipalities that received the COVID-19 relief fund, it could only afford to visit the selected few due to time and budgetary constraints.Observations Madam Speaker, the committee was informed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development approved the COVID-19 emergency fund, amounting to Shs 53.5 billion to cover all 501,107 targeted beneficiaries.  Out of these numbers,  a total of Shs 2.854 billion was spent on administrative costs and Shs 50.6 billion was transferred to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development account in Post Bank to facilitate direct transfers to the chosen beneficiaries. During the meeting with the committee, Post Bank informed the meeting that the bank had since received 488,272 total transaction instructions from the Ministry of Gender and successfully processed 487,307. Payments had since closed, according to the Ministry of Gender, with a balance of about Shs 1.43 billion lying on its account.Term of reference 1: Establish who compiled the lists of beneficiaries  in the different locations.The committee observed that COVID-19 and its resultant  effects, as occasioned  by the lockdown, needed to be treated as a disaster and, therefore, it was wrong for the Government not to involve the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees Management in its response,  given its rich expertise  in personnel and structures down to the local Governments.Although the town clerks were supposed to be in charge of compilation of the list of beneficiaries  as stipulated  in the guidelines, the committee noted that this was done mostly through delegation. In Soroti, Arua, Hoima, Mbarara and Fort Portal cities, for example,  the town clerks were newly posted and therefore, delegated their deputies to undertake the exercise.  This was, however,  done with little, if any, supervision. The committee observed that the delegation of this responsibility  without  sufficient supervision,  made the exercise susceptible  to abuse, as the data collected by those delegated was greatly manipulated. Many would-be beneficiaries  were left out, especially  private school teachers and restaurant workers, as the committee found out in almost all locations visited. In Fort Portal City, the deputy town clerk monopolised  the whole exercise.  In Arua, most of the data entry clerks that carried out the exercise were volunteers/interns  who took advantage and registered themselves and other persons in the different categories. 2398 2399THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTAs noted earlier, in most locations visited by the committee,  this exercise  was marred by irregularities.  Officials who were assigned  the responsibility  to carry out the exercise negated on their duties. There was also poor co-ordination between the offices responsible  and the grassroot  structures as such as GISOs, DISOs, RCCs/RDCs, LCI and town agents in the supervision and verification  of the beneficiaries,  which led to abuse of the process. Whereas in Masaka and Lira cities, the RCCs actively participated  in the exercise,  in Ntungamo Municipality and Mbarara City, the elected leaders were not involved at all. In Mbale City, the Office of RCC was denied the opportunity  to verify the beneficiaries  in the Office of the Town Clerk. As such, about 1,500 persons were verified out of the over 9,000 that benefited.  In Arua city, the RCC and the Mayor only got to receive a report on the exercise while meeting the committee. There was no structural framework involving all leaders to ensure a co-ordinated  execution. This led to people, who were not intended to benefit, taking part of the fund. It is worth noting that a few random telephone calls made by the committee  to the beneficiaries revealed that some persons did not receive payments whereas their names are captured as having received relief and in the list provided. The committee could not, however, establish the accuracy of such assertions as the payments were made privately through their telephones and they could have deleted the confirmation messages. A one Ssewankambo Bashir Mbale captured in the list as having been paid under the bus/taxi conductor  category denied having received the money when the committee called him.A one Oloya Geoffrey  from Gulu purported to have been the first beneficiary  of the relief fund under the boda-boda category could not be traced. When the committee consulted the boda-boda  Association in Gulu, they denied him being a member and alleged that the Oloya in question is, in fact, a builder. While interacting with the committee, the Gulu City officials informed  the meeting that their efforts to reach out to Oloya were futile. The committee noted that not all persons registered received the money due to various reasons, such as disparities in the names registered vis-à-vis those that appear in their NIN, using one’s NIN to register many telephone numbers and incomplete information, among others. The Committee further noted that there was an option in the guidelines to pay persons who qualified  and were in possession  of NIN, but had no telephones through the bank post. However,  many would-be  beneficiaries  with these cases were ignored and replaced hence leaving out a big number.Recommendations1. The Ministry of Gender considers verifying and giving relief to the vulnerable who had already been identified  within the quota range but were left out due to errors in the information. This should be done before the end of October 2021; and2. In future, systems designed for this kind of exercise should cater for vulnerable  persons without phones and persons with disability.Term of reference  number five was on how much money the beneficiaries  received.  We have indicated  the figures and the committee recommends that should such an intervention be necessary in the future, the rates should be based on the current cost of living. We did observe before the recommendation on how we arrive at that conclusion.Term of reference  number six was to establish the roles played by the different stakeholders. We have examined  the same at page 17 and came to the conclusion that the committee recommends  that should such an exercise be necessary in the future, elected leaders should be involved from the onset to give it ownership. benefited  under the boda boda category than food vendors, salonists and car washers. In Mbale, the committee noted that the number of support staff who benefited  in private schools was more than the teachers in those schools, which is not logical. In Tororo, a total number of 1,402 slum residents  benefited,  representing 37 per cent of the entire threshold, as compared to three vehicle loaders.In Soroti, the committee interacted with Mr Saleh Babu Opwonya, the Chairperson Teso Coach Stage, who intimated that out of the 75 members he registered, none of them received relief. Meanwhile, his counterpart, Mr Abdu Mugisha, the Gateway Bus Company chairperson, revealed that out of the 56 members he registered, 48 benefited. In Fort Portal, at Kampala-Kyenjojo  Taxi Stage, 60 members were registered and on Kampala Road Boda Boda Stage, 132 members were registered but none of them received relief. These inequities meant that certain categories benefited  more to the disadvantage  of others. Suffice to note that the Government  was able to set thresholds  for beneficiaries  in all the cities/municipalities but did not consider setting out a workable formula to be used to equitably share the quotas.The committee noted that for success to be achieved  in Lira City, identification  was done based on the area of operation and business location for each category. Leadership structures for each category also supported the registration and verification process. Consequently, internal structures were put in place where the compiled  lists were first submitted  to the DISOs’ office and both physical verification  and phone call verification was done to ascertain authenticity of the submitted lists. Once approved, the list would be submitted back to the Town Clerk for data entry. Other cities and municipalities did not fully verify their lists. Cognisant of the directive of the ministry to display the lists generated in public places within urban areas for purposes of updating and verification,  with supervision  of warden administrators and support of village health teams, the committee noted that across all the cities and municipalities, this directive was defied. This was attributed to limited time, technicalities in the online system, bulk and sensitivity of information. In the committee’s view, the display was avoided as it would expose the irregularities  and abuse of the process. Nonetheless, if a display was to be done, raw data would have been the one to be displayed as and when the lists would come through. The committee recommends, therefore, that;1. The Ministry of Local Government should, in liaison with UBOS, support the local government administrative units to set up a more robust database for future use. 2. In future, if such an activity reoccurs, the Ministry of Local Government should ensure that Town Clerks strictly adhere to the set guidelines. Term of reference No.3: Verify the list of people who received the moneyMadam Speaker, the observations here are contained on pages 12 to 13. I would wish to proceed directly to the recommendations, following the observations. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should consider giving relief to residents of Ayivu Division and Northern Division of Arua and Fort Portal cities, respectively. This flows from the observations  that there were no benefits to them. Term of reference No.4: Verify and establish whether  the intended  beneficiaries  actually received the money. [Mr Sseggona]2400 2401THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT3.  Prioritise sensitisation of any intervention by Government as many people did not know the criteria though which to get assistance under the intervention;4. Prioritise recruitment of tacticians and other relevant staff to boost the capacity of local administrative units in data administration;5. Government should discourage giving out hand-outs by deliberately strengthening a social security support systems that is sustainable in the long term. 6. Religious and cultural institutions should be involved  in these efforts.  Should such intervention be considered in the future, the ministry for disaster management should be the one to coordinate the response efforts, since they have the expertise  as well as developed structure and transcends down to the local governments.Madam Speaker, the Joint Committee on Public Accounts, Central and Local Governments applauds the Government’s intervention to alleviate the hardships occasioned by lockdown on the people. However, considering the challenges that came with this intervention, it is prudent that the Government ensures that proper structures are put in place and the Ministry of Local Government and Ministry of Disaster Preparedness are empowered to handle any future reoccurrences should such an intervention be considered.In our considered view, the recommendations contained in this report will go a long way in addressing  the gaps identified  during this exercise.  I beg to move that the report be adopted. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you so much, hon. Medard Sseggona, the chairperson of PAC for the elaborate report. We are in this House as representatives of the people, so we must do the right thing.Honourable members, before I open the debate, I would like to make a few observations from the chairpersons’ communication. Looking at the report of the Joint Public Accounts, Local Government and Central, there was no involvement of the area Members of Parliament. When giving out the money - we are the representatives of these people, why don’t they involve us? How can you get clout from your members? Even if you took only Shs 100,000 to a person, even if you are involved  in identification,  it will have created you political mileage. None involvement of the political leaders was very wrong when giving out this money and that was bad. (Applause)We have always said that if you are going to my constituency or going to my district or you are doing anything, please involve the political leaders; we are the voice of the voiceless. Therefore, we must be the ones to speak for our people. (Applause)There is that problem that we are not involved in the exercise.  However,  be it as it may be, there should be no abdication of our oversight duty. We need to make sure that our oversight duty is being done. I also know that there was some abuse of office by different authorities;  different people abused their offices and did not do the right thing. In some municipalities and town councils, I remember some people were even arrested but I do not know what took place after that. As a recommendation from the committee, the Auditor-General must take that up and action must be taken on those people who abuse their offices. Lastly, in the implementation of such important programmes, the two-line ministries should be involved.  For example,  the Ministry  of Relief and Disaster Preparedness; that was relief, there was a disaster. We needed to involve the Ministry of Relief and Disaster Preparedness because they have the technical  expertise  on The committee encourages elected leaders to perform their oversight roles and mandate on all projects in their jurisdictions, whether invited to do so or not. This will promote an accountable and transparent society. Term of reference number seven. Madam Speaker, this was to deal with any other matter incidental to and connected with the above. Food hand-outs versus cash paymentsThe committee  noted that in a similar effort to ease the effects of the pandemic  in the first lockdown, Government provided food hand-outs to the vulnerable. It was therefore, prudent for the committee  to find out whether  the decision by Government to give out cash relief as opposed to food items was a better choice. There was an overwhelming preference for cash relief in most of the locations the committee visited, with the justification  that it preserves the dignity of the vulnerable, eliminates middlemen and enables consumer choice. The committee recommends that going forward, Government should address the challenges  identified  with giving out cash relief, should it consider such an intervention necessary.Facilitation for data entry clerksThe committee noted that Government provided Shs 4 million to every municipality and division within cities to facilitate the exercise,  including  but not limited to fuel costs and allowances for data entry clerks. At the time of the committee’s visit, however, some of the officials had not received  this facilitation due to the bureaucratic challenges associated  with vote change  and staff structuring now that they had become cities. As a matter of fact, many civil servants including town clerks in the new administrative units, had not received their salaries. The committee recommends that Government expedites  the process of operationalising  the new administrative units to enable them fully function. Multiple paymentsIn a circular provided by the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, showed that only one person per household was supposed to be registered in their relief fund. The committee noted abuse across the locations visited. In Fort Portal City and Ntungamo Municipality, for instance, there were cases of husband and wife registering under the same household and benefiting;  some, even outside the categories required.In Masindi, several people had similar names and NINs, but altered the case form, one in the upper case and the other in the lower case. This clearly shows that the NIN was manipulated by the users. Other town councils/urban areasThe committee noted that the action by Government to provide relief to only the vulnerable in cities and municipalities was segregative as the lockdown occasioned by Government was countrywide. Curfew hours were being implemented strictly across the country, including town councils and urban areas. This equally disrupted the citizens in those areas who were engaged in employment to continue with their daily earnings. General recommendations1. The Attorney-General should carry out a forensic audit in the exercise and make appropriate recommendations; and2. The Ministry of Gender should:i) Ensure that all officers  who were fraudulently registered and received relief fund, refund the money;ii) Ensure the functionality of disaster management committees in all administrative units from which disaster policies can be developed and implemented;[Mr Sseggona]2402 2403THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTaffected than those in the rural areas. It brought a lot of issues politically - that COVID-19 did not come only for the people in towns because people were also dying in the villages. For future work, if we do not have it, we would rather not do it. However, let us not use programmes like this to bring disunity in the country. I know that the Uganda Bureau of Statistics together with the National Identification  and Registration  Authority  were involved. How come we could not know the person who should get the grant? I think that data usage and data management is critical in any social grants that we hope to implement in this country. I thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you.4.29MS CHRISTINE AKELLO (NRM, Erute County North, Lira):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a matter of planning and the way the beneficiaries  were chosen. Since I represent people at the constituency, according to the minister, as of today, they think that all the businesses are being run at the cities and yet we also have businesses in the constituencies. People suffered and all the burdens were left to us; we had to cater for the people in the rural centres. Even the church leaders were left out and these people have suffered up to today because the churches were closed. However, when we raise that - nobody even catered for them. Next time, if there is anything,  we need to involve the Members of Parliament. Planning is better using the bottom-up approach. That is why Government programmes are failing because of planning from the ministry and leaving the Members of Parliament out. I beg to submit.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you. Members, when debating this report, I want you to relate to the cash bonanza to teachers. I want to know whether we should still make the same mistake. If there was no mistake, can this Parliament pass a resolution today on whether can the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development can give out the cash to the teachers?4.33MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman together with the members of the committee for the report.  The motive of this programme was okay but the implementation  was not effectively  done. The method that was used to identify the beneficiaries  was not proper. The principle  of saying that the town dwellers should be the ones to benefit was also not good.I represent a rural constituency. Remember when the country was locked down, there was an influx of movement  of people from towns to the villages. Therefore, the impact equally, was much on the rural areas. I have islands and people from my islands did not benefit from this. When the country was locked down, Government did not think about the people who stay in islands - because these are hard-to-reach and hard-to-stay areas. I would like to thank Government for at least, beginning this programme. However, the system of using the National  Identification Numbers should also be looked at. We have National  Identification  Numbers  that have expiry dates. I do not know next time, when we have –(Member timed out.)4.35MR JOHN LEMATIA (NRM, Ayivu Division West, Arua):  Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank the committee for that report. I want to speak about data in relation to Arua City. The report did not clearly bring out Ayivu. In Arua City, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics gave data on Arua Central only, and yet in Arua City, we have two divisions. The data, which was given, was only for central, which was 60 per cent of the 60 households, leaving out 21,500 beneficiaries  from Ayivu Division West. these issues. However, if we want to do it on our own, then we will have problems. In addition, when we are doing the identification of the people let us not sit in Kampala and identify the people on a computer. (Applause)  People should be identified  on the ground. You cannot know who is a needy person in my constituency or in my village.We have CAOs in the districts and these are people we can punish. If you say; CAO, make sure that you monitor this activity to the letter, a CAO will do it. However, if you gave a politician  for example,  FDC, NRM or NUP chairperson, will they be accountable? Will your people have benefited? So, as we make resolutions  on the next programme, let us put all the things in mind. Technology has just come so let us not experiment.  Tinka said something  yesterday- let us not allow this money - whether it is donor money or whatever - to go just like the other cash money. I now open debate for 30 minutes.4.25MS LILLIAN ABER (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Whereas the intent for this money was a good one, everything was wrong about the action taken. I want to thank the committee for doing good work, investing the time to analyse these issues. Madam Speaker, we need to pay attention and value taxpayers’  money. We must also ensure that whenever we take money to the community, it reaches the direct beneficiary.This country adopted the policy of decentralisation and we have functioning local governments. I do not understand why we want to do things from the centre and always be reactionary.The number one challenge we have is the issue of keeping data. The second problem we have is rushing to do something before carefully analysing the impact. I would, therefore, suggest that for the money we are supposed to give or send to private teachers, we must use the chief administrative officers because  the districts  have got a functioning system. We do not want to have the same challenge. It is only prudent that we do the right thing. They say doing the same thing in the same way and you expect different  results will never yield results.I, therefore, insist that those who mismanaged the money must be brought to book. I insist that when doing the next disbursement  of money for the private teachers, we must use the CAOs at the districts. I thank you. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, hon. Lillian. 4.27MS AGNES ATIM (NRM, Woman Representative, Amolatar):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I thank the committee for bringing the issues out. This report insinuates two things. One, it unveils the lack of coordination of our ministries, departments and agencies. Two, that when a programme is brought forward, every ministry is struggling to have it run by themselves so that is why we see all this disjointed kind of reactionary processes. The other issue I see which my colleague has just said is the devolution of power and implementing the decentralisation policy or law that we have in this country. We have structures right from the village level that will recognise if that person is a boda boda  rider or not. However, we choose to use a centralised system that cannot help us to reach the last person.I think for future work of social grants like this, let us appreciate the structures that we have in our communities. The last issue that this report brings out is equity. I know there were decisions made that the people in urban areas were much more [The Deputy Speaker]2404 2405THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT4.39MS IRENE LINDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Fort Portal City): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to thank the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) for this comprehensive report. My point is on the issue of understaffing  of cities. As newly created cities, we have a very big challenge  of staff because the structures have never been approved. This has greatly affected the operations  and development  of the cities. My prayer is: can the Ministry of Local Government approve the structures of these cities?On the issue of the cash to be given to the private school teachers, personally, I have tried to mobilise the private teachers but most of them are not registered. The few who are registered  benefited  in the first lot. The nursery school teachers are there and they cannot apply for this relief. My prayer is: can the nursery school teachers also be allowed to access this money? Thank you. 4.41MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairpersons of the committees for the wonderful report they have presented to this august House. It was indeed a very rich report.The issue of the relief fund that was given to the vulnerable people was grossly abused, if we all followed the report of the committee. From the criteria for the selection  of beneficiaries, to double payments  of some beneficiaries, to quite a number of issues that were raised by the committee, I want to agree with the recommendations that were given by the committee. Sometimes, it beats my understanding how the government rushes to implement such programmes. First of all, we need to analyse: what do we want to achieve? What is our objective? That will drive us to the right methodologies to use. Looking at how this money was rushed to be given out to the beneficiaries,  definitely,  I expected  such an outcome from the committee. Therefore, I look at how this money was grossly abused by those who were supposed to handle it and I want to agree with the committee on their recommendation of recovery of funds for the money that we can still recover. I strongly recommend that we recover these funds. Secondly,  on technical  officers, who neglected their duties and yet they knew that they had roles to play, they must be handled with a harder fist. This is because we need to teach people a lesson. Then we shall start taking some of these things seriously. Madam Speaker, I am looking forward to handling the money that we are supposed to give out as relief to the teachers. I am worried. I wonder whether we should continue to give the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development the authority to give out this money alone or not. My recommendation would be that we need to fully involve the Ministry of Education and Sports in this programme. We need to also involve – in fact, there is a commissioner who sits in the Ministry of Education, who is fully in charge of private schools. How do we rush to let the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development give money to private school teachers and yet, the Ministry of Education is fully responsible for our teachers in the country? I strongly recommend that the Ministry of Education should take the lead.4.44MR MOSES OGWAL (NRM, Dokolo North County, Dokolo):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate what the committee has done. I also want to quickly appreciate what the minister presented yesterday to support the teachers. Shs 30 billion in the economy starts improving the purchasing power, which is badly required.  We need to expedite  this. I My prayer is that since the report has been generated, can the minister consider Ayivu Division West, which was left out with a total of 21,500 beneficiaries?Secondly, the time and system used for giving out the money was not proper. If you look at the timeframe given for the city clerks to do all this work, I think it was not proper. Also, the system used could not even display results not until it was in the system. Next time, I beg –(Member timed out.)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Lematia, if you looked at the report very well, it is talking about Ayivu and how it did not benefit because of non-capturing of the data. I wish you were attentive when the report was being read. It reads, “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development should consider giving relief to the residents of Ayivu Division and northern division of Arua and Fort Portal cities respectively.”  Therefore, the committee captured your issues.4.37MS JOV ANICE TWINOBUSINGYE (NRM, Woman Representative, Kiruhura):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is on page 16, about the issue of double payment by Post Bank to the beneficiaries. About 6,000 beneficiaries  were double-paid to a tune of Shs 614,550,000 but only Shs 380,000,000 was recovered. The balance of Shs 243,000,000 – we cannot tell where it is. As Government, what have we done to recover the balance that was not recovered? This could help, for instance, subcounties or districts that did not benefit at all. Someone  wonders  why some people were paid twice and others were left out completely. Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the procedure and criteria used. I think we are still wondering about the criteria that was used. Next time, I recommend  that when taking up the programme,  we first think of the procedure and the guidelines. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I think as an institution that does the appropriation of funds, maybe, it would also be good for the procedure to be brought to this House for us to understand. We need to understand what is going on with the money we are giving out; whether it is donor money or not, we need to appreciate, as legislators. 4.38DR GEORGE BHOKA (NRM, Obongi County, Obongi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairpersons of the two committees and the honourable minister who presented the proposal to give money to teachers. The report has brought out three key issues that I would like to debate on. Issue number one is appreciating the National Social Protection Policy. It is a good policy with good pillars, and a strategy, and a programme that if we respected, we would not be firefighting. I thank the Government of the Republic of Uganda for the COVID-19 relief fund. I also want to thank Give Direct for the efforts that they have made to extend assistance  to our private school teachers. My first observation  is related to evidence-informed planning and programming. That affects the Office of the Prime Minister,  the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the National Planning Authority and Uganda Bureau of Statistics. Do we know our population? Do we know who is vulnerable? In the era of digitalisation, should we really be firefighting  in getting the facts and figures and statistics  for evidence-informed planning and programming? Number two is disaster preparedness, response and our role as Parliament in emergency planning and allocation of resources to –(Member timed out.)[Mr Lematia]2406 2407THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTherefore, I join colleagues who are saying money should be sent to the office of the CAO and the office of the District Education  Officer arranges and payment is made to the teachers, if we are to support them. Thank you.4.52MR PHILIPHS LOKWANG (NRM, Napore West County, Karenga):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. In this gesture of helping the vulnerable persons, the technical persons did not do enough research. In reference to Karamoja, the two cities that were identified  in Karamoja  are heavily inhabited  by people who move from the village to survive in town.Therefore, most of them do not have national identity cards. When you use the criteria of identity cards, all of them cannot benefit. I request that they include these inhabitants in the system.Secondly, I want to correct that there are no “private teachers”, but “private school teachers”. In this sense, most of these private schools hire the teachers, some of whom are on Government payroll in other schools and come to part-time in private schools.I, therefore,  request the office of the District Education  Officer, in conjunction  with the office of the Chief Administrative  Officer, to identify teachers who are duly recruited and paid in the private schools. I beg to submit.4.54MR POLYCARP OGWARI (Independent, Agule County, Pallisa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the report given. However, when money is supposed to be distributed I do not know where the fear is coming from such that leaders are always put aside.An MP is a consultant to the Government but these things are done without a Member of Parliament’s notice. When it comes to the local councils, in every area, things are done without their notice and that is why the report said that the guy was said to be a boda boda  rider yet he is a builder.In simple analysis, it is like calling: “Is Polycarp in Agule?” “Yes.” “Polycarp, whom shall we give this money?” I will mention my brother.Generally, the process through which the money was distributed was very poor and we must accept that for any money that is supposed to be distributed, we shall work together and remove the business of – I do not know whether it is fear: a minister may say that “an MP may take my powers”. We do not take powers from a minister but we work together as people who are supposed to develop and improve the works of Government. For example,  Emyooga  was a mess and it is the same thing going on. Ministers, kindly, let us work together and make sure that the real vulnerable  people benefit. Thank you very much.4.57MR BARNABAS TINKASIIMIRE     (NRM, Buyaga West County, Kagadi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank you, chairperson and committee members, for the good work. Madam Speaker, I register my thanks to you for this kind of approach, particularly when monies are distributed. You demanded that we get to know what was going on. (Applause)  You started with the Emyooga . That was a good thing to do. We are now seeing this matter of the boda boda  money – (Interjections) – “boda boda  money” - of course that is how we call it because they said the first person they called was a boda boda  rider – (Laughter) - yet he was a builder. You can see how it is really working for us to find out the truth behind this distribution.I am glad we are going to move forward to give to the teachers - at least we are following something that is practically possible for us to have value for money. Madam Speaker, I want to raise the bar and say the money that we are following is 0.001 per cent of the national budget. We have almost spent an hour debating that 0.001 per cent of the national budget.thank the government for thinking about that and for supporting the private schools and the private sector. Despite what the committee said, I want to say clearly that let the teachers who are teaching be supported. Let me repeat that – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Let me correct you, hon. Ogwal. The principle of giving money to the teachers is acceptable. We agreed that we are going to give the teachers the money and we appreciate that our teachers are getting the money. There are two things that we are looking at; how much are we giving the teachers? And how are we giving the teachers? Are we still going through the same process that we are saying was not correct, or are we going to do decentralisation? That is where we are now. MR MOSES OGWAL:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think borrowing from what the committee has said, we need to involve more people. This is why I am saying that let us use and involve Uganda Private Teachers’ Union (UPTU), rather than tracing persons registered or licensed at the ministry. Otherwise, if you trace through UPTU, you will get the teacher who taught and whom we are looking for. So, let us not rely so much on the registry or the licence side. Lastly, let us build this digitalisation process; let us not break it. It helps in traceability and so we should build it so that it can help us to catch the thieves. Let us give these people money quickly because they are badly off. Thank you very much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are not going to give out money in a haphazard way in the name of doing it quickly. We need to create procedures and processes in this country. (Applause)4.47MS CATHELINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to interest myself In how the money was distributed. Madam Speaker, allow me to appreciate the work of the chairpersons and the committee members. They have tried to highlight the issues that have affected most of us. I come from the border between the other country and ours –(Interjections)- that one that borders Kabale. (Laughter)  To assure you, Madam Speaker, some members from that side have our identity cards and they got the money, but our natives never got it. It was very sad. The  majority cried, but we had no help. So, next time, Government  or planners should go well aware of it. If they had not wanted to involve us as Members of Parliament, at least the involvement of village leaders would have been vital. Madam Speaker, if we go to the issue of private teachers, there are teachers who are employed by private schools and those who work part-time but are not employed and Government, each year, produces teachers with certificates. I would like to know, clearly: who are the private teachers that will be considered in this? Thank you.4.50MR SAMUEL OKWIR (NRM, Moroto County, Alebtong):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in thanking the committee for the report that was well presented here. I have one or two concerns on the issue of the money that is supposed to go to private teachers. There are schools that have not yet completed the process of registration but they have already submitted to the Ministry of Education and Sports. But the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is asking for submission of names with registration numbers. My fear is that most of the schools that have supported our children and teachers will miss out. Why can’t we borrow a leaf from the Ministry of Local Government on how the LC1 chairpersons are paid? The LC1 chairpersons are paid at the subcounty; they are called on the day of payment and everybody appears and there is no duplication.[Mr Ogwal]2408 2409THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTH.E. the President, as the Fountain of Honour and the political head of the country, is being helped by the ministers, which ministers are also political leaders. However, I wonder how they fail to work with MPs, the LCV chairpersons and LC III chairpersons who are also political leaders and the whole structure, which is streamlined up to LC I chairpersons. If the exercise is supposed  to move through the political structures, why exclude the MPs? Madam Speaker, I am looking at it as discrimination against MPs, where the ministers ill-advise the President and opt to work with -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are supposed to monitor. We do not implement; that is one. If you don’t do your oversight role, then you are at a loss. As an MP, you must do your oversight role.MR TEBANDEKE: Madam  Speaker, I appreciate that. However, even during the oversight role, we are not accorded due content and data as a basis for us to conduct that exercise. If this money was to be –THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can I ask you a question, hon. Tebandeke? Do you know your powers, as a Member of Parliament? Do you know your powers? Do you know that you even have powers to get any document that you want? (Applause)  Check Article 90.5.07DR MICHAEL BAYIGGA (DP, Buikwe County South, Buikwe):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this good report. I have read and indeed they said there was segregation between those who were living in the cities and municipalities leaving out those in town councils. The constituency which I represent here has three town councils and the lifestyle of those who are in the town councils and municipalities is very similar. For us in the rural constituencies, Members of Parliament were left to do what the government did in the municipalities and the cities. I was however delighted that a few of my members within the community called me to thank me for enabling them get some of this money. I was not part of it and I said so. That is how I discovered that the process of distribution of this money, including the compiling  of beneficiaries  was already wrong. That is why in the rural constituencies, some people got it. I discovered in the report that Shs 1.43 billion had been discovered, left hanging on the accounts of Post Bank. I wonder what we are going to do with that money, and the committee did not make any recommendations about it. Now, with regards to the distribution of money, I have heard members talking about the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and so on and so forth. Well, Madam Speaker, if there is a process that can be - can I add the second?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  As herbalist or a doctor, please go ahead.DR BAYIGGA:  I would argue, Madam Speaker, that the system, which was used in the previous distribution of funds could have been wrong. However, I believe that any responsible government should make improvements from time to time. All that this Parliament needs is a process, in which we can make contributions and which can be monitored and the results should be objectively  verifiable.  This is better than simply getting information, to be used, with notable results. Thank you very much and I thank the committee.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We have had enough debate on this matter. Members are now repeating the same things. Honourable chairperson, do you have anything to say? 5.11MR MPINDI BUMALI (Independent, PWD Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for the We have not allocated reasonable time to debate monies, which are given to sectors like defence. For the last 36 years, they have been receiving a share – (Applause) - of 22 per cent of the national budget but we have never given critical time to discuss and ask questions.As for the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have children studying on the floor yet a lot of money – 22 per cent of the national budget - is being allocated but here we are not asking the officials there these critical questions. Now, the bar that I want to raise is that let us move away from this matter and handle these big percentages – (Applause) - and deliver to our constituents what should be delivered. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. 5.00MR ENOCK NYONGORE (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join my colleagues in appreciating  the initiative  of your office and this Parliament, to follow up on some Government money being dispersed to do certain work in this country. I also thank the chairman for the good report that he presented.When I looked at the list of persons who benefitted,  I realised it is an embarrassment  to us who are supposed to do oversight roles. We are now heading for another kind of exercise. What do I propose? I propose that all the listed schools in our districts be categorised into constituencies.  Let the list first be forwarded here and let the Members of Parliament look at these - because we all know those institutions in our constituencies - so that we can also pass it. We do not need even to approve, so that we can do something that is correct and perfect. Thank you so much. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. If you are a member of PAC (Local Government) or PAC (Central Government), do not even stand. Why don’t you people sit down? People have already debated; you are going to repeat the same things. I want a lady; I cannot see you well because of the mask. [Hon. Namugga rose_]  I meant Gorreth, not you. The lady who is two-in-one. (Laughter)5.02MS KENNY AUMA (UPC, Woman Representative, Kwania): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I appreciate the chairperson of the committee for the report he has given. You know very well what we have been going through in this country. On the COVID-19 money, we had a scenario where people were getting money from the community, in that for one to register, they needed to pay some money. Now, on the money that the private school teachers are going to get, we know there are a lot of things likely to take place. The first thing that we need to consider is the strategy we are going to use to give out money to the private school teachers. I suggest, if possible, that the minister goes through the CAOs, LCsV and the DEOs of each district. One thing I want to put up very clearly about the money is that people are using money in this country - we have heard of a scenario where money is landing in the wrong hands; those who have been given money were not supposed to get it. Now, we have the teachers who were supposed to get this money. We have teachers in Government schools not on the payroll. What is the minister going to do about those? Are those teachers also under the same category of teachers going to be paid? Another thing is about the mayors and councillors who got the COVID-19 money. As a country, we need to punish those who got the money not meant for them. The money was meant for the poor, not for the rich. Thank you.5.05MR CHARLES TEBANDEKE (NUP, Bbale County, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also appreciate your initiative towards supervising this. My worry is how this money was determined and how it came to be distributed to the vulnerable, in the first place.[Mr Tinkasiimire]2410 2411THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTo colleagues, about the double payment, yes, we did recommend recovery; but also recommended that those hidden in a room doing criminal acts should also be handled in accordance with the law. With respect to guidelines, we will submit recommendations that there should be proper guidelines in the Ministry of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. It should take the lead in the future, in the event of such similar occurrences. I have also been touched by the concern of hon. Linda, Woman Member of Parliament for Fort Portal City, about the understaffing.  I think there has been research in this country that all local governments  are understaffed  to the extent of 47 per cent. I think it is a matter that Parliament may wish to take interest in. Honourable colleagues, I think also the matter of education was at the forefront of the debate today. Our terms of reference were to look at all identified  categories  of intended  beneficiaries. Therefore, we were not paying particular attention to teachers in private schools, which seems to have been a dominant concern in today’s debate. Hon. Catheline Ndamira and some other people who accessed national IDs - that was not part of our terms of reference and it is a matter that we clearly avoided in this report for legal and diplomatic reasons. The last two issues; one by hon. Dr Lulume Bayigga Ssalongo that some people from the rural constituency  benefited:  I think we said, “Yes, there are categories of people who were not intended beneficiaries  but benefited.”  This will help the ministry in undertaking further remedial action. Finally, I think hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire, some of the matters you raised relate to classification  of accounts or classified  accounts. I am not one of those that will be tempted to discuss them but I can also urge Government - for purposes of accountability, 36 years is a lot of time. In other civilised countries, they declassify.  Those that have been declassified are discussed in the national parliaments. I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members.  I reiterate our prayer that you find pleasure in adopting the resolutions. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. Honourable minister, are you responding to the report?5.19THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  (Ms Betty Amongi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I start by thanking the committee for the report. The reason we became very transparent with this exercise is that we understand  the principle  that underlines democracy is that the three arms of Government have their functions. Parliament is responsible for checks and balances on the Executive.  Therefore  –(Interjections) - but I am appreciating the role of Parliament. Unless my English is a little bit difficult. I am saying that Parliament has an oversight – (Interruption)MR SSEWUNGU:  Madam Speaker, we all know English and respect it because we learnt it at the infancy stage. I am raising a point of order. The honourable minister is stating that they were very transparent but as a Speaker, you directed the investigation into this matter. Indeed, here, you can see Shs 2.8 billion was spent on administration, yet her ministry - ministers  and officials,  are given allowances plus vehicles. Look at Post Bank. Money was lost worth Shs 614 million at their cost and she says they were transparent and she knows English very much. Is the honourable minister, a former UPC Member and ardent supporter – (Laughter) - an evolved one we used to sit with her raising similar matters - in order to come before this august House and tell us how they were transparent? Yet, when you make a deep investigation on the allowances that were paid to these people who took Shs 2.8 billion, might even have gotten Shs 500,000 per day at the cost of those Ugandans who were given Shs 100,000 and were taxed by Post Bank. Is she in [Mr Bumali]elaborate report. However, at the same time, I would like to raise a concern. Yesterday, when the minister was presenting her report, she did mention to this Parliament that the other cash bonanza was a success. And from what the chairman has presented today, it appears that not even 20 per cent, as you said yesterday, was achieved under that arrangement. Madam Speaker, after the Parliament dissolved yesterday,  we said that we needed to first discuss the report. When the minister went out, the journalists interviewed her, and she said that “Parliament has not stopped me from continuing with what I have been doing; for us we are going to proceed with what we have been doing.” And that indicates that without her appreciating the mistakes that were made in the other cash bonanza, we are going to face a lot of problems in this second bonanza.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear that statement. Honourable Minister - [ A Member rose ]- sit. Honourable minister, is that what you told the country that you are going to continue? Or, have you already paid?5.13THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Ms Betty Amongi):  Madam Speaker, I made it clear that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development will continue with data collection, because I knew your ruling was very clear that on principle, Parliament will not stop the payment to private teachers. However, today there will be a debate on the issues of the past programme to inform recommendations on how to improve. So, it is data collection that I indicated will continue and data collection is continuing.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, can we also know if you have done any payments out of that money?MS AMONGI:  We have not paid? We are collecting data. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Now, the debate on this matter has stopped.  Whoever has not debated on this will debate on the cash bonanza. Honourable Chairman, do you have anything to add or amend? [ Mr Sewungu rose ]- Hon. Ssewungu, I am tired of your procedures. MR SSEGGONA:  I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker-THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You people, should just appreciate it; I am sitting here talking from the time I come, until we leave and you are there either saying procedure or order? Can’t you really appreciate and put yourself in my shoes? (Laughter) MR SSEGGONA:  Madam Speaker, by way of appreciation, let me thank you and my colleagues,  first of all for the compliments  to the committee. Permit me to say that this was a co-chaired joint committee.  And I want to express gratitude to my co-chair, my young brother hon. Martin Ojara Mapenduzi - (Applause)-  and the joint teams of PAC Central and PAC, local government. I take responsibility for anything that may remain wanting, but the compliments, go to my team that worked tirelessly and jointly. I raised the question of those who have been arrested. Yes, we did ask the police CID to apprehend and investigate. They made a comprehensive report which is attached to the minutes that we have submitted and the matter will be attended to by the police, including prosecution, which we directed. If it is the pleasure of this House, we would recommend, therefore, that those apprehended and investigated be prosecuted urgently. However, remember that we also made a recommendation for a forensic audit, which perhaps would aid the police to a greater detail in undertaking the possible prosecution.2412 2413THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA WEDNESDAY , 2 FEBRUARY 2022 STANDING COMMITTEE REPORTTHE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, let her conclude. MS AMONGI:  We are going to ensure that we involve everyone  and all leaders, in this next cash release for the teachers.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, can you conclude.MS AMONGI:  I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. I will report in due course, on how we have integrated the ideas of Parliament in this cash relief. Thank you.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. I am happy we have debated these two issues together.  (Mr Ssewungu rose_)THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssewungu, what is your issue?MR SSEWUNGU:  Madam Speaker, I am sorry for taking too long to raise this issue. The issue has arisen from what the Member on the Floor, the honourable minister said.  If you internalise properly, what the minister is saying about the cash bonanza and bringing it to Parliament - as if, the minister is trying to insinuate that Parliament should not be questioning, but only helping and that the Cabinet would conclude that. Madam Speaker, the principal role of Parliament is oversight and accountability of the Executive.  If the minister begins to raise such statements - as we leave, Madam Speaker, go and internalise the minister’s submission on the Hansard.  It is as if she wants to say that she is helping us. Yet, as Parliament - and as long as some money is coming from the Consolidated Fund, we are supposed  to monitor it and find out how it is spent.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Even if it is not from the Consolidated Fund - for instance, for this one, I am told it is a donor fund and so we must - MR SSEWUNGU:  Everything. Therefore, honourable minister, as you submit - I know that and I was in the Committee on Public Accounts with you. Madam Speaker, let us not have that kind of submission  on this Floor, where the Executive wants to overpower Parliament. Otherwise, it seems I am very useless here. I am not here for talking; I am here for an oversight function, accountability and management of government funds. THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ssewungu and I also thank Members for the debate. I now put the equation that this august House adopts the report of the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government) and the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Governments)  on the exercise of verification of the list of beneficiaries  of COVID-19  relief funds.(Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Thank you very much, chairpersons and members of the different  committees.  Now that we have debated - we have also debated the cash bonanza.Members, we have debated the cash bonanza and so, we should be able to come up with the resolutions. First of all, we need to guide the ministry on how to handle the cash bonanza - being on the Chair does not stop me from giving my suggestion. We need guidelines on how this money is going to be given out to beneficiaries in each of the districts. Secondly, the Ministry of Education and Sports should take lead in the process of giving out this money. (Applause)  Thirdly, the devolution of power, using the administrative structures that know the private schools in the area must take lead in identifying  the beneficiaries  of this money. The administrative leadership in the districts and the education ministry should order to tell us that she was very transparent yet even here I see that she is not?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Ssewungu, transparency is relative.  Maybe for my sister also to show total transparency, when you were making the guidelines - that is if you had them - you ought to have brought them to us as the House. We needed to have known what category of people are getting money and how are they getting it. That is the kind of transparency we wanted. It is after we realised that there was something wrong that we did a post-mortem as Parliament. We are the custodians of the law of this country. That is what Members are saying. Yes, we need to be transparent. That is good. You have made a commitment  to that effect but the amount that was spent on administrative costs alone was enough to cover my entire constituency. It would have caused inflation in my constituency.Therefore, honourable member, just give a brief.MS AMONGI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to reiterate that this exercise came out of a decision of Cabinet - the issue of who should collect the data and the criteria. The premise was because at that time we were in a lockdown. Cabinet debated - actually, we put a case for allowing LCsI to be the ones to participate in data collection. However, because of the fact that we were in lockdown at the time the pandemic  was so difficult with the Delta Variant Cabinet said, “We cannot involve LCsI.” Once you say LCs, it is like the whole country is out. Therefore, we were guided by the Cabinet. I want to state that in the future - I will relay these issues to Cabinet. However, now that the economy has reopened, that is why I came with the second cash relief in this Parliament to show you that as a ministry we cherish involvement of leaders. At that time, because of the pandemic and lockdown, Cabinet guided that you cannot unleash, from LCI to Parliament, everybody to participate  in the exercise. That was the reason. I want to put it on record. Secondly, I want to appreciate and notify Parliament that Government has already invited the Attorney-General and the IGG to collaborate. As a ministry, ours was to give guidelines. Those who were supposed to identify, validate and register were town clerks at the city and municipality level. The committee has indicated that. There are lists. Good enough with technology, you cannot run away from the list. Even those who will lie that they did not get the money, we will trace you and make you know that you got the money.There are also people who got the money and are saying they did not.  I am glad that when a Member was speaking she asked, “Why don’t you, in the teachers’ bonanza, open it up?” Some of the teachers are saying they already got money in the last one. The good thing is that the data is available, the Auditor-General and IGG are auditing. We will be as transparent as possible. Administrative -THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister,  we know the Office of the Auditor-General will do their work, but they do a post-mortem. Let us do the right thing before we go and start lamenting that a wrong thing was done. Let us do the right thing now and this is why we are discussing this. As we go for the cash bonanza, let us do the right thing; let the money go to the right people. We are helping you and your ministry; we are not against your ministry.MS AMONGI:  I know that, Rt hon. Speaker but I am responsible for putting facts on the table. I cannot leave the government’s position - I have to put on table all the issues that made the Government do what it did. I have also indicated the reasons the teachers’ cash has come to Parliament. This is because we understand that we have now opened the economy and so we should work together. This is why we have requested that we join hands; give us all the ideas and we shall be able –(Interruption) [Mr Ssewungu]2414STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT [The Deputy Speaker]carry out the analysis and compilation of beneficiaries.The Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development shall carry out an oversight role since it received the money. You are going to do an oversight role as the gender ministry. The Committee on Education and Sports will also carry out an oversight role on what is happening, while Members of Parliament from the different  districts must be involved. (Applause) I want recommendations not points of procedure or points of order. What is the additional recommendation? Honourable minister, do us a favour, as Parliament; do not give out money before we approve. The Ministry of Education and Sports should be fully involved in this. Honourable minister, please do not take a lead in giving out money.MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Madam Speaker, we have an outstanding matter which was supposed to come on Tuesday. Actually, it appeared on the Order Paper last week, on Thursday. The matter is about the statement from the minister on fuel prices.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Can we finish one item? We are on the cash bonanza issue. MR TINKASIIMIRE:  Cash bonanza? I thought we were done.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Yes, I have given the ruling.MR TINKASIIMIRE:  I thought we would follow your ruling.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Members, order.MS ALUM:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are dealing with a very important issue and you have made a ruling. You have also requested that we come up with additional recommendations. Is it, therefore, in order, for hon. Tinkasiimire to divert your ruling to discuss something else, by way of procedure? Is it in order for him to abuse the Rules of Procedure?THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Tinkasiimire had just come inside so he was not aware of what I had said. (Members rose_) Honourable members, you are shouting, as if this is a market. Can everyone sit? I have given my recommendations. You will debate what the minister will bring. Honourable minister, no giving out money - I do not need an answer from you, honourable minister. The issue is: Do not give out money before we have guidelines in place. In addition, before we have a list, involve Members of Parliament to identify people in their constituencies.The Ministry of Education and Sports - someone said there is a commissioner in charge of private schools. The Minister of Education and Sports must take charge. I want the gender ministry to do oversight. You can go to the microphone and accept the role.5.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS ( PRIMARY EDUCATION) (Dr Joyce Moriku):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank you for your recommendations. I want to confirm that the Ministry  of Education  and Sports is working together with the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. The Commissioner in charge of private schools and training is the one actually heading the collection of data. The day we had a media conference, I was together with the minister and we have a team from Education. I just want to confirm – THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, I am not saying work hand-in-hand. I am saying take the lead. DR MORIKU: Madam Speaker, I oblige.THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  I adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2 O’clock. (The House rose at 5.36 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 3 February 2022 at 2.00 p.m.)