


Tuesday, 23 February 2021

Parliament met at 2.37 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have a few issues to communicate.

This afternoon, I met the Early Childhood Development Association of Uganda petitioning Parliament on the continued closure of pre-primary schools and Early Childhood Development (ECD) centres.
One of their complaints is that the international schools, together with their ECD centres, were allowed to open from 01 September 2020. 

The delegation was led by the president of the association, Manuella Mulondo. She also came with Estela Kabagaya who operates a day-care centre at Wandegeya Market and a number of other stakeholders.

Their concerns and presentation are that young children and these learning centres are not the key drivers of the COVID-19 pandemic. They say that research and statistics indicate that there is little incidence of infection among children in Uganda and that there is no known death of a child COVID-19 victim so far.

They are complaining that the ability of women to work has been hampered, especially, those with young children at home because they are not only allowed to go to school but also to the day-care centres. For instance, in the markets, the day-care centres are also closed yet their mothers are there working.

They want the Government to allow the parents to be the ones to make a choice whether they want their children to go to the ECD centre or they can stay at home.

I would like to remind the Government that when we reconvened after elections, I made an appeal to Government to review those areas that are still closed and address them. I repeat this plea on behalf of the population. There are very many sectors which are still under lockdown. It is now almost a year. People are not earning and life is not good for them.

I would like the Government to handle this matter. I will be sending the petition formally to the Prime Minister, the Minister of Education and Sports and the Minister of Health.

There are a few matters of national interest. I would like to invite Commissioner Mwijukye to present in two minutes.

2.41
Mr francis mwijukye (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance. Last Tuesday, there were heavy rains in Buhweju that destroyed several schools, churches, more than 100 homes and about 500 plantations.

Most of the children in those schools and families are now displaced and people have nowhere to go for prayers. Two days after the rains, mudslides swept away homes and we lost seven people. 

Following that tragedy, my colleague and I visited the area and we promised to raise these matters in the House so that –

    1. the Minister of Relief, Disaster Preparedness and Refugees can intervene and see how to help people who cannot go to school, are homeless and whose plantations were destroyed;

    2. the experts can go and examine the soil and advise on where people can build homes to settle and where they should not. People are now living under fear, especially those in the hills, who think that they are the next victims.

Madam Speaker, I am here to appeal to you to ask the Prime Minister or the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees to come to Buhweju and rescue our people who are now homeless, the school children and people without plantations. Thank you.

The Speaker: Thank you, honourable member. This issue is indeed very serious. I do not see the Prime Minister but there is a senior Cabinet minister here in the person of the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. Please inform the Prime Minister about this disaster. We invite the Minister for Disaster Preparedness to go to Buhweju and establish the situation. 

I would like to also remind the House and Government that in this very session, our colleague from Bundibugyo came and raised the issue of the landslides when they were just beginning. I think not enough attention was paid to it. After about a month, there was a major landslide in Bundibugyo. It killed very many people.

Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, I do not know whether you can comment on behalf of the Government.

2.45
The Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I am fully aware of what the honourable member from Buhweju has reported because we are neighbours. The devastation was massive and the floods did not stop in Buhweju; they simply swept into Sheema as well.

Therefore, I will be obliged to report to the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business to, as quickly as possible, respond to the request of the Member of Parliament. Thank you.

Mr ssewungu: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Since the senior minister has responded to hon. Mwijukye’s issue, wouldn’t it also be procedurally okay to give us assurance on the matter you have presented?

The issue you have raised is pertinent. As we speak now, schools are registering nursery pupils into primary one. Once they stopped them, parents started taking them to primary one so that they can study as long as they open schools. That is very dangerous. I remember it happening one time when Universal Primary Education (UPE) was starting. A number of children performed poorly because of that.

Therefore, we would like to get an assurance that the minister will come here to explain the issue of pre-primary classes. Thank you.

The Speaker: It was part of my communication. Honourable minister, I hope you can also ask the Prime Minister to address it quickly. It is touching the country.

2.47
Mr benard atiku (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the privately owned education institutions that have raised concerns about bank loan facilities, which they acquired before the lockdown. These loans are chocking most of the affected education institutions. 

They have requested that Parliament directs the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to order Bank of Uganda to harmonise the issue of restructuring loans. The first instruction that was given by H.E the President was honoured but that did not take away the interests that had been accumulated. 

The private school owners are also asking Parliament to consider a stimulus package or to pay off the interests if that can be done so that when the time for school resuming comes, they are able to operate normally. 

Thirdly, the private schools are also asking Government to support their candidate classes, particularly on requirements for doing exams, especially science subjects. Parents have been asked to pay for the chemicals the students  will use in the practical laboratories but, of course, as we all know, the lockdown affected everybody. Government should support the private schools by way of purchasing these items. 

If you remember, Government came out clearly to say that they are withdrawing the facility of Universal Secondary Education (USE) from privately owned schools. However, the lot that were enrolled in USE schools in private schools are sitting Uganda Certificate of Education (UCE) this year. 

Nonetheless, Government has since stopped giving grants to these schools. The owners are in a dilemma because some of these students are still in their schools and yet, the grants stopped coming. They are now wondering what to do and so, it will be important for us to see or find a way in as far as allowing these schools to complete the support for UCE facilities to the privately owned schools is concerned. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development here. However, I recall that during the budget and even after, this House appropriated some money for a stimulus package. We have been asking where this money is and how it can be accessed but we have not got any response. 

Last week, I read in the press that the Central Bank had given some relief to commercial banks as COVID relief. I think they were dealing with the interest rates but no one has come to brief us. The people are asking us where the stimulus package we passed is. We passed it here and we want to know where it went. 

2.51
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono South County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that very many private school operators have been eagerly waiting because we passed here a reasonable sum of money. To our dismay, we were surprised when we heard that they are selecting a few schools without even going through district education officers to come up with a list of private schools to benefit. That is where it ended. We just heard of a few schools being selected by the chairman of private schools in Kampala, without considering a cross section of schools countrywide. 

Madam Speaker, your concern is genuine and we should address it. The challenge we have is that when it comes to getting a briefing from the Ministry of Education and Sports, they give us a half-hazard one. They do not exactly tell us what is on the inside, how much there is and who should be the beneficiary. 

I saw a video concerning Government aided schools – or students and the pupils being forced into boarding section and hiking the school fees almost thrice the previous fees. It is unfortunate that the Government aided schools where teachers and other benefits are fully paid by Government are the ones rising fees while the private ones that are almost holding 85 per cent of the student population are unattended to. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is directed to come and explain to the House and the country where the stimulus package is and how it can be accessed. 

The Minister of Education and Sports should also advise us on how they are supporting the private schools as well as the criteria used. This is urgent because schools are struggling. Many have been sold because of debts; it is a matter that we need to handle urgently. Can we have a response by Tuesday next week? 

2.53
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): I stand on a matter of national concern in relation to the seed schools across the country, where this week, the Education Service Commission is recruiting. 

I would like to state that I do not have a problem with recruitment because some of the recruitments should have been done much earlier. They are recruiting for the seed schools here, particularly those that were formerly community schools but have now been taken over by Government. Some of them were taken over about five years ago. What has been happening is that most of the teachers in these schools were volunteers and even the headteachers were initially teachers on Government payroll who were requested to act as care takers.

In the Public Service policies, we do not have the post of care taker and this means that when these people are care taking, they are not paid for that role. 

As the Education Service Commission goes in the field to recruit new teachers – and where I said I have no problem – I have a problem with the head teachers who have been care taking for a number of years without salary but they took only those who were qualified and were teaching in neighbouring schools. They have sent a circular saying that those people who were care taking should not participate in the interviews. 

I pray that this august House stands in and requests the ministry to come and explain to us why care takers cannot be interviewed when they have been teaching and care taking for a number of years. They have been left out deliberately and that demotivates, as far as the Ministry of Education and Sports is concerned, which contributes to poor quality education. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Ministry of Education and Sports is required to come urgently and explain this issue because the interviews will soon be concluded and many Ugandans will be left out. We would like to receive an answer by Thursday this week. 

2.56
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning security. On 21st February, we had cattle rustling in the neighbouring districts of Karamoja at 9.00 a.m. –(Interjection)– yes, in the morning. They now come during day.

Madam Speaker, insecurity has persisted not only in Otuke District but also in the entire north. Fortunately, when they raided the animals, we had a security guard who fired in the air and they ran away with nothing. We have raised this issue many times to the Government. On 13th January, the eve of elections, we talked to the Minister of Defence to help the people of Otuke who were sleeping in the bush at that time. Madam Speaker, I request the Government to help the people of Otuke as regards security. 

We have land that was demarcated many years ago by Government where people can stay but we only need security to be provided. The few security personnel (eight) that we have are requesting the Government to provide them with a motorcycle for transport because when these cattle rustlers come, they cannot chase them on foot. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister for Internal Affairs is requested to urgently address the issue at the border between Karamoja and Otuke and come and update this House by Tuesday next week. However, in the meantime, provide sufficient security for the citizens in that area.

2.59
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance that I am raising is about consumers and farmers’ protection countrywide. Sugarcane growers, maize growers and consumers generally in the country are all crying.

Consumer protection is the practice of safeguarding buyers of goods and services and the public against unfair trade and credit practices, oppressive bargains, qualitatively deficient goods and services as well as dangerous goods and services in the market place.

As a country, we are still experiencing the effects of the COVID-19 lockdown that started in March, 2020. Our people have always been exploited in times of land crises, force majeure by manufacturers, traders, transports, among others, to worsen prices for profit, greed or ego.

Madam Speaker, you will recall the recent fuel crises in the county and now the COVID-19 impact where prices of essential items like salt, sugar, soap, fuel and agriculture items like maize, sugarcane, among other food stuffs, continued to extremely fluctuate because of the absence of a legal framework or measures established by law to manage the situation. This has been happening for a number of years.

If we continue to leave everything to the free forces of demand and supply, we will be doing a disservice to the people who entrusted us with authority as enshrined in Article 79 of our Constitution.

It is critical that prices remain stable and consumers, including farmers, are not cheated to allow Government incentives, measures and positive impact of the situation to reach the common person.

I pray that you direct the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to come up with a legal framework, which will specially deal with consumer and farmer protection.

For quite some time, farmers have been complaining. They started with Moringa but prices fluctuated. They went to eucalyptus and pine growing and still prices fluctuated. They jumped to vanilla but prices fluctuated.

In Lugazi and the eastern region, we have been growing sugarcane but prices have completely fluctuated. You came up with a very good alternative of growing Hass avocado. We are contemplating on cutting down the sugarcane and going for avocado growing but we are also not sure of the price stability. 

Madam Speaker, it is imperative that we have a legal framework by the ministry to stabilise prices. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue the honourable member has raised is important. We shall ask the Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to examine that situation and give guidance as to how the farmers should be protected from the inconsistencies they meet in their work. If you could come back to us in a fortnight’s time -

3.03
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance about the road link between Laropi-Afoji Road and a one kilometre bridge across River Nile in Moyo District.

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda, through Parliament, around July 2020, borrowed US$ 235 million from the African Development Bank for the construction and development of Laropi-Moyo- Afoji Sudan border road measuring about 37 kilometres and a one kilometre bridge across River Nile, which forms part of a regional, national and international route connecting the remote north-western region of Uganda and South Sudan.

The issue is, while currently survey work, stakeholders and community consultation are going on for compensation, the South Sudan security and authorities at the border halted the process about 2.5 kilometres inside Uganda. That aside, other projects previously stopped by the said authorities include, among others, an MTN mast construction for communication to serve the people of Moyo sub-county and a borehole for the UPDF soldiers who stay along the border. 

There has also been beating and harassment of farmers, stealing their crops, animals and birds. Furthermore, the road meant for smallholder farmers that was supposed to connect Bari, Arapi, Padiga, Gopi, Afogi and Bamure was halted because of all this. This road was meant for ferrying produce from remote areas to the market. 

We pray: 

    i. For re-demarcation of the border so that we know our areas of jurisdiction. The ministries of Lands, Internal Affairs, and Foreign Affairs should come to our rescue.

    ii.  We should have patrols by our security forces along the border for peace and this can only be effected by the ministries of Defence and Internal Affairs.

    iii. Resumption of the construction of our road networks. The Ministry of Works and Transport should come to our rescue.

    iv. Like it was with Teso, our cattle were raided and we need restocking so that we can recover our cattle and enjoy economic development.  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable Members, the Prime Minister is requested to examine the issue of compensation of the people who are near the Sudan border as proposed by hon. Aza.

Secondly, the Minister for Lands, Housing and Urban Development, do we have a border dispute with Sudan? Is it that our borderlines are not known? In the last Parliament, they grabbed our community members from the Ugandan side. Are the boundaries clear? Please, take an interest in that. The Minister of Defence should ensure that our borders and population are secured from indiscriminate attacks from the neighbouring country. If we could have a response on this one in a fortnight’s time.

3.08
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to present a matter of national importance concerning non-accessibility of Emyooga funds. It is unfortunate that a country like Uganda, which has been yearning for wealth creation can have money lying idle in a Microfinance Support Centre. 

The money was disbursed from November 2020 up to now and it has been going to Microfinance Support Centre but the SACCOs, which were created cannot access it. By 17th February, only 11 per cent of the SACCOS registered by Microfinance Support Centre had accessed the funds; meaning that, around 90 per cent of SACCOs have not accessed the money, which means that the money is lying idle. The population and the Community Development Officers are putting us on pressure. They think that we can do much to give them money and yet, we are not in direct control.

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, which is expected to issue certificates to those SACCCOs through the Department of Cooperatives makes sure that these people get their certificates because they are the ones holding them from accessing that money. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Member, are these SACCOs in your constituency or Uganda generally? It is a nationwide problem.

MR TIMUZIGU: In Ntungamo, they informed me and according to the Independent newspaper of 17th February, many SACCOs have not got money and therefore, it becomes a national matter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Members, the Minister of Microfinance is directed to come and update the country on the extent of implementation of this programme and its coverage. 

3.11
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is embarrassing that someone is granting a car bond to be established in Kololo. Kololo is our prime area, how on earth does someone grant a modern car dealer to be established in Kololo.

I was shocked yesterday coming through Kololo to see a big banner of a modern car bond, which will be established soon. I remember in the Eighth Parliament, during CHOGM time, that place had been allocated money and we were told that it was supposed to be for establishing a CHOGM hotel. 

At that time, I raised an issue because they had curved part of the Lugogo bypass road and you directed hon. Byabagambi to go there and stop it. However, today, a car bond is being established in Kololo. It will cause congestion, jam and insecurity in that area.

I request that you direct the Minister for the Presidency where Kampala Capital City Authority falls and good enough, the Chairperson of the Presidential Press is here, this should be stopped now. We cannot allow this adhoc way of doing things, moreover in the city. 

The residents of Kololo should be concerned. (Interruption)

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you, hon. Okupa, for giving way. The issue of transport has become a very big problem in this country. Uganda has now become a dumping ground where all the outskirts of Kampala are full of old vehicles that do not run abroad.

These vehicles have brought in a lot of pollution and that is why we have many cases of cancer in this country. For us who come from Eastern Uganda including the Speaker, travelling from Mukono to Kampala is a nightmare of about two hours.

These days, to be able to get to Kampala, you must leave your home at about 6.00 a.m. to be able to reach the city at about 9.00 a.m.

This is indeed terrible. The Ministry of Works and Transport should come to our rescue. We waste a lot of time in jam. One time, we appealed to the Ministry of Works and Transport to work on the road from Mukono via Mukono University to Jokas Hotel to reduce traffic.

By allowing new areas to start car bonds, we have put our country and our people in a terrible situation and this should be stopped. I agree entirely that Kololo is a high-class area and that should not be allowed to take place.

MR OKUPA: This is a capital city. The former Mayor of Kampala was telling me that that area is not for such. This should be stopped now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am surprised. In the last session, this House worked very assiduously and we enacted the Physical Planning Act.

We were told that Uganda was now a planning area and the law was even assented to. I hear there is even a planning board. How can a car bond be established in Kololo when we have that law and we have a Government? No! Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, this is again in your docket. Where is the person managing the Physical Planning Authority of this country? 

Please, Minister for the Presidency, you should stop that bond. Kololo is a residential area; it cannot be turned into a trading area. It cannot! No, no, no!

Finally, honourable members, I have also received a petition from the Local Government Workers’ Union. They are raising issues of their inability to unionise in the local governments. They are also raising issues about the enhancement of their salaries and issues of collective bargaining.

So, I am going to send this petition to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government to study and advise us on how to move. Thank you very much.

Let us go to item three.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OCCASION OF COMMEMORATING THE INTERNATIONAL WOMEN’S DAY, 8 MARCH 2021

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development?

3.18
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): Madam Speaker, in 1975, the United Nations declared an international women’s year and recognised March 8 as the International Women’s Day, on which all member states recognise and honour women.

The International Women’s Day has its origin in the struggle by women for social change and their right to participate, on equal terms, with men in political and economic processes. 

It is a global day for celebrating the achievements made on the delivery of gender equality and women empowerment. The day also serves as a call for action to accelerate progress towards gender equality and women’s empowerment. 

Uganda declared the International Women’s Day a national day in 1984 and has been celebrating it on an annual basis. This year Uganda will once again join the rest of the world to celebrate the International Women’s Day and renew its commitment to promoting gender equality and women empowerment, as well as lay strategies for future actions, in collaboration with other stakeholders.

Madam Speaker, since the previous celebrations, the stock of interventions in promoting gender equity and women’s empowerment include:

    i. Promoting wealth creation through the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme, Youth Livelihood Programme, Operation Wealth Creation and other programmes to improve livelihoods at household levels. 

    ii. Addressing gender-based violence through public awareness to prevent occurrence and providing survivors with services for healthcare, justice and psycho-social support, and

    iii. Ensuring that women access inputs for improved agriculture production, including value addition, promoting girl’s education and skilling women and youth for employment and job creation.

Madam Speaker, the national theme for 2021 celebrations is: “Building on Women’s Strength for a Better Future in a COVID-19 World.” The theme highlights the situation of women during the COVID-19 pandemic. It also serves to generate a national dialogue on the urgent need for a gender-responsive national COVID-19 response plan, to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on women and all communities in Uganda.

The theme will raise public awareness and appreciation about the role of women in shaping a more equal future and recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. 

It is now a year since Government of Uganda implemented measures to curb the transmission of COVID-19, which has impacted on all aspects of the national economy and peoples’ lives.

According to the World Health Organisation coronavirus dashboard of February l0, 202l, Uganda has registered a total of 39,883 cases, 14,440 have recovered and 327 have died due to COVID-19. COVID-19 lockdown measures have impacted on the income levels of people, especially women and girls, who are generally earning less, saving less and holding insecure jobs. 

In addition, the pandemic increased the burden of unpaid care work and escalated gender-based violence, among other challenges. COVID-19 is undoing the significant gains that the Government of Uganda had registered on gender equality and women’s empowerment.

The International Women’s Day 2021 celebrations will highlight the impact of COVID-19 on women and girls, take stock of Government and other partners’ response efforts and initiatives to guide gender responsiveness in the national disaster and emergencies response plans.

Madam Speaker, I wish to inform you that the venue for the national celebrations is ordinarily selected on rotational basis among the regions of the country. However, due to the increasing levels of morbidity and mortality caused by COVID-19, the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development will hold scientific celebrations of the International Women’s Day 2021 at State House Entebbe, in order to abide by the guidelines and SOPs issued by the Ministry of Health. The Chief Guest at the celebrations will be His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda. 

The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is guided by its mandate to oversee and coordinate the organisation of national celebrations and in this respect, will lead all the other stakeholders in the commemoration of the event.

Government MDAs, civil society organisations, the private sector, the media, communities and individuals are all involved in the preparatory activities. 

All local governments and KCCA have been informed and guided to observe the International Women’s Day, according to the guidelines for its commemoration, including the SOPS issued in regard to the COVID-19 pandemic.

I, therefore, wish to note that a few members of Parliament will be invited to join the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development and His Excellency, the President in State House to celebrate the International Women’s Day, on 8 March 2021.

However, I wish to encourage you to participate in the district celebrations in your respective constituencies to commemorate the day; of course while observing the SOPs on COVID-19. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Of course, members will be able to contribute. However, I just have two areas of concern.

Honourable minister, you have said the theme for this year is going to take into account the impact of the COVID-19 on women. I do not want to anticipate what you are going to present but I think it would be more meaningful if maybe additional funds were found to support women in this country, in addition to what is available. That would have more meaning to them and would show that the Government is aware that the impact on them has been exceedingly high.

Secondly, you said that for those of us who will not go to State House, we should go to our districts. Can you tell us; are we invited there? How will the celebrations be in our districts? I think we want to know that because you are telling us to go there.

Now the members speak to the statement. Hon. Kisembo, then hon. Robina Rwakoojo, hon. Asamo - the men; yes, I have seen the men.

3.26
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. The minister mentioned that part of the celebration is going to assess the impacts of COVID-19 on women and the children.

One of the impacts of COVID-19 on our children is increased number of early girl child pregnancies. Even as we plan to open schools in the coming weeks, many of our girls will not be able to return to school. 

Since there is a call to action, I call on the ministry to have action aimed at attending to the challenges of these girls, who will not able to go back to school. Some affirmative action such as funding in the area of skills development should be considered so that the future of these girls is secured. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can someone help hon. Baba-Diri to move?

3.28 
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development for bringing this statement on International Women’s Day. Since we started celebrating the International Women’s Day in 1984, it has been a very colourful day when all the women come out to show what they have done, the challenges they are facing and to ask Government what they have done. 

It is a pity that coronavirus has reduced it to a scientific celebration, where the celebrations will be limited. Even if you say we should go to the district headquarters, how shall we manage to control the women not to come in big numbers to celebrate?  It is a big challenge. 

The moment we say we should celebrate at the district headquarters, all the women will come – dancing and so on – and it will be very dangerous for us to hold such a celebration. Secondly, have you sent some money to the districts so that the women can celebrate in a big way? Quite often, you do not give enough money for the women to celebrate their day.

According to the theme of the day, which is on the effects of COVID-19 on women and what we can do, indeed –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude. 

MS BABA-DIRI: COVID-19 has really affected women. As a result of lockdown, most of the women and men were not working but men and children would still expect women to bring food on the table. It is always the woman at risk. You have heard of women who were sleeping in the markets so that they could raise money. There are some women who would go to dig. Therefore, the burden of COVID-19 laid a lot on women. We, therefore, need the Government to support women with more funds.  

There is also the issue of domestic violence. As a result of lack of food and many facilities, women suffered domestic violence. Many have been killed. As a result, we ask the Government to give us more money to raise the awareness on gender-based violence so that COVID-19 does not impact too much on the women. Thank you. 

3.32
MS ROBINA RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my first time to talk since we came back from the elections and, so, allow me to congratulate you upon being re-elected. 

Regarding the theme, I, first of all, would like to thank Government for promoting the empowerment of women; their inclusiveness in the political, social and economic spheres as well as representation on commissions and other constitutional bodies. We have seen these being recognised. 

I would like to thank the Parliament of Uganda, the women and the Ministry of Health. We saw the Minister of Health, the Permanent Secretary of Ministry of Health and others, during the COVID-19 period, continuing to come up to deliberate on matters that affected this country. Thank you very much.

I would also like to say that a number of women came up to protect their families and there was some food security in a way. Right now, in the constituencies, there is a lot of maize being harvested. They took their children to the gardens and actually farmed. 

Unfortunately, we have a lot of early pregnancies and marriages that came up. I know that during the sexual violence probe on schools, we had said that girls who are pregnant should still be allowed to go back to schools. I hope that those who are interested can still be protected and can go back to school.

I would also like sensitisation on domestic violence to be done. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: After hon. Asamo, it will be hon. Stella Kiiza. So, please, move nearer because the walking takes a bit of time. 

3.34
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement she has given to the House. While looking at the effects of COVID-19 on women, we should not look at women as a homogenous group. There are women who are living on the hand-to-mouth basis, especially our women living with disabilities. Coronavirus made them eat into their capital. How I wish Government looks at such a category and gives them a small package that could help them come up. 

The other thing is that the women are the caretakers of COVID-19 patients. I am not, however, very sure whether the Ministry of Health has had a special programme to train the women on how to manage a COVID-19 patient. Women always take care of our sick people and some of our people have died because of such contacts. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the minister the steps Government has taken to look at the situation of women, especially those who were in the markets during the lockdown. Families got broken and gender-based violence increased. How do we save these women, even psychologically, to support and ensure that the families do not go down?

Lastly, I would like to add my voice to ask for more money for the women. How I wish Emyooga Funds had percentages. When you put Emyooga as a general thing – you could put 50 per cent of this money for women and leave 50 per cent for the men. Also, we should increase the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP) because it has worked and it has results. 

Therefore, I would like to beg for an increased budget for the support of the women. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Stella Kiiza, hon. Oliver Koyekyenga, hon. Mutonyi, hon. Aogon, and then I will come this side.

3.36
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister and her team for having chosen that theme for the day; “The impact of COVID-19 on women.” I would like to request the minister to relate it to Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Program (UWEP)funds. 

I have had challenges during the campaigns with women, who had received UWEP funds, when we were in the lockdown. Madam Speaker, they were told not to return the instalments that they normally return. However, during the course of the time, the Community Development Officers (CDOs), the subcounty chiefs and the whole staff of the districts started demanding that those women who received those funds pay back the instalments.

However, during the outbreak of COVID-19, these women were affected. Most of them invested money in petty businesses in the markets yet the markets were closed and so, the women had nowhere to invest that money.

When I tried to ask from the district teams, they were very naive and not concerned. Therefore, during this celebration, I would like to request that the Government make a pronouncement on forfeiting some instalments during those months, when the country was in total lockdown. It can be calculated and waived off, to allow those women, who had already taken the money and invested it but their businesses failed since they were not operating.

Honourable minister, your theme would be very meaningful to the common woman, if the Government forfeited that money completely or forfeited the six months of instalments during the lockdown.

I would also like to add that some additional money should be given under UWEP, even if it is not Emyooga, which has now turned to be more complex for a simple woman. Let money for UWEP be increased to cause an impact on the community. I rest my case. Thank you very much.

3.39
MS OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Woman Representative, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the honourable minister for the statement. 

Madam Speaker, we all know that women have suffered a lot from the effects of COVID-19. I would like to give an example. Last week, we lost lives in Buhweju because of landslides. Many people died but among the dead were three women and their daughters, with only one boy. That means that women suffer more as they go about looking for something for their families for sustainability.

During this time of COVID-19, we have seen them suffering, moving up and down to ensure that their families are sustained. Honourable minister, like my other colleagues have suggested, I would like to request that we add more money to UWEP. Even the Emyooga money can be of help.

I am also suggesting that for the Emyooga money, we should find ways of helping the different women groups so that they can get more money to sustain them. Otherwise, most of the women, who were working have now reached the extent of spending their capital because of what is happening in their families. Therefore, we need to consider this and help women to come up and do their businesses. Thank you. 

3.41
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You mentioned something that I would like to supplement by seeking clarification from the minister, after she said that a few people will be invited to the State House and that the rest of us go to the districts.

The national function is being restricted because of COVID-19 through SOPs. Are there guidelines on how the districts are going to hold their celebration? Otherwise, women are usually collected from the villages and they are brought to the venue of the function to dance, sing among others? Are there guidelines?

Secondly, I would like to point out that whenever we hold women’s day at the national level, it is the Government that puts in money. There is no way you can invite a visitor or a guest for celebration and they go back without even water. Normally, people expect something to eat.

At the district level, Madam Speaker, I am sure that you have witnessed this. When we hold these functions, the districts look at Members of Parliament to sponsor the function, which we have always done. The districts are given Shs 3 million, as the budget, yet the chairperson of the women council uses part of it to travel to the national celebration and, therefore, nothing is left. If you do not contribute, the women look at you, as if you are not helping then at all. 

When you invite them, they expect to eat food, drink and so forth. Therefore, is the Government planning to put something to help the women and to show them that they can celebrate their day? Will it continue being the responsibility of the Members of Parliament, which is a big burden to them? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.44
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Firstly, as an ardent ally of the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA), I am concerned and I always speak my mind. The minister needs to send money to the districts so that this time around, our women enjoy. She should send that money so that people can enjoy it. Most times, they only get Shs 3 million, which is a problem. Madam Speaker, that money is very little.

Secondly, we have a lot of Bills that are pending here; the gender related laws. I am talking about the Sexual Offences Bill, Succession Bill, Employment (Amendment) Bill, the Human Rights Defenders Protection. Most often, it is the women who bear most of these abuses from other people and so, we need to protect them. These laws come in handy to support the women.

Regarding the Legal Aid Bill, when women have problems and wish to run to a court of law -most times they do not afford the costs involved. What are we doing to ensure that most of these Bills are enacted into law? Madam Speaker, we need to make these Bills into laws.

On the issue of empowerment, it is my recommendation that we double funds to UWEP and give to the women. We should also double this Emyooga money - When you study most of these groups, you will find that it is mostly women in those groups, yet they are the ones suffering.

During lockdown, I discovered that most men got problems, when they tried to go out to look for money and therefore, the whole burden is laid on the women to put food on the table for everybody to eat. We cannot close our eyes when the women are suffering at that level.

Madam Speaker, we need balanced interventions. Last time, I saw in a newspaper an article talking about 31 districts benefiting from a fund, which was going to help in testing and treating Hepatitis B. However, this was in one region. What about the women in Kumi? How are they going to benefit from these services? 

I think the issue of equality, equity and balancing of everything is constitutional and a matter for our attention.

I would like to also talk about Kumi Health Centre IV, whose theatre for operating on women during child birth has not been constructed in the last 10 years. What gift are you giving my women in Kumi?

How I wish Government did this as a present for the Women’s Day celebrations. (Member timed out.)

3.47
Ms joy atim (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. I appreciate that the national day shall be celebrated at State House and that the one at district level shall also be held. Very many Members have asked questions as regards how we are going to handle the one at the district.

I would like to bring to the attention of this House and I know that many female members of Parliament shall attest to this. When it comes to the Women’s Day, the RDC, who is male will want to take charge. They say that, “If His Excellency is the Chief Guest, what about us? We are the representatives of the President at the district.” They do not give the women members of Parliament an opportunity to articulate issues to the women. That is the only day that members of Parliament have. 

How I wish the Minister of Gender, Labour and Community Development came out clearly and had a position on this matter, so that female members of Parliament took charge of such a day.

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the Women’s Day Celebrations and we are aware of the concerns of the women, especially during this time of the COVID-19 pandemic. When we went for electioneering, the files that we got from the women groups on Community Driven Development (CDD) indicated that women felt that we were the ones supposed to sponsor it. There were very many requests from the women’s groups.

I feel that the Minister for Microfinance and Enterprise Development should come out clearly. Women have put in money, which is lying idle in the banks; Shs 20,000 per person for 30 members, which is about Shs 600,000. This money is lying idle in the banks, yet the women are not allowed to withdraw it. 

In the banking system, you bank, withdraw, put it in business and bank it again. However, the women are not allowed to withdraw their money yet, they do not have capital. That money would be enough for them to run their businesses. Let the minister of Microfinance Enterprise and Development come out clearly on this; with a specific position.

How I wish the Minister of Gender, Labour and Community Development – at first, your ministry had a programme called CDD. It helped the women very much. However, you put a programme, which is handled and then phased out and other programmes come out. The CDD helped the women very much. Please, put some money in that.

Added to that, there was money for UWEP. Let us use this opportunity as we go to celebrate the Women’s Day and advocate for money for UWEP to be doubled or even tripled. Women are trusted in the community and have a reputation of paying back their money. They utilise it to help their population.

Therefore, let us use this opportunity to add money in the budget for women for UWEP. Thank you.

3.51
Ms FRANCA akello (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I support this motion by the Minister of Gender, Labour and Community Development, I would like to wish that Government found a way of making Women’s Day meaningful by engaging women in different activities that would lead to productive activities in that financial year. That would, therefore, make the theme for that financial year more meaningful.

The many years I have celebrated Women’s Day, we get there and women get excited, there is a theme and they listen to speeches one after another. The LCI, LCII, LCIII, Chairperson for Women up to the RDC; all speak. At the end of the day, the women who have come, go back with the speeches to wait for the next celebration. During the course of the year, no activity related to the theme of that year is sponsored by Government.

I would like to request that the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Community Development finds it meaningful from next year onwards, to ensure that the theme of that year is put into practice, by making sure that funds are tendered in towards activities of women.

Secondly, most women at the grassroots engage in the production, especially in agriculture. How I wish that even for this financial year, we engaged women in productive activities, especially, those engaged in subsistence agriculture.

Much of the cries of women emanate from after harvest; some of them realise bumper harvest but they do not gain a lot from those harvests in the year. No woman would cry of poverty if prices of produce were high enough and market for the products found to enable them sell and get enough money from the proceeds of their work. We do not need to give people actual money but whatever they do, they should be able to realise some money from it in order to sustain their families. 

Otherwise, it is a good cause. Most of us as members of Parliament have participated in celebrating Women’s Day in our districts but we have seen the challenges.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I am sure - you have even alluded to it – most women experience the challenge of celebrating Women’s Day up to sub-county level. For instance, 08 March is celebrated at national level. After that, the districts start celebrating theirs.

At the district, most women are unable to make it up to the district headquarters. At the end of the day, the Woman member of Parliament is engaged throughout the year. All subcounties want to celebrate at the sub-county level, while others take it up to district level. At the end of the day, the Woman Member of Parliament takes most of the burden of these activities and they invest in it. And yet the Woman members of Parliament are not well supported.

I would like to end by asking the minister to support the Women members of Parliament so that they engage in these activities meaningfully. Thank you.

3.56
Mr abdulatiff sebaggala (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When we talk about the Women’s Day, what rings a bell in my mind is women empowerment. How I wish that on such important days, like this Women’s Day, women are given priority. 

I heard that His Excellency, the President, is the chief guest. It is my wish and prayer that in future, we get a woman to be the chief guest because this is their day; we have women that could be chief guests for this function. 

Madam Speaker, we would like to empower women. We have three arms of Government and now we are talking about four - including the media. The first arm of Government is the Executive which is led by a man. The Judiciary is also led by a man. Parliament, is at least balanced because it is led by a woman; a capable lady, the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. I am not just campaigning for her but that is exactly what I am doing. We cannot have all the arms of Government headed by men. (Applause) We must see women being empowered. We know that the Executive is led by a man; the Judiciary by a man; the media by a man and now the Legislature (Speakership) – for those who are going to be in the 11th Parliament, we should ensure that the head of Parliament is a lady - and that should be none other than the Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga. I am not campaigning but I am just telling the truth. Thank you very much. 

3.58
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the minister that Uganda, being a member of the United Nations, will join in to celebrate the International Day of Women. 

When you look at the history of why this day started, the women that were working in textile factories were fighting for their rights. Therefore, it is a movement of women for their rights. 

I would like to appreciate the Government because it has done a lot for women. Women now earn the same salaries when they do the same jobs with men but there are some countries where women are being paid less. In this country, women earn the same salary as men. 

COVID-19 has devastated the work of women in this country. Some of the children that are supposed to go to school are out of schools because they have been married off. How can we celebrate this day in a meaningful way for the right of women? Instead of celebrating the day, Government should come up with something that is going to help the women. For example, women that are in business, Government should come up with loans at low interest rates. We have seen countries where the interest rates in banks are as low as five, eight or three per cent. 

Government, knowing that COVID-19 has affected women in this country, should come up with something to help our women. They should come up with loan schemes with banks giving women loans at a low interest of about five per cent so that the women can regain what they have lost during COVID. This will be useful and meaningful; celebrating with no meaning does not help at all. 
I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.01
MS ANGELLINE OSEGGE (FDC, Woman Representative, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to agree with my colleagues on the statements they have made in favour of women in this country. 

I just have two issues that I would like to raise. We have read from the minister’s statement that this day was started as a way of lifting women worldwide and making them participate on equal terms with men. 

All the submissions that have been made here so far talked about the rural woman. We are saying that they are the most downtrodden and are the ones we are crying out for. If a research study was to be done in this country, you would find that there are many households headed by women. These are disadvantaged as the rest of the women in this country. 

When we talk about Women’s Day, these are the categories of people that we should look out for. If we are going to see their meaningful participation in the contribution to the GDP of this country, we need to look out for more meaningful ways of celebrating this day, as colleagues have said. 

Today, we are counting 27 years since we started celebrating Women’s Day yet we are still doing it the same way. The women we purport to want to lift up are the same women that we bring on this particular day. They stand in the sun the whole day and go back home without eating anything; the ones who are not talked about are the ones who come and enjoy. They come and get entertained by these women and we are just using these women, in my opinion. 

Madam Speaker, we need to change the way that we mark this day and look out for a way of purposefully lifting up these women, so that we can make them contribute meaningfully to their lives and families. 

Besides the rural woman, we are talking about affirmative action for women. We are here as women Members of Parliament on affirmative action but we are more burdened than our male colleagues. If there is any situation in the constituency, the African nature is such that a mother is the first to be approached in case of any problem. You are talking about supporting a household under any circumstance. It is the women Members of Parliament that have to do it. 

What is more is that the constituency of a woman Member of Parliament is larger than that of a male Member of Parliament. You will find that in a district, you have four male colleagues and it is the woman MP running the four male colleagues, sorry, the whole district. – (Laughter) – we are not running the male colleagues; it is just a slip of the tongue. I know you understand what I mean. 

If we are going to talk about affirmative action, this needs to be looked into because the burden is too much and we cannot be talking about improving the status of women and yet we are burdening them. 

Madam Speaker, we need to look at a woman - right from the rural to the urban and women in this House in particular. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Minister of Gender, I hope that you can change the word “affirmative” and call it “a district seat” because there is nothing affirmative about contesting on universal adult suffrage in 20 subcounties and you say that it is “affirmative” and when someone who lives in three subcounties is what you call “direct”. You need to change that because there is nothing affirmative about it. 

4.05
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to speak for the mothers, our wives and daughters. I thank the minister for the statement and also like to support hon. Sebaggala for his proposal that we should have gender balance in the leadership of the three arms of Government. It is very important, Madam Speaker. 

If you look at the hierarchy of Government, you have the President, the Vice President, the Speaker and so on. In the first five, how many women do we have there? I thank hon. Latif and support his proposal because you cannot just talk about gender balance when we are not practising it.

Secondly, the minister talked about the criteria of getting a venue. I do not know how she came to State House because I have seen all national functions these days going to State House. I do not know then, if the ministry spends money to organise functions in State House or if it is State House that organises. Now, if it is State House organising, then the money for this celebration should be given to the women members of Parliament so that they go and support the districts.

In addition, getting to State House is not easy. I am sure it is not just about COVID-19. Even if it was not, very few people would still go to State House. May be, next time, we should think of Kololo or any other national venue. Otherwise, for State House, I do not know for which reason but getting there is not easy. Thank you very much and I support the minister.

4.07
MS CONNIE GALIWANGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join colleagues in thanking the minister for the Statement. However, I am concerned about the celebrations. It is true we are going to have scientific celebrations in State House where very few people would attend. I wish that as they invite people to State House, the biggest number will be women. Many times, you will find that the dignitaries that are invited there are men and yet, this is a women’s day.

We have been referred to the districts for celebrations. Like the colleagues have been concerned, how I pray that as they organise these other big ones for the big dignitaries, the majority should be given the biggest budget. That is where people who are very concerned attend. The women who are always scorched- nobody cares about them any way and yet, it is their day.

Last year, I was blessed that the celebrations took place in Mbale. However, what I observed is that when we were organising for tents, food and others, these tents were for the big dignitaries and when we said that they are not enough, they said the others could remain standing. Now, this woman who is celebrating is the one standing under the sun and the big people who have been invited, who are majorly men sit in tents. This has to change.

Therefore, I request the minister that as they are planning this and like we have said, I do not know whether COVID-19 is only going to be in State House and not in the districts. We cannot stop these women from coming. In addition, as they come, what do we feed them on? We are just from an election and many of us have been hit terribly. Can we have a way of taking care of these women in the districts so that they take this day as their day?

How I pray, like one of the colleagues has said that a landmark be left in every place where celebrations have taken place. There must be something to note, say, a bank opened for women.
Madam Speaker, I wanted this to go on record that in every district where it is celebrated, a women’s bank should be opened so that they know that as they celebrate, they celebrate what they see not only going to dance and sing for the guests and then leave hungry. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: What hon. Galiwango has said reminds me that the Government proposed an agricultural bank. I hope that during this budget, something will be said about it.

4.10
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Butebo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable minister for the Statement. I have a few concerns; one, I request the minister to engage us the women members of Parliament more on policy issues by way of circulars and communication. Many times, it is very difficult to get information from the district officials. Even in the hierarchy of Government, it is quite awkward to be pestering people at the district for information when we could readily get it from the headquarters.

Most issues have been touched on. The issue of Government programmes, many of them falling short of gender targets, yes, that is true. I would like you to take note and engage the Public Service - even as heads of departments, you can take an audit. For example, in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, who are the heads of departments, middle level managers etcetera; who are they? They are men. Therefore, even in the Public Service, women are not doing very well in terms of career growth.

On the issue of UWEP, in Butebo, it performed so badly. There were many women groups that were fleeced by CDOs and at the end of the day, many groups did not get money. Therefore, the women were very demoralised when it came to Emyooga funds and yet, even as of now, this programme is not systematic. 

In the beginning, when people paid membership fee and subscription, 10 people would get money and another 10 and we thought that was it. Now, it turns out that it would be a revolving fund. Some women have actually preferred to pull out of the programme and the district people are telling them that they cannot and cannot redeem their money.

This brings me to ask you to rethink how Government implements its programmes. Many regions are not at the same level, yet you come with one to fit all across the board. The level at which women are in Butebo is not the same in other regions. Some people need a start-up push.

4.14
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. When we reflect about the effects of COVID-19 on women, we are more adversely affected compared to our male counterparts.

I would advise that the honourable minister takes the lead and we use this budget process to incorporate issues affecting women. Many have lost their businesses and their social status slowed down seriously. It would be a good idea if this was reflected in our budget. However, as we celebrate this day, we should be sharing strategies on how to give back hope to the female figure. I request that the honourable minister spells out specific strategies to this House and also informs the country about what Government, with the support of our ministry, is going to put in place in order to revive our hope.

I am making 10 years in this House. The plea to have funding for this celebration in our districts has been there all along. Local governments try their best and remember that local revenue generation in our districts is very low.

Therefore, the districts offer whatever they can. The minimum in my district ranges from Shs 500,000 to Shs 3 million. The burden is shifted to outsiders and political leaders. I wish to make this plea; honourable minister, for once, can we have the support of Central Government in sending money to support the local governments.

If we can have conditional funds attached to such days in the districts, the monies can be safe and the celebrations can be better than what we are having. 

I have an opinion on having a group of people selected to celebrate this day at district level. As a woman Member of Parliament, I cut across the whole district of Adjumani. How will I be able to participate in the selection of a few women to celebrate this day?

I am reserved about this because it will have political implications for us. As we celebrate yearly, even at the sub-counties, our women and other interested parties join together to celebrate. If we cannot have mass celebrations, I would prefer that we do it like other celebrations which have been totally centralised rather than causing political implications; havoc to women Members of Parliament that will take us time to rectify. Thank you.

4.19
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Peace Mutuuzo for her very good submission concerning the day of the women in this country. Congratulations. I know you and hon. Opendi as one of the good ministers in this country and moreover you are women.

The theme of this day was carefully selected: “Building on women’s strength for a better future in COVID-19.” I am lucky to be born in Busia, a district which is on the border of Kenya and Uganda.

We were the first district in the whole country to be put under lockdown for nine months. I witnessed markets closed like Busia Sofia Market and Busia Produce Market. These markets are full of women and as I speak, Sofia Market was completely closed. The women who were working there had acquired loans from banks, they were renting and educating their children.

Madam minister, since I am praising you in the august House, I propose that, for the benefit of the cross-border women who are doing business in Busia, you get part of the donation of COVID-19 funds - This money is still lying idle in an account; we have nothing to use it for as a country. You could give part of that money to the cross-border women not only in Busia but also in Mutukula, Elegu, Malaba and other districts that were under lockdown so that these women can begin doing business because if you empower a woman, you have empowered a home.

Secondly, this day reminds me of the emancipation and empowerment of women in Uganda. I would like to agree with hon. Sebaggala and hon. Mwijukye that as we have three arms of Government, I would like to thank God that the Executive is being manned by a man, my mentor President Yoweri Museveni. I would like to thank God that the Judiciary is being manned by our Chief Justice Owiny Dollo. I am also praying that to maintain the Commonwealth status quo of emancipation of women, the 11th Parliament still needs you so that the women of Uganda can continue being a star in Africa and in the Commonwealth. An African woman can manage what other women in other parts of the world did not believe. 

Lastly, I have a fear that we have an increase in gender based violence, not only in Busia but in other parts of the country. Something must be done. I believe that this is coming as a result of economic fatigue in the homesteads.

Government must come quickly with an alternative to solve this matter because the way I see women being battered and majorly by us men, it is not good for the name of our country. Thank you.

4.23
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the statement and to congratulate the women of Uganda that soon, we will be celebrating International Women’s Day, 2021.

When I raised a concern two weeks ago about this statement coming late, I was requesting the minister to guide us about the mode of celebrations.

We are grateful to learn that His Excellency the President will host the celebrations in Entebbe. But we are surprised to learn that the districts have already been guided on how to celebrate this day, while the Members of Parliament are in the dark. I think we should know first before the districts. 

We hope that in response to our issues, the honourable minister is going to highlight the mode of celebration at the districts. As a member has said, maybe it would be better that we have a centralised celebration because of COVID-19 and forget about the district ones. However, if we get guidance, we are happy to hold the celebrations.

Madam Speaker, we are grateful to learn that Government is aware about the challenges that women have faced during COVID-19. We expected that the minister would have highlighted some of them – A few have been highlighted but at least the strategies on how to deal with this.

I do not think that we needed to wait for the International Women’s Day so as to know these strategies but we will wait. As members have said, Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme has done a good job. Women have been faithful in taking care of their homes and trying to raise household income. They have paid back this money, especially when you compare them with the youths. 

Honourable minister, I hope that among the strategies you are putting in place to revamp the women’s economic empowerment, you are thinking of increasing UWEP and as our colleagues have said, putting in place credit facilities for the women so that they can run quickly and get money, use it and be able to pay it back.

Indeed, this International Women’s Day was about women empowerment. We would like to look at economic empowerment because it is when the women are economically empowered that they will have sufficient food for their homes; that they will be able to educate their children and so, we will know that there are real gains from the International Women’s Day rather than just celebrations.

On the strategies that were put in place, where is the national strategy to end teenage pregnancies? Where is the national strategy to end child marriages? We would have loved that the Tenth Parliament dealt with this and we now see how they can be implemented.

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I hope that the minister will give us the mode of celebrations. We thank you.

4.27
MR APOLLO MASIKA (NRM, Bubulo County East, Namisindwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for bringing the issue of Women’s Day.

First of all, COVID-19 hit Uganda. I was the first to talk about COVID-19 when it appeared in China and you sat and saw where I was talking from. In my district, the first case of COVID-19 killing a woman was in Namisindwa District. When I went there after some time, of course, everybody was fearing COVID-19. It was my area and I had to go and see where it happened.

To my surprise or dismay, I saw two girl children who were mourning their mother. Everybody had escaped from the area. I only saw the two children who were mourning. I was very sympathetic but I did nothing. (Interjections) I did something but it was too small.

I would like to use this opportunity to ask the Members of this Parliament and Government to make sure that we help those children to go to school because up to now, they are still suffering.

As you know, women are the most important in the whole world because all our mothers and grandmothers, are, first of all, our teachers and doctors. Whether you like it or not, your mother was your nurse, doctor; she was the one who brought you on this planet. We have to give them respect wherever they are because they have done a lot. 

In art and culture, if you move around the whole world, you will see that the mothers are the ones who started making clothes for children and old people. They know how to weave baskets and they know how to grow food. 

On this day, we should not say that it is just a day for celebration. The women could bring their produce and their works of art. You can see women in Karamoja are the ones who build wonderful grass-thatched houses. If you go to Ethiopia, China and Japan, women have done great work, which should be celebrated, together with their celebration day.

Therefore, Government should put in a lot of money because our mothers and grandmothers are our foundation. They know how to keep money for the future. They know how to keep food in granaries but men only come to dictate and take away what women have done.

I would like to request Government to make sure that our parents or mothers should not only come for celebrations. In other countries, they bring all of what they have produced, reared and done in –(Member timed out.)

4.30
MR ISAAC MULINDWA (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Mutuuzo for the statement.

International Women’s Day celebrates: the power of women, their rights and roles in our lives and societies. Women’s Day not only honours their power but also highlights the suffering, pain and anguish that they have suffered and successfully battled over the years.

I am proud of some women members of Parliament like hon. Mutuuzo, hon. Opendi; even you, Madam Speaker. When I see women standing here firm, defending their rights, I feel proud of my daughter and others. Actually, even though I am going to miss the Eleventh Parliament, I will appeal to Members to ensure that this position of the Speaker is reserved for a female MP. (Applause)

I am an associate member of Uganda Women Parliamentarians Association (UWOPA). We have several Bills, as reported by hon. Aogon. We have some Bills that have been lying here for quite some time like the Marriage Bill, Succession (Amendment) Bill, Sexual Offences Bill and several others –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I would like to provide information to the honourable member and this House about the Bills he is referring to.  Before I came here, the reports on those Bills were uploaded; six of them in record time. The Succession-related Bill and Sexual Offences Bill will be done by Thursday. The Marriage and Divorce Bill –(Interruptions)– Madam Speaker, you can hear from the title of the Bill. I was here in the Ninth Parliament. The title of that Bill was Marriage and Divorce but already, people are making amendments before you come down to Committee Stage. (Laughter)

The Marriage and Divorce Bill was here and processed up to - I think - clause 23. It is a matter that is before us the House. Honourable member, the members of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs have been working tirelessly. They know there is a female Speaker. They know they have mothers; they have daughters and some of the mothers are in this House.

That is the information. We are up to the job.

MR MULINDWA: Thank you for that valuable information, honourable colleague. Thank you very much. You are indeed up to the task.

Madam Speaker, I was going to request Members but I am happy that the Bills are already underway. It is my humble appeal to the Members that by March 8th, those Bills are passed.

As I conclude, you will recall that when the late Rt Hon. Prime Minister Apolo Nsibambi passed on, he did something to set a precedent in the country and a section of our country was offended when he left a will, naming one of his daughters as his heir.

We need to move ahead because we are still behind the courts of law and some countries have moved a step ahead. We need to have the Bills passed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: On those Bills, in particular, I am very confident that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, whom I have a lot of confidence in, will move to ensure that all those Bills, including the Marriage and Divorce Bill, are handled and concluded because it is his law and he should be able to come and complete it.

4.35
MS JANE AVUR (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development for presenting this report. I also would like to take this opportunity to thank the Government of Uganda for giving the women of Uganda space in political leadership, leave alone other positions in Government. I particularly would like to thank and congratulate the Ninth Parliament for making you the first female Speaker of Parliament in East Africa. (Applause) 

On this note, I would like to inform the House and particularly the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development that in 2018, we reinstated the women councils and carried out elections right from national up to village levels. 

I have been speaking to a number of women members of Parliament who participated in the recent general elections, and a number of them do confess that they faced similar challenges like I, especially in the village, parish and subcounty women council elections. A number of these women were elected, but they do not know their roles. 

I would like to further inform the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that it is as good as nothing to put somebody in a certain position without tooling that person to help them do their work to perfection. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon this House and particularly the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development that as we move towards this year’s celebrations for Women’s Day, there is urgent need to create some activities for the women councils. This will help them get to know their roles. Some modest budget for the district women councils should be designed for them to carry out these activities and others.

Two, COVID-19, no doubt, has had adverse effects on the women of this country, and probably globally. A number of our women move from one market to another. In my view, which could be the view of – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MS AVUR: That is why we have several abuses within communities. There are cases of rape and defilement because women are moving from one market to another, leaving the children at large, probably with drunkard husbands. The next thing is that when they return home, they find their 14-year old daughters, pregnant.

It has been stated here and again that a number of our girls are pregnant. We have very many teenage mothers. I would like to call upon the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development to take the lead ensuring that in every district, there is a skilling centre for women and girls. During COVID-19 lockdown, many markets were closed, but tailors, hairdressers and basket makers did not close their shops. 
Honourable minister, I implore you to think of taking the lead in skilling the women and girls of this country. Please start with Pakwach because recently, a committee of Parliament went to the district after some research findings showed that we have so many teenage mothers there. Thank you. 

4.40
MR JOHNSHON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in thanking the Minister of State for Gender, Labour and Social Development (Gender and Culture) for the presentation she just made to the House. 

I have heard much about women empowerment, which means we are trying to see how women at all stages can be part of and contribute to the development of this country. However, there is still a gap. It is because even as we talk about Women’s Day, there is only some class of women who are always invited to such functions; they are the only ones who attend such celebrations. There is a class of women market vendors and the like who do not consider themselves as part of the women we are talking about. They have never seen anything in plans to support them in the fight against poverty yet such support would enhance their participation in the bigger team of the women of this country.

Unlike before, the 2021 elections brought the biggest percentage of women on board. As my colleague, hon. Avur, has said, very few know what to do. How many Women members of Parliament are ready to help those ones? When you go for capacity building courses, which are organised by the local governments, they are one day courses. Many of these women might be of low class and yet, these courses are organised by professors and elites who speak only English. As a result, they leave the local women behind; emphasis should be put on those local women.   

When we talk about women, we normally consider ladies between 25 and above yet when you look at women, you realise that majority are between 16 and 22 years. In many areas, the women in that age bracket are already mothers and it is not because of COVID-19; it is because there is very high rate of girl school dropouts. Therefore, serious consideration should be put in place. 

Yes, we are talking about skilling Uganda, but the Government stopped funding this programme in 2018. All those schools that were helping Ugandan girls and boys to get skills have never received even a single coin for that programme since July 2018. The schools that are still training are on probability of whether the Government –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 27 members have contributed to this statement. Can I invite the minister to conclude? 

4.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (GENDER AND CULTURE) (Ms Peace Mutuuzo): I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues for enriching the statement with all the information we have gathered from different contributions. I will make comments about a few things because most of the issues you raised only further complement and support the cause of women.

First of all, I would like to plead that you give women a gift by concluding the Sexual Offences Bill, the Marriage and Divorce Bill, the Succession Bill and other related Bills. 

The second issue I would wish to emphasise is: we are happy to note that you have the will to support our budget and interventions, especially by supporting the increment on Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Programme (UWEP). Even Cabinet sat to consider an increment on UWEP, but an increment from Shs 33 to Shs 48 billion is still small. We have so many women. We are about 52 per cent of the total population. So, while we put the little resources we get to use, we cannot perform miracles because even what is allocated in the budget is not what is released. On many occasions, we approve projects at the district level but they cannot be implemented or supported financially because what is released is far less than what is approved or allocated in the budget.

On the guidelines, we have already sent a circular to the local governments through the chief administrative officers but we are also going to send a circular tomorrow to the Clerk to upload it and members of Parliament will be able to know the guidelines.

This COVID-19 is real and that is the reason we are outside here under a tent and also in small numbers in Parliament. Therefore, we cannot congregate and the world, including the women, is aware. Therefore, we shall do more of scientific celebrations even in the districts, more of documentaries – if we can run them on the media – and a small meeting.

On the strategies we have been engaging in, we are following up very strongly on gender mainstreaming. The Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development is coordinating other stakeholders to prevent and respond to cases of gender-based violence. We are in partnership with UN Women in implementing a spotlight initiative to curb Female Genital Mutilation as well as early and child marriages.

The Judiciary recently operationalised special court sessions so that they could reduce the backlog of cases under the family courts. We are in a strong partnership with police to step up collaborations on investigations of criminal nature to reduce the vice of gender-based violence.

We are also actively engaging the Ministry of Education and Sports and we are happy that they allowed, especially the young girls who have got pregnant during this COVID-19 period, to go back to schools.

On the issue of UWEP implementation, indeed, it was affected by COVID-19. Many of these businesses and enterprises where women had injected resources - when businesses closed during the lockdown, some of their enterprises and capital were affected.

Therefore, we are now calling them to find out what they are going through and we are managing them case by case. We are now in the process of reviewing the guidelines that support UWEP implementation. We are making some considerations especially on the businesses that were badly affected by COVID-19.

I would like to thank you, honourable members, for receiving our statement and I still encourage you to organise these celebrations or commemorations at the district level, following the SOPs. I thank you, Madam Speaker

LAYING OF PAPERS

    1. The 42nd Inspectorate Of Government Performance Report To Parliament, July To December 2019
    2. The 43rd Inspectorate of Government Performance Report to Parliament January – June 2020
    3. The Inspectorate of Government Handbook on Transparency, Accountability, Anti-corruption (TAAC) on NUSAF II.

4.49
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, before I lay the necessary papers on the Table, I would like to thank the Minister of Gender, Labour and Social Development. You know, the Women’s Day is not for women only; it is for all of us, especially men who love women. (Laughter) 

It is a day we look forward to, I am telling you. It is a day we condemn all men who beat women. A real man must love and respect women. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the following reports on the Table:

    1. The 42nd Inspectorate of Government Performance Report to Parliament July – December 2019
    2. The 43rd Inspectorate of Government Performance Report to Parliament January – June 2020
    3. The Inspectorate of Government Handbook on Transparency, Accountability, Anti-corruption (TAAC) on NUSAF II.

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are all sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. However, as I indicated earlier, we are going to have to make additional arrangements to consider these agency reports.

MR OKUPA:  Madam Speaker, thank you. Hon. Kamuntu has just laid papers here but one critical thing, which we have been waiting to hear from the minister is the appointment of the IGG. We are also aware that even the Deputy IGG is remaining with two weeks and it is a non-renewable contract. 

Can the minister throw some light on this matter? Otherwise, in two weeks’ time, we shall be thrown into total confusion. Even the other one is left with four months. Therefore, you can see the crisis.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I thank the Member for reminding me. According to one of the decisions of the courts, when the inspectorate is not fully constituted, it cannot take certain actions. Honourable minister, I would like to know when the IGG will be appointed. 

Also, the Human Rights Commission is not fully constituted up to date. It is almost two years since the chairman died and the other members are not there. Would you like to throw some light on that?

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I appreciate hon. Okupa’s concerns. There are quite a number of very important positions that we, as the Government, are processing and they will be done. We have the IGG, Human Rights Commission and, equally urgent, the establishment of the Constitution Review Commission.  All these processes are being handled and I will report to you as soon as they are concluded. However, I would like to assure the House that we want these things to be behind us in earnest. Thank you.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF EXPANDING SOCIAL PROTECTION PROGRAMME FOR THE PERIOD 1 JULY 2018 TO 30 JUNE 2019

4.54
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the following reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of:

    i) Expanding Social Protection Programme for the period 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019

    ii) Makerere Institute of Social Research Think Tank Initiative Phase 2 Institutional Support Centre for the period 1 January 2018 to 31 December 2018

    iii) Economic Policy Research Centre (EPRC) for the year ended 30 June 2020

    iv) Makerere Institute of Social Research Carnegie Corporation Grant Number G-16-54073 for the period 1 April 2018 to 31 March 2019;

    v) Soroti University for the year ended 30 June 2019;

    vi) National Housing and Construction Company Ltd for the year ended 30 June 2018;

    vii) National Housing and Construction Company Ltd for the year ended 30 June 2019;

    viii) Kampala Sanitation Program (Phase II), AFDB Funding For Lake Victoria Protection Project (Phase II) for the year ended 30 June 2020;

    ix) Makerere Institute of Social Research NORHED Project “Building and Reflecting on Interdisciplinary Phd-Studies for Higher Education Transformation” Grant Number: Uga-13/0023 for the period 01 January 2018 to 31 December 2018;

    x) African Centre for Agro Ecology and Livelihood Systems (ACALISE) Implemented by Uganda Martyrs University Under Africa Higher Education Centres of Excellence (ACE II Project) Project No. 126974, Loan No. 5797-UG for the year ended 30 June 2020;

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members - 
    a) Item 4 (2) (i) on the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of expanding social protection programme will go to the Public Accounts Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

    b) Item 2(ii) on the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Makerere Institute of Social Research Think Tank Initiative Phase 2 Institutional Support Centre will go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government).

    c) The report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements for Economic Research policy will go to the Public Accounts Committee (Local Government).

    d) The report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements of Makerere Institute of Social Research Carnegie Corporation Grant Number G-16-54073 for the period 01 April 2018 to 31 March 2019 will go to Public Accounts Committee (Local Government).

    e) Report of the Auditor-General on the Financial Statements that for Soroti University will go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government).

    f) That of National Housing and Construction Company Ltd for the year ended 30 June 2019 will go to the Public Accounts Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

    g) The report on National Housing will also go to the Public Accounts Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE).

    h) The report on Kampala Sanitation Programme will go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government).

    i) Makerere Institute of Social Research NORHED Project “Building and Reflecting on Interdisciplinary PhD-Studies for Higher Education Transformation” Grant Number: Uga-13/0023 will go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government).

    j) The report on Higher Education Transformation Grant will go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government).

    k) The African Centre for Agro Ecology and Livelihood Systems (ACALISE) will also go to the Public Accounts Committee (Central Government) for perusal and report back. Thank you.

BILLS,
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report had been presented. We adjourned so that Members could read and come back for debate so you are free to do so.

MR JACOB OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether it is because of the rain or the fact that members are satisfied with the committee report. I do not see anybody getting up to debate. However, I see gestures pointing to rain but we seek your guidance.

THE SPEAKER: Despite the rain, there are Members who need to debate. 

5.01
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I believe we can listen to each other. I would like to congratulate the committee, led by the chairperson, on this report, which we have been waiting for. Now, it is ready and we are debating it.

I would like to support the committee on the issue of reinstating term limits in the Constitution of Uganda because since it was removed, many people have been dissatisfied. They have been waiting for this time in vain. I believe this is why sometimes we see politicians becoming violent in this country. They do not expect to become presidents at any point because they do not have resources. They believe that they can never at any time get to that seat.

Madam Speaker, there are advantages of having two terms for presidency. When someone is looking for presidency, you must have a number of allies who have got to be committed and work hard. Maintaining those allies is very expensive, since they have several expectations. Therefore, when we have more than two terms, those are the people who, at a certain point, enjoy impunity and bring a situation in the country, where some people believe that they are above the law. We need term limits since we are a developing country. In any case, Ugandans need to have hope because the resources are limited.

Secondly, I would like to register my disagreement with the committee, as far as leaving Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) in the House is concerned. They are representing UPDF, which does not fairly vote for them. 

I would like to report to this House that the MPs, who represent the army in this House, are not voted for by non-commissioned officers. These are not even allowed to contest for positions of Members of Parliament. Therefore, we, Members of Parliament, representing other constituencies, are the ones who have been representing the army because they even vote for us. They do not vote their army representatives but they vote us, as their representatives.

Thirdly, if we are to maintain UPDF in the House as a security organ, we need to have the Uganda Police Forces, Uganda Prison Services and even the game rangers. Those are not represented by anyone. It is the constituency members that represent them. I, therefore, wonder why the UPDF should be represented, when other security organs are not represented. My proposal is that we, as Parliament, decide on this issue in this way –

 With due respect, Madam Speaker, we should ensure that the UPDF is left out and we represent them, the way we have been representing them because they vote us and not the UPDF representatives. The UPDF vote members of Parliament everywhere but when it comes to representatives of the Army, they are not allowed to participate in any way. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

5.05
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is my maiden speech since elections ended. Let me, therefore, take this opportunity to congratulate you upon your success and re-election by the people of Kamuli. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

MR OTHIENO: I would like to thank the committee for their tireless effort in coming up with this report. I only have a few areas that I would like to comment on. The first is the issue of representation of the Army in Parliament. I got persuaded by the argument of the committee and I tend to agree with them entirely. 

The issue now is not whether we want the Army to be in Parliament or not. The argument the committee came up with, which I got persuaded by, is that there are provisions in the Constitution. We have just made a review. There is a mechanism through which we can remove the Army from Parliament or retain them but right now, the issue is if we use this other avenue, what happens to the avenue already provided for in the Constitution? 

Therefore, having looked at the issues as presented by the committee, Madam Speaker, I got persuaded and I would like to concur with the committee. We have avenues through which we can remove them but for now, they should remain as ex-officio members of the House. This is because in the Constitution, the Army is supposed to be non-partisan. The way we conduct our business in the House is through partisan methods and so, there is no way the Army can remain active by voting in the House and continue remaining non-partisan. 

I would like to concur with the committee that, yes, there are provided avenues in the House through which we can remove the Army. I am not saying the Army should stay but we can exploit that avenue in the Constitution to have the Army removed or kept. For now, the Army should remain as ex-officio members of the House.  

The next issue I would like to comment on is the issue of term limits. Personally, Madam Speaker, I supported the removal of the age limit but on condition that we impose term limits. You cannot drive a vehicle when all the brakes are removed. If the front brakes have been removed, at least, retain the behind ones. 

Unfortunately, this was not the case. We removed the term limits, the age limits and we left the vehicle without any braking system. Such a vehicle is very dangerous. I would like to concur with the committee that it is high time we restored term limits so that the country can be at peace and know that everything is in their hands. 

However, what I would like to disagree with the committee is on the issues when they started thinking for the country and for the House. They thought that five years are not enough. Whereas the Bill talked about two term limits of five years, the committee thought that five years are not enough and they want to introduce seven years.

The committee’s argument is that they got a memorandum. I have looked at the minority report and the major report and there are only seven stakeholders that submitted the memorandum. All these seven have distanced themselves from this. They only got memoranda from the mover himself, who did not include seven years. 

They got the Leader of the Opposition who said she distanced herself from the seven year term. Another memorandum was got from the Electoral Commission, FDC, DP and NRM. The NGO forum also did not include seven years unless the NRM is the one that included seven years. 

The NRM has been telling us that it has been implementing 80 per cent plus of its manifesto, every five years. If the NRM implements over 80 per cent of its manifesto, where then did the committee get this argument that five years are not enough for a Government to implement its manifesto? The NRM is the only Government you have known in this country. In my adult life, I have not known any other Government that has failed to implement its manifesto but for the NRM Government, it has been implementing its manifesto to 80 per cent completion.

Madam Speaker, this seven year term thing is not supported by any memorandum or any sound argument and so, it is something that was simply smuggled in, by the committee. Madam Speaker, I would like to reject it entirely because it was not part of the Bill and the committee is not being sincere. If its argument is that it was got from the memorandum that they received from the stakeholders, I have listed them here. Which one did they get it from and forgot to list? They should assure this House that this is a wrong thinking because they simply thought - and they should not cause more pain to the country. 

Madam Speaker, I implore colleagues that this seven year issue is a matter that was smuggled by the committee –(Interjections)– unless you are saying that you are the one who submitted the memorandum –(Interruption)

MR SILWANY: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give hon. Okoth is that what he is talking about, the smuggling of seven years is actually not in the report. Please, look at the report that was presented by the committee very well. Read line by line and see their recommendation. 

MR OTHIENO: Thank you. Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that hon. Silwany did not understand his report. I do not want to –(Interjections)– allow me make my argument. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented. Please, allow Members to make their comments. You will have an opportunity to respond.

MR OTHIENO: Madam Speaker, thank you for your wise guidance. I have a copy of this report and they say that they got this extension argument from the stakeholders that presented memoranda. I have listed them and the minority report talks about the same stakeholders, as the main report. These stakeholders have distanced themselves from the seven years. Therefore, the question is, which stakeholder did this committee consult? 

As far as I am concerned, this matter was smuggled into the report and should be rejected by the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the point of order.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, this is a House of dignity. We refer to ourselves and we are referred to as the “honourable” Members of Parliament. 

I would like to refer the House to a page of the committee report (page 28). We are referring to our earlier position in this House. The precedent before us was that this was a matter we handled in 2017 and we referred to it in the committee report. We are not saying that those who appeared before us - the ones that are listed by the committee. When we brought this matter in 2017, they said the matter was smuggled because it was not part of the Bill. 

When you relate a matter that talks about the term of office (five years) - we had received information earlier. This same committee of this same Parliament, which we referred to, we are not making any recommendation to this House that that is the position that should be adopted. Is the honourable member in order when we actually said we were generally recommending to Government to look at the additional seven years and probably come up with appropriate laws “accordingly”?
 
Is the member in order to use words which are un-parliamentary and unpalatable that we are “smuggling” yet we are referring to our own committee report?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me read what the committee report says on page 28: 
“In light of the above, the committee recommends that –

    i. presidential term limits be restored as proposed in Clause 11;

    ii. the term of all political offices be extended from five to seven years;

    iii. the Government commences the process of increasing the term of all political offices from five to seven years, which is in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Constitution and should not apply to the Parliament in which the proposal is effected.” That is what you wrote in your recommendation.

Honourable chairperson, when you bring your report, members are supposed to comment on it. Please, allow members to comment. Please conclude.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise guidance. I would like to remind the chair that on that same page (28), this is what the committee said:

“The committee, however, thinks that for presidential term limit to be meaningful, the presidential term has to be sufficient enough to enable the President implement and fulfill his or her manifesto. It is the considered opinion of the committee that the term of five years is insufficient for the implementation of the manifesto in order to have a meaningful impact on the development of the country.” 

I do not know whether my friend and my neighbour really read this report before he interrupted me; but that is what he wrote in his report. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker, but that is my position. This is a matter which is even in the opinion of the committee and my position is that they thought wrongly; that should never be the case.

On the issue of the prime minister, the committee recommends that we remove the office of the prime minister and that this position should be vested in the office of the deputy president.

I do not have any problem with this but I would like to caution this House and the country. In some countries, they could have done that but the question is; has it worked well? 

Therefore, I would request that if we have been having a position of a prime minister and it has served us well, I have no problem continuing with the status quo. However, for us to say that because some countries have adopted the position of deputy president and they have moved away from the position of the prime minister, you never know, they could even be going back to the same position they came from.

Therefore, it would be very dangerous for this country to start doing a lot of experimentation. Some of these are experiments. We could spare this country some of the experiments that could be very costly in the end.

I would urge my colleagues that for now, let us keep the status quo. Let us avoid the temptation of going into these experiments; they can be very costly for this country. In some of these countries, they went for those experiments and they realised that it does not work. Now they are going back to the position they came from. Is that what you want for Uganda? The answer is definitely “No”. 
Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I request that we move together.

5.21
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the sponsor of the Bill and the committee for the report that you have given to us. 
I have three areas to submit on, two of which are by approval and the other, is in disagreement with the committee report.

The first one is on page 13 and it has to do with holding presidential, parliamentary and local government elections on the same day (as far as it is practical). 

The second one is reinstatement of presidential term limits and the third one is on the area of extending the political term from five to seven years.

I agree with the committee on the first two issues – for the reasons I will give later. However, I will start with the third issue (the extension of the term of office from five to seven years).

Madam Speaker, the recommendation you have read says that this recommendation would not apply in the term of Parliament in which - If I may read it verbatim: 

“The Government commences the process of increasing the term of all political offices from five to seven years which is in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Constitution and should not apply to the Parliament in which the proposal is effected.”

This proposal means, it would not apply to the 10th Parliament. However, we have the 11th Parliament which already has been elected. It would therefore mean that the proposal would be effective from the 11th Parliament and I think this unconscionable. And this Parliament cannot take this direction.

Madam Speaker, Article 79(3) enjoins this Parliament to protect the Constitution and promote democratic governance. Article 1 (4) states that, the people shall express their will as to how they are going to be governed through regular free and fair elections. 

The people have already expressed their will as to how they are going to be governed through the election, which was held in January. It is, therefore, inconceivable that this Parliament may think of extending the term of a Parliament for which an election has already taken place.

In 2017, I stood here and opposed the same recommendation. I should have benefited out of it anyway if it had succeeded but I opposed it because I felt it was not the right thing for Parliament to do. Look at the case studies given by this committee. They have given examples of Rwanda, Burundi, Gabon and Cameroon. If I may ask, is the practice in Somalia the best that we should adopt?

Uganda has been a Member of the East African Community longer together with Kenya and Tanzania. Not long ago, Rwanda, Burundi and others joined but we seemed to have learnt nothing from Kenya and Tanzania as far as their term limits are concerned. 

Do we prefer examples from Burundi, Rwanda and Somalia? Is this what we should be doing? On the point of Presidential term limits, the committee says that it is an international best practice, which has popular support. 

On the first one, you did not talk about the popular support except that of the committee, which also dissented on it. I think that if we are to protect the Constitution as we are enjoined to do, then we need to restore term limits in our Constitution.

We have diluted the Constitution so much that there seems to be less left. We should use this opportunity to restore term limits. I was happy about the hope we had in 2017 but we lost it in court. I think we should have put another safeguard so that subsequent Parliaments do not remove the term limits again.

Finally, on the point of holding Presidential, Parliamentary and local Government elections on the same day, in 2017, I submitted this position to the committee thinking that we could hold these elections on the same day and avoid repetition of one election and other.

In Kenya about seven to eight offices are elected on the same day. We could also elect the President, members of Parliament and district chairpersons on the same day. 

All the rest, except the special interest groups should be at sub-county level. The councilors to the districts should be elected at sub-county level, including the rest of parish councilors.

We would save money and time. Instead of holding three major elections, we can have two if we cannot have all of them on the same day.

It is frugal that we adopt a system where we can have more offices elected on the same day. I, therefore, support that we buy the recommendation of the committee that we hold presidential, Parliamentary and Local Government elections on the same day. It is practicable and possible. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.28
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak South County,  Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Looking at the committee report, from page 28, about term limits and the seven years extension, I do not know the intention of the committee for including this in the Bill brought by hon. Niwagaba, who did not mention anything about seven years extension in his Bill but the committee in their wisdom smuggled it in.

To me, the committee brought in the idea of seven years in bad faith. They wanted to tarnish the name of this Parliament. I remember in 2017, court ruled on the extension of this Parliament and I do not know why they have brought it again.

Looking at the current situation in Uganda, we cannot make a mistake of supporting the extension of terms of electoral offices from five to seven years.

Currently, in Uganda, if you manage to become a President, we do not have age limit; we are still in the process of restoring term limits and adding more years. The moment we make this mistake, we must know that we are messing up this country.

I would like to call upon the chairperson of the committee to withdraw this recommendation that Parliament should extend the term of elective office to seven years. This is tarnishing the name of Parliament following the court ruling in 2017. 

Instead of extending to seven years, we could reason that the term comes to four years. Right now, we do not have any stop. If we reduce it to four years, somebody would be contented that after every four years, we shall have an election and maybe by a miracle, we may see a new President.

For the peace and security of Uganda, we may talk of reducing to four years not extending to seven years at the moment. On the term limits, let honourable members support this highly; let us restore term limits in the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda.

After every 10 years, five years from now, let us see a peaceful change of Government in this country. People who were born less than 30 years ago have never seen a peaceful change of Government in Uganda. They cannot compare any presidents in this country. Let us bring stability in Uganda. 

On army representatives in Parliament, my colleague and the committee said that the Army members of Parliament should be ex-officious. However, they are voted to represent a group of people and you are a member of Parliament representing a certain group of people. How can you represent someone and yet, have no voting power. The idea of the committee that the Army remains without voting power in the House is quite irrelevant. If you represent the people, you must have the power to vote on their behalf. 

The only thing we can do is ask why we have 10 UPDF representatives in the House; we should look at reducing the number instead. We could say, let the Army representatives be three, the police representatives be three and the prisons representatives be three. Why are you allowing only UPDF to be represented in the House as if they are the only security organ in this country? When looking at equal representation, let all the security organs in this country. 

Madam Speaker, when we are looking at equal representation, let all the security organs be represented in the House. However, now that they are in the House, they must have equal voting powers because they are representing a group of people.

Finally, on the number of ministers in this country, I really feel that we need to consider reducing the number of ministers. Right now, we have more than 80 ministers. I am very sure that in the next Parliament, more ministries shall be created. We may go to 100. 

Looking at the resources we have in this country, Madam Speaker, right now, because of the COVID-19 pandemic, schools, health centres and roads are almost nonexistent in this country.

In fact, we are in a crisis for resources and all these ministers call for offices, vehicles and imprest in their offices. Resources must be provided and staff must be recruited. I think we are really going astray. Having all these ministers is quite irrelevant.

If we look at, for example, the Ministry of Education and Sports, we have a minister in charge of higher education, another in charge of primary education – What is the role of the Cabinet Minister of Education and Sports? Her role is to only sit in the office. 

Madam Speaker, let us consider reducing the number of ministers in this country. Let the resources be channeled to other important areas that can touch the rural woman in the village and the rural man who is suffering in the village. Having all these ministers and providing them with enough resources, good offices and staff is quite irrelevant.

Madam Speaker, I request the chairperson of the committee to withdraw the statement concerning the increase of tenure of elective offices from five years to seven years. Withdraw it before all Members of Parliament participate in the debate. Thank you.

5.37
MR CHARLES ANGIRO (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What we are discussing is very important; it is an issue touching the heart of this country and that is constitutional amendment or changes.

In Uganda, we have witnessed that at the beginning, we can change the Constitution and then vote but later, we can change our system through the gun. That is why I think the committee got confused.

I can describe what the committee has attempted to do as trying to commit crimes against the voters, which is a very serious matter. What I now see in the House, Madam Speaker, is that we need a constitutional review for this country to first discuss how this country can be governed, following the Constitution we are using.

If you ever think - like the committee attempted to think – that the term of our governance be upgraded from five to seven years then they are telling the whole world that the President is a very weak person who cannot work within the five years that we have agreed on in the Constitution.

What reasons have they given to think about this and did we ask them to think of smuggling this idea into the constitutional amendment, which was brought before the House? Actually, it was not so. I think this one should be dismissed with disgrace and they apologise to the House for attempting to amend or smuggle this idea into the amendment that we were talking about. 

We did away with term limits, we did away with age limit. Those were prominent breaks that would guide this country, if we want to change from one leadership to another. However, I very much know why the age limit was brought here and removed. When the late Dr Obote was still strong, many people imagined that if he came back, he would even throw away the incumbent President. This caused a lot of fear and indeed, he succeeded in removing this age limit.

Madam Speaker, we were beaten up in Lira at Adyer when we got permission to go and consult our voters. Two months ago, we went to court and won the case. I think they must compensate us for beating us when we indeed wanted to consult the voters over this age limit and we were permitted by the former IGP.

You can imagine! Instead of thinking that people should go and consult stakeholders over this matter, they said, “They have recommended.” Which power are they using - maybe because the committee has very important powers. That is why we say that was almost an attempt to commit crimes against voters.

Madam Speaker, over representation in the House by our army - many times, I have witnessed and then seen their roles. Just like the way you say the youth representative, the elderly and people with disabilities, if you are representing a constituency or women in the district, we deal with all these people without neglecting youths, PWDs and the elderly, which are now in place. This is, I think, double.

If you are trying to say, “You go to the elderly representative or the youth representative”, you are in trouble. This is trying to mix up things. I have seen it in the House. We now know that you go out there, try to consult but they say, “Why should the army be in the House? They are probably listening posts.” 

If you want to be reasonable, the police and the prisons officers are complaining that they are not represented. It is only the army. Is it because they went to the bush and represented people of Uganda by themselves, without even getting our authority and they overthrew that legitimate Government that they now say they must be in the House?

Even so, I said here last time, Madam Speaker, that the army men participated a lot in these subsequent changes in our elections; in getting votes for the President. When they are here - I want anybody to challenge me among the army men – who of them has ever opposed or joined us in the opposition to pose real matters in the House? You will never see that.

Go to the youth, go to the elderly. If you are not NRM, you will not succeed. Is this how we are governing this country? They fear. You cannot accuse your father; you cannot even allege anything on your mother because of this and that. That is exactly what we see. I feel that this should have been removed a long time ago, if we are to go back and try to do a constitutional review.

Where are we going? At the moment, Madam Speaker, we have increased the number of Members of Parliament in this House. We heard from the top most source that their salaries will not be increased. What is the cause? It is because we have no money. If we build many numbers, it means we should be able to pay them. Therefore, the few have - Go back to the Constitution and see the effectiveness – 

I do not know, if you succeed to become the Speaker, how you are going to allow each Member to speak for five minutes. Can it be done? It will not be possible. I think you will allow each Member to speak for one minute. That will be a disgrace because you cannot represent your people in one or two minutes. What are you going to discuss? It is a matter of now standing up to say thank you and you sit down. There are many issues to be discussed for this country, which would need time. 

I am very sorry for what the committee has done to smuggle what was not in the Bill. They thought they had recommended it on our behalf. I think it is the right time for them to withdraw it with apologies. If you were to hear what the general public is saying, this House is already under insult. They thought the House was the one doing it. Anyhow, this is a committee of Parliament, which consequently means we are the ones doing it.

This is a very serious matter, which I do not support. It is unfortunate they thought on our behalf without consulting us. I am sorry for that. Thank you. 

5.46
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): When I was consulting in Patongo Subcounty in 2017 to amend Article 102 of the Constitution, the people of Agago accused me of being part of the team that removed the term limits of Parliament. Of course, they could be right much as I was not part of the Parliament that altered the provisions for the term limits in the Constitution. That happened in 2001 when I was not yet a member of Parliament. 

I would like to think they were right because they know that Parliament is Parliament. Whether you were there or not, it is the institution that makes prominent decisions that are used in this country forever. Therefore, I wanted to use this opportunity, as we debate this motion, to caution the committee, especially the chairperson, my very good friend, hon. Oboth, to desist from reducing it to a playing ground. 

I say this because all of us are aware that when we were consulting the people over the age limit, the issue of term limits came about and the issue of seven years extension from five years kind of came up also. Remember, the court threw it out. So, it is not in wisdom for this Parliament to pursue it. Much as hon. Oboth is learned, I do not, however, think, on this matter, he was very learned. (Laugher)

I would like to believe that hon. Oboth understands that it is the teachers that make him a lawyer. So, he should stop duping this House by inserting things that were not part of the committee report, thinking that the teachers in this House will not understand.  (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I would like to state from the onset; when do I become a subject of debate? My name is repeatedly mentioned. Is this my report or it is a committee report? Madam Speaker, I had risen up to give guidance on this matter and you referred it to the recommendation.

I understand we have just come from elections. Others won and others lost. That is how it is. I understand the timing. This report was not supposed to be debated now. This report was supposed to be debated even before elections. It was ready then. I am now paying a price for being a chairperson at a time – if you could protect me from hon. Opendi, Madam Speaker – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please, allow the chairperson to make his comments without interference.

MR OBOTH: For the future readers of this Hansard, unless there is something I do not understand, unless I am targeted in this Parliament, the report is clear on the policy recommendation. Even the proposed amendments are there. Members should not debate as if this forms part of the proposed amendments for the Constitution. We do not have it. 

Is hon. Akello, who alleges that I am her friend, in order to insinuate that I am a smuggler? I could be coming from a border district – (Laughter) Is she in order to say that I manipulated and take this House casually as a playing ground? As a member of Parliament who has represented Agago for many years, is she in order?

Anybody reading the Hansard would think that hon. Oboth is a joke. Is she in order to even doubt my professional capacity to understand the law when I was actually taught by a teacher but not to be like a teacher? 

We should give value and credit to this report because it is still the property of this Parliament. Parliament has a right to reject or adopt it but I should not be part of this kind of – I rise on that and I would love for you to make a ruling whether it is in order. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me ask you not to use un-parliamentary language. Do not personalise, please. This is a report of a committee. Perhaps, say the committee name but do not say they smuggled or they are manipulating. You are free to listen, debate, agree or disagree but do not use un-parliamentary language. There is no duping. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Most obliged, Madam Speaker. As I conclude, I would like to be part of the House that supports the restoration of the term limits, that rejects the extension of the term of Parliament from five to seven years and that proposes equal representation of the security forces and not only one section of the security forces and not a section of the security forces if at all it is necessary to be part of the House.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee and you, for giving us opportunity to at least get this one out of this Parliament. At least, after disposing off this report, Parliament will be understood. I would like to pray that the proposals moved by Members be considered one at a time, especially on the issue that members have raised on the representation of the security forces. Thank you very much.

5.55
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I stand to make two comments. One is that I support the proposal to reinstate term limits into the Constitution. It is a very good idea. In the first place it was wrong for us to have removed term limits.
Two, our Lord’s Prayer ends thus: “…do not lead us into temptation but deliver us from evil, Amen.” 

When you read the recommendation on the extension of the term of office, from five to seven years, you see an attempt to lead us into temptation. And I would like to appeal to Members not to be led into temptation by the committee led by its Chairman, the hon. Jacob Oboth. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you just say a committee. Do not reduce it to naming the chairperson; we all know. 

MR MWIJUKYE: Okay. Madam Speaker, this recommendation was meant to divert the country from something. It came in to purposely divert people so that the discussion could go around that.

The recommendation is immoral and anti-Ugandans. It should be condemned in the strongest terms possible. 

On the presidential, parliamentary and local government elections being held on the same day, my thinking is that it will bring confusion at the polling stations. Already between 7.00 a.m. and 4.00 p.m. we have had confusion and people said that time was not enough. Declaration takes place at night and/or the following day or two to three days later. 

Gazetting members of Parliament has taken more than a month. Now, if you bring in this, we will have more confusion. After all, the law says that “if it is practical.” Given the fact that the Electoral Commission still has challenges of even using the available technology, it is not yet practical; this should be stayed for now.

The minority report about ministers not being members of Parliament, which is also in the main report, is a very good idea. 

As I conclude, we have had challenges from our colleagues; some ministers are very uncomfortable debating certain motions here. Some come and tell us, “that it is a Cabinet report and I cannot oppose it or say anything.”

My position is that if ministers were not members of Parliament, they would be more vibrant. All of them would be here - now you see some of them not here because they are uncomfortable - you have maybe five or six and others do not come. We need to help them so that when one becomes a minister, they do not have to be members of Parliament. This will help them to independently speak for their constituencies. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.59
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for presenting this report, it is not an easy one; we commend your work.

On the issue of restoration of term limits, I have a low spirit on it. My question is: what do we want to achieve? If a term constitutes five years, two terms is ten years, are we saying ten years are too long for a good serving person to still remain in public domain and serve this country politically?

Madam Speaker, the second reason my spirit is low is that this specific provision has been on and off in our laws. The implication is that it is difficult to implement and if that is the case, then what miracle will make ten years a position of this country?

Elections are supposed to be regular and free. Ugandans are made to take positions. Therefore, personally, if Ugandans are saying that they do not want people to over stay in power, ten years to me, do not tantamount to over staying in power. Therefore, I do not support this recommendation.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, whether it is a recommendation or an idea on the issue of the seven years, I do not support it. If it meant to enhance government in policy making, I still do not support it. The popular view in this country is that Ugandans are contented with five years duration.

If we are saying that if this provision is enacted by this Parliament, it will be implemented from the next Parliament - we have just had elections. This will be reflected as people who have vested interests. Therefore, to me, the status quo is still very significant in the political governance of this country.

Madam Speaker, I also propose that we maintain the status quo in elections where we have elections for the president and members of Parliament. If we add on elections for local governments, it is going to promote a lot of rigging. With the status quo, there is a lot of fatigue. We even pray that the time for declaration of results should be shortened because at times it passes midnight. It puts people under tension; I support the status quo. Thank you so much.

6.03
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the two reports presented: the majority and minority reports. Regarding the extension of the term for members of Parliament, first of all, this is a private member’s Bill and so, there is no way we can introduce it because it will incur costs on the Consolidated Fund. If these people want it, let them persuade the minister or the Government to bring it so that it becomes a Government project.

About extending the term, at times, there are members of Parliament who don’t do anything. Really, staying for seven years is too much. (Laughter) Yes. They will be tired of you and they will have no way, especially where we have not enacted a law on the censure of members of Parliament. Five years are enough.

Regarding the term limits, I support the committee. Without term limits, we shall have the same people again and again. For the past, we have achieved our goal. (Laughter)

Regarding the Resident District Commissioners (RDCs), in the past we had a person called “District Commissioner (DC)”. What we have added is “Resident” only. Therefore, this position has been there and it is for the representative of the President in the district, to monitor government programmes and ensure security there. Therefore, I support the idea. They are very important people in our governance.

On the number of elections, I think one time is enough. People are getting fatigued with going for elections four times. You can see that for presidential and parliamentary elections, many voters come. However, when you go down, the number decreases.

Election is very simple and we know the people we are voting. Just put, say, 10 basins there and we tick them and extend the time for declaring elections. Otherwise, other people are not voted genuinely because very few people come to vote for them.  (Member timed out.)

6.06
Mr Isaac mulindwa (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee and the chairperson for the work well done.

I will submit on two issues; one is on page 28 where there are recommendations on restoration of the term limits and the other is on the extension of the term from five to seven years. Let me begin with the restoration of the term limits.

I support the committee’s position to restore term limits. First, I will debate this as a common person from Lugazi. We need to give our Constitution a safeguard that checks the Office of the President. This is an office with all authority where we have the Commander-in-Chief – the person who is in charge of the direction of the country.

We removed the term limits initially and then, the age limit, leaving the Constitution almost hanging. It is imperative that we get the term limits back on board.

Secondly, we have many Ugandans who are competent and prepared for the office of the President. Having one person to serve for several terms in office does not prepare other leaders for the office.

Thirdly, we need to see our former leaders as consultants like it is in Kenya and Tanzania. Look at the example of Chama Cha Mapinduzi. It has been in power for long but after every two terms, they see another person. Times have changed.

We had several changes of Government here in Uganda right from 1962 to 1986 when the current President took over. We had many troublesome changes. At that time, change was almost useless because it was unconstitutional. It is time to have a constitutional change of the President in office. We need to see a President of Uganda handing over power peacefully to another leader. This is the time because times have changed.

We are lucky in Uganda that we have a jajja who calls us “bazukulu”. We may have a radical change and –(Member timed out.)

The Speaker: Please, conclude.


Mr mulindwa: We may have a radical change and get somebody very stubborn who, again, will misdirect the country. It is high time we had things constitutionally organised.

As I conclude, on the extension of the term of office from five to seven years, I invite you to look at Article 260 (1) and (2) of the Constitution. I will read it for you verbatim:

“Article 260. Amendments requiring a referendum.

(1) 	A Bill for an Act of Parliament seeking to amend any of the provisions specified in clause (2) of this article shall not be taken as passed unless—
(a) 	it is supported at the second and third readings in Parliament by not less than two-thirds of all Members of Parliament; and
(b)	it has been referred to a decision of the people and approved by them in a referendum.”

This Article clearly specifies Articles 1, 2, 44, 69, 74 and 79(2). There seems to be a conflict between Article 260, which gives power to the people and Article 79(2), which brings back the power to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, look at Article 79(2) and advise us on which one overrides the other and we shall have a proper answer on the extension of the term from five to seven years.

Article 79(2) reads:

“(2) Except as provided in this Constitution, no person or body other than Parliament shall have powers to make provisions having the force of law in Uganda except under authority conferred by an Act of Parliament.”

There seems to be a conflict between Article 79(2) and Article 260. Article 260 refers power to the people to decide because once a general election has been held, the people would have decided. When you look at Article 1 of the Constitution, once the people have decided, then we have no mandate to come here and debate to extend the term from five to seven years. It has to go back to the people.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, advise us on which one overrides the other and then, Parliament will have a proper position to decide –(Interruption)

Mr akamba: Thank you, my honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give to my brother regards this recommendation of the committee in respect to the seven years. 

The committee does not propose the seven years as one of the amendments to be considered by this House. All that the committee is saying is that the Government commences the process of increasing the term of political office from five to seven years, which is in compliance with the relevant provisions of the Constitution and it should not apply to the Parliament in which the proposal is effected.

Therefore, the committee was alive to the fact that this is a private member’s Bill and this aspect has a financial implication and it is only Government that can bring a Bill that can have an effect of changing the term of office.

The Speaker: Honourable members of the committee, do you expect the other Members to comment on this issue or not? It is part of the report.

Mr mulindwa: Thank you for the information, honourable colleague. As I conclude, with the office of the member of Parliament, one can come back even four or five times. However, the office of the President is very sensitive. Two terms are enough for a person. Let us restore them. 

For the member of Parliament and local government representatives, let people serve as long as people keep voting them back. The number one office is a very sensitive one, which requires to lead the country in the new times of change. I submit. 

6.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (MINERALS) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very unfortunate that the committee is uncomfortable, when members speak about this seven-year extension and yet it is part and parcel of their report. 

It is unfortunate that we have not done our work to have the Constitutional Review Commission in place and, therefore, our Constitution is being amended piecemeal. 

I would like to thank the committee for their reports. First and foremost, I would like to state that I am one of those who stood to support the reinstatement of the term limits at that time. If I am not mistaken, I could have been the only minister who did that. I am glad it is coming back and I would like to support that position, Madam Speaker. If we need peace and stability in this country, this is the way to go. It was amended then for a purpose. I think, moving forward, we need to have these term limits reinstated. This was also the recommendation of my people, when you sent us to consult them, Madam Speaker.  

The issue of appointment of ministers from amongst Members of Parliament – some people think that ministers will be more efficient. I am a minister but also a Member of Parliament at the same time and I have been in very busy ministries; the Ministry of Health was quite busy. Remember, I was voted as the best female minister and Member of Parliament in this House; you all saw that report. Therefore, there is nothing like you will be more efficient. It is up to a person to organise his or her time and be present in Parliament to handle parliamentary business. 

Looking at this particular proposal, it definitely has a charge on the Consolidated Fund. Article 93 of the Constitution bars us from proceeding with Bills that have this because when ministers are appointed from outside Parliament, it implies –(Member timed out.) 

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MS OPENDI: It implies that those ministers will have to be paid and they will actually be ex-officio members of this House; thereby, increasing the number of members of Parliament of this House. 

Regarding the seven-year extension - it is very unfortunate that we have just come from an election. My voters are also my brother’s voters, hon. Oboth. None of them said that they are tired of these elections and they should probably extend them to seven years. 

Madam Speaker, the report from page 27 talked about term limits. However, from the term limits, it veered off and brought in the extension of the term of the President to seven years. Of course, this goes with also the other members of Parliament.  This is very unfortunate to me.  Therefore, I would like to request this Parliament to reject this particular recommendation. The committee deems the presidential term limit to be meaningful; the presidential term has to be sufficient enough to enable the president implement and fulfil his manifesto. Who said that you cannot fulfil your manifesto in five years?

Madam Speaker, we make manifestos for five years and we can actually fulfil them. If I can use the accounting term, it is like a growing concern. There are resources to implement other programmes that may not have been completed by one person and whoever comes next, can continue with the programmes of this country. Therefore, I request Parliament to reject this particular proposal and the committee should drop it. I wonder why they even thought about it. 

I would like to appeal to my brother, hon. Oboth, to be comfortable if we say “the Oboth report” because we have had the Odoki Commission Report and the Sempebwa report. We shall have other reports so there is no problem with that. 

Madam Speaker, the other issue regards the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament. I would like to support the position that the Parliamentary Service Commission recommends the Clerk to the President and then the President appoints. I think that is basic practise.

The others are on the city land board, which is an obvious issue. It is very unfortunate that this matter is still in court and I hope it can be fast-tracked so that this particular amendment can be extended now that we have cities. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you. The time has been short. Otherwise, I had other issues. Maybe at an opportune time, I can make another contribution. Thank you. 

6.20 
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the work. 

I do not want to support the recommendation on the army being ex-officios because they are voted by an electoral college established by law. When they come to Parliament, they must have the same right that every Member of Parliament has. Probably, in future, we can recommend that the President nominates the 10 names directly to Parliament – those ones can be treated as ex-officios. Therefore, let us uphold Article 78 (2) to have them as part of the interest groups, like persons with disabilities, workers and the elderly that are now joining us. 

Secondly, on the issue of term limits, I partially agree that we can restore them but I think, in future, let us go down to other elective positions like Members of Parliament and even chairmen LC V. I know there are members here that have lived equally the same way as the President’s stay in power. I heard someone say it is only targeting the number one. I think it should target all elective positions; maybe after four terms, someone can go away and allow other people to come. That will also reduce on the pressure among the competitors because they will know that you are leaving tomorrow, and then they will prepare at that time you are leaving. 

On the issue of holding elections on the same day, I support it because it reduces the fatigue of going for elections many times. Hence, the voters can vote the President, Members of Parliament, and others like the chairmen of the district. We can leave the lower position elections for a different day. I support those ideas. Thank you very much. 

6.23
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for this opportunity. I would like to thank members of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee for their report. 

Honourable members, you will recall that on that on 19 December 2019, a private member’s Bill entitled, “Constitution Amendment Bill, 2019” was introduced in this House by hon. Wilfred Niwagaba and it was read for the first time and referred to the committee in accordance to the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

You will also recall that the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs examined the Bill and submitted its report in May 2020. It had both majority and minority reports, showing that members of the committee had not reached a consensus on a number of recommendations on the provisions of the Bill. The Bill is now being debated and has been read for the second time.

If you look to the amendments, they tantamount to about 31 articles in the Constitution being amended, affecting many different entities and departments of Government. These include the Judicial Service Commission, Public Service Commission, Electoral Commission, Office of the Prime Minister, the Office of the President, specifically the Office of the Vice President, the Office of the Resident Commissioners and Uganda Police Force. This is a huge exercise. It almost tantamounts to overhauling the Constitution through a private member’s Bill.

Madam Speaker, allow me to make two observations: the first is a general observation on amending the Constitution piecemeal. This kind of amendment distorts the coherence of the Constitution.

The second observation I would like to make is on financial implication, which is contrary to Article 93. I would beg to –(Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural point I am raising is two-fold. One, this particular Bill is at debate level, and the honorable minister is expected to be participating in the debate, if at all he has anything useful to contribute.

Secondly, the honourable minister is raising matters that have since been bypassed because, one, he together with the Executive arm of Government, particularly the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development participated in refusing to give me as a private member, the certificate of financial implications. However, fortunately enough, when we were passing the Public Finance and Management Act, we provided for the grant of the certificate by operation of the law, particularly section 76 of that Act. Indeed, we got the certificate of finance implications. Therefore, is the minister proceeding rightly in bringing matters that have since been overtaken by the law?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think, let the debate flow. You will be able, at committee stage, to object or mobilise people to your position.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I had not actually involved myself in the debate or content of the Bill yet. All I was making was observations, leading to what I wanted to talk about but hon. Niwagaba is anticipating what I am going to say, which I have not done.

However, just to continue on this point, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs has received several proposals for the amendment of the Constitution from different individuals, stakeholders and organisations. The amendments are being compiled and we will continue to compile them, waiting to process them through the Constitution Review Commission. This Constitution Review commission is in advanced stage of forming.

Furthermore, the process of enacting a Constitution amendment Act if you recall, that is in 2015, was required to amend electoral related provisions of the Constitution; ahead of the general election in 2016, the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs at that time scrutinised the Bill and recommended to the House in its report that since there was popular demand for amending the Constitution, Government should set up a constitution review commission to process the proposals, which we have received and which we have because at that time, these were outside the scope of their mandate.

Madam Speaker, furthermore, in adopting the report, Parliament also recommended that we set up a constitution review commission to examine and consider all those proposals that we had received. And I want to confirm that amending the Constitution piecemeal is contrary to the methodology recommended by the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.

Furthermore, I know hon. Niwagaba has drawn my attention to what had gone on before but I want to show that the Constitution amendment Bill being debated right now, promoted by hon. Niwagaba- (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember very well when this Parliament started in 2016, you requested Government several times to bring all matters related to constitution amendments. It became a song because very many times, we were requesting Government to set up a constitution review commission.

In 2017, you remember very well that I sponsored a motion requesting constitution amendment to be done once, so that every provision can be re-evaluated, so that we do everything and we never wanted to do peaceful kind of amendments – [Laughter]

THE SPEAKER: The word is “piecemeal”

MR NSAMBA: Whatever it is. I think Members understand what I mean. (Laughter) We never wanted what the minister is now requesting for. We took time here but they said that they were in a hurry because of that kind of amendment that you desired at that time. That is why hon. Niwagaba is here because you allowed hon. Magyezi to bring in his amendments. Now, hon. Niwagaba is here doing the same thing hon. Magyezi did.

Madam Speaker, is the honourable minister in order to stand before us and keep saying that, “we cannot allow this kind of amendment to the Constitution?” Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like us to take the track record of what has been happening here. First of all, in 2014 there were a number of stakeholders who made submissions to the Government, including Parliament. Proposals for the amendment of the Constitution were handed over to the Attorney-General at that time. I am told that they went to the Cabinet and then they decided that some things were urgent and others would be done soon after elections - that was 2015. The Government has not come with any proposal – not even the constitutional review commission.

Honourable minister, I am sorry but you are standing where another minister stood and assured this House that the proposed Constitutional Review Commission was almost done; there were even some names he splattered in the papers. 

It is difficult to believe that the Government is in the process of proposing any review commission because of the track record. Allow the House to debate this Bill and see how they pass it. What remains can be taken to the review commission.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I respect your ruling and all that I can ask is for your guidance. The amendment imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund. Secondly, hon. Ssozi raised a point of Article 260 of the Constitution, seeking amending the Constitution requiring two-thirds of all members of the House and I want your guidance on whether this can be done. 

I also need your guidance on whether indeed with the COVID-19, use of Zoom and whether we constitute a quorum to even debate this matter?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the debate does not require two-thirds; leave that issue to me. When the time comes, I will deal with it.

PROF. KAMUNTU: How about the quorum? Thank you very much –(Interruption)

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The honourable minister who is very senior in this House has said that the constitutional amendments we are considering now impose a charge on the Consolidated Fund; but among the things that we are debating is restoration of term limits.

I do not see how restoration of term limits imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund. We are simply saying that let the President serve two terms and go. 

Is the honourable minister – who is a very senior member of this House – in order to come and misguide the House that restoring term limits imposes a charge on the Consolidated Fund, without specifically telling us which are those that he thinks can impose a charge and those without? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are at a stage of general debate; when we come to the committee stage, we shall examine item by item and decide which one attracts Article 93? We cannot stop members from debating this matter.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Madam Speaker, I oblige to your ruling. In any case the debate has already gone on; so I would not stop it. All I can do is to beg and pray that you allow time for Government to constitute a Constitutional Review Commission, so that the amendment of the Constitution can be comprehensively examined and treated for coherence and order for the proper constitution of the country.
I beg and pray that we are allowed time to –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the Speaker has no control of whether you appoint or not; that is your business. What we are doing is the business of this House; you cannot stop us from doing our work. When you are ready with your commission and your report, let us know.

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. That was my submission.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the debate will continue; we are going to give you sufficient time to debate.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the minister should further be informed that as we are concluding business in our committee there are more two Bills on constitutional amendment. Tomorrow we are meeting hon. Mawanda, a private Member; we have met hon. Paul Mwiru, then the “maragoli” which you came and presented (the smaller amendments).

There are three more constitution amendments coming; so, if you wanted to move the Speaker, probably – (Interjection)- Yes. Thank you very much. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you had requested earlier, you wanted sufficient time to debate this Bill; so debate will continue tomorrow, go and prepare yourselves. House adjourned to 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24 February 2021 at 2.00 p.m.) 

