Thursday, 2 February 2017

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. The Order Paper is a fairly long one but we need to finish whatever is on the Order Paper today. Therefore, there will be no communication from the Chair. Let us proceed.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE HEALTH SECTOR FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts! Next!

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PROPOSED RATIFICATION OF THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY PROTOCOL ON COOPERATION IN DEFENCE AFFAIRS

2.07
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I am here to present two brief reports from the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the proposed Ratification of the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs.

Mr Speaker, on 10 May 2016, the Minister of Defence moved a motion in Parliament under rules 30 and 31 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, Article 123(1) of the Constitution of the Republic Uganda (1995) and section 2 of the Ratification of the Treaty’s Act, Cap 204 of the Laws of Uganda seeking a resolution of Parliament ratifying the Eastern African Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs herein after referred to as the protocol.

Noting that the 10th day of May 2016 was the last sitting day of the Ninth Parliament, the protocol was referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs of the Tenth Parliament for consideration.

Methodology

In the process of scrutinising the protocol, the committee noted that the process is of little consequence since it was already signed by His Excellency, the President, in the exercise of his constitutionally given mandate. This notwithstanding, the committee met and interacted with the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs, as the lead minister in the implementation of the agreement together with the technical persons in the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs.

In scrutinising the protocol, the committee studied the following documents: 
    a) The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 
    b) The UN Charter 1945 
    c) The Constitutive Act of the African Union
    d)  The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community
    e) The Protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
    f) The ratification of the Treaties Act, Cap. 204 of the Laws of Uganda and Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005.

The objectives of the protocol are to:

    a) Develop, promote and pursue policies and programmes aimed at widening and deepening cooperation among partner states in defence affairs for their mutual benefit.
    b) Promote peace, security and stability within and good neighbourliness among partner states in order to guarantee the protection and preservation of life and property, the wellbeing of the people of the community and their environment as well as the creation of conditions conducive to sustainable development.
c) 	Anticipate and prevent conflicts and in circumstances where conflicts have occurred to undertake peace support operations and peace building functions for the resolution of conflicts.
d) 	To promote and implement peace building and post conflict reconstruction activities to consolidate peace and prevent resurgence of violence.
e) 	To coordinate and harmonise regional efforts in the prevention and combating of international terrorism in all aspects.
f) 	To undertake such activities ancillary to cooperation in defence affairs that are calculated to further the objectives of the Community, as the partner states may from time to time determine.

The legal mandate for the execution of the Protocol

The Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community in Article 151 makes provision for partner states concluding protocols as may be necessary in each area of cooperation which shall spell out the objectives and scope of, and institutional mechanisms for cooperation and integration.

Indeed, by virtue of Article 151(4), the annexes and protocols to the Treaty form an integral part of the Treaty.

The parent law for the execution and ratification of treaties in Uganda is Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It provides:

    a) Execution of treaties, conventions and agreements. The President or a person authorised by the President may make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body in respect of any matter.
    b) Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause 1 of this Article. The law enacted by Parliament in this regard is the Ratification of Treaties Act Cap 204 of the Laws of Uganda. 

Section 2 thereof provides that:

Ratification

All treaties shall be ratified as follows:

a) 	By Cabinet in the case of any treaty other than a treaty referred to in paragraph (b) of this section or by Parliament resolution where the treaty relates to armistice, neutrality or peace; or 
b) 	In the case of a treaty in respect which the Attorney-General has certified in writing that its implementation in Uganda would require constitutional amendment.

Parliament is, therefore, sought out to ratify the Protocol in issue under the provisions of Article 151(3) of the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community and section 2(b)(1)of the Ratification of Treaties Act. 

However, like earlier observed, the process is not participatory enough as Parliament is only required to ratify instruments that have been executed by the head of state or his lawful delegatee. It is crucial that in ratification of all treaties, the public and parliamentary participation are guaranteed in line with Article 38(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Article 26 of the Protocol also requires ratification and deposit of the instruments of ratification with the Secretary General by all parties for the protocol to come in force.

Mr Speaker, ratification is the confirmation or adoption of an act that has already been performed. A principal can, for example, ratify something that has been done on his or her behalf by another individual, who assumed the authority to act in the capacity of an agent. 

When it comes to treaties, it means that when a state signs the treaty, the signature is subject to ratification, acceptance or approval. The state has not expressed its consent to be bound by the treaty until it ratifies, accepts or approves it. 

As a nation, while the President can represent us, under the constitutional authority of Article 123 in signing treaties, the people of Uganda, through their elected representatives have to ratify, accept and indeed approve that they be bound by the treaty so executed or signed by the President in line with Article 1(3) of the Constitution. This is what we are being called upon to do, as a House of representatives of the people of Uganda. 

Observations and recommendations

The committee observes that:

1. 	The Government of Uganda, in signing the Protocol, is complying with National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXVIII(ii), which require Uganda to actively participate in international and regional organisations that stand for peace and for the well-being and progress of humanity. 
2. 	Articles 2 and 16 of the Protocol provide for scenarios where the officers and men of our forces may traverse other jurisdictions and as such highlight the importance that lies in the Parliament of Uganda ratifying this Protocol, especially in light of Article 210(d) of the Constitution of Uganda and sections 39, 40 and 41 of the Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces Act, 2005.
 
3. 	The Protocol highlights the commitment of Uganda to the establishment of a framework for close cooperation in defence affairs for promotion of peace, security and stability within and good neighbourliness as an East African Community Partner State. 

4. 	The signing of the Protocol by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda is consistent with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Constitutive Act of the African Union, the protocol relating to the Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the Treaty for the establishment of the East African Community. 

5. 	The country has often defaulted on their financial obligation to regional and international bodies and appropriations. 

Recommendations

The committee, therefore, recommends that right from inception, the implementing ministry or department should work with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to ensure sufficient allocation and releases from the National Budget to meet the country’s financial requirement as envisaged in Article 19 of the Protocol. 

The committee further recommends that since Article 26 of the Protocol also requires ratification and deposit of instruments of ratification with the Secretary General by all parties for the Protocol to come in force, it is imperative that Uganda, as a state party of the East African Community fulfils her requirements to ratify, in order not to frustrate the integration and resultant cooperation under the Protocol.  

The committee recommends that this sitting of the Tenth Parliament adopts this report and collectively resolves to ratify the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs signed by the President of Uganda under his constitutional authority on 28 April 2012. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, that is a report on the treaty that had been brought before this House for ratification. As you all know, as the chairperson has stated, Uganda adopted this dual system of a two way mechanism for ratification treaty; one by Cabinet and one by Parliament. She has also spelt out circumstances under which Parliament does the ratification. 

The question that the House has to examine to satisfy itself that it is a treaty that they can ratify is to assess its impact on the Constitution, negative or positive and whether we are ready to go that way. If we are ready to go that way, we shall adopt the treaty and ratify it accordingly. 

However, people sat there and the President took the initial decision that was a proper step to take to facilitate the integration process for the Community. Therefore, that is what we have. 

The motion that I now propose for your debate is for the adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the proposed ratification of the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs.

2.20
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Aware that it is a constitutional obligation for this House to ratify this Protocol and aware that the President of the Republic of Uganda has already appended his signature, and the circumstances of the motion and the committee report indicate that the treaty is consistent with not only our legislations here but with other legislations within the African Union and the East African Community, I do hereby move that the report of the committee be adopted without further debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the question be put. 

MR OBOTH: I, therefore, move that the question be put for adoption of the report. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion on the Floor is that the question be put. Once that motion is raised, unless the Speaker has reservations, he will proceed to put the question to that motion. We will, therefore, deal with the motion that the question be put first.  

Honourable members, I put the question to the motion that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the proposed ratification of the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Affairs. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there should be a ratification motion now. I now put the question that the Treaty on Ratification of the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation and Defence Affairs be ratified. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let us go to the next item. 

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE PROPOSED RATIFICATION OF THE AGREEMENT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE EAST AFRICAN STANDBY FORCE

2.22
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakooba): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to present another brief report on the proposed ratification on the agreement for the establishment of the East African Standby Force.

Mr Speaker, on 10 May 2016, the Minister for Defence moved a motion in Parliament under Rule 47 of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, Article 123(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and Section 2(d)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties’ Act, Cap 204 of the laws of Uganda seeking a resolution of Parliament ratifying the agreement for the establishment of the East African Standby Force. 

Noting that the 10th day of May 2016 was the last sitting day of the Ninth Parliament, the agreement was referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs of the Tenth Parliament for consideration. 

The East African Standby Force is a regional organisation, whose mandate is to enhance peace and security in the East African region. It is one of the five regional multidimensional forces of the African Standby Force consisting of the military, police and civilian components.

The East African Standby Force was established as a regional mechanism to provide capability for rapid deployment of forces, to carry out preventive deployment, rapid intervention, peace support, stability operation and peace enforcement. The East African Standby Force was established with a vision to contribute to regional and continental peace, security and stability and enhance regional integration. Its mission is to maintain and sustain a fully operational and multi-dimensional integrated standby force, ready to respond to emerging crises.

Mr Speaker, the need for a common African defence and security mechanism was a key feature in the inaugural Summit of the African Union held in Durban, South Africa in July 2002. The African leaders felt compelled to develop African solutions that would respond to the multi-faceted challenges threatening stability, security and cooperation on the continent. 

Consequently, through the Protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union, the African Standby Force was established as part of the African Peace and Security Architecture (APSA). 

The Peace and Security Council (PSC) Protocol covers a comprehensive agenda for peace and security. This includes conflict prevention, early warning, preventive diplomacy, peace building, intervention and humanitarian action and disaster management. The other components of APSA set up by the PSC Protocol include the continental early warning system, the Panel of the Wise and the Peace Fund.

The African Standby Force comprises multi-national and multi-disciplinary civilian, police and military component, held on standby in their countries of origin, in the five regions of the African Union. These regions are:

    i) The East African Standby Force
    ii) The Northern Standby Brigade
    iii) The West African Standby Brigade
    iv) The Central African Standby Brigade
    v) The South African Standby Brigade

These components stay on standby for rapid deployment, at appropriate notice as provided for in the six peace support operation scenarios of the African Standby Force.

The establishment of the East African Standby Force follows the decision of the Summit of the African Union, held in July 2004 in Addis Ababa Ethiopia, to create the East African Standby Brigade. The Memorandum of Understanding signed in April 2005 expressly establishes the East African Standby Force as a constituent organisation of the African Standby Force.

In March 2007, the Council of Ministers for the Defence and Security established a coordination mechanism code: EASFCOM formally EASBRICOM. The establishment is based on the past experiences of conflicts in Africa such as the Rwanda genocide, the war in Sudan and the war in Somalia, among others. The East African region continues to be faced with challenges of conflict and internal problems impacting on peace and security.

In 2014, the Council of Ministers for Defence and Security elevated the East African Standby Force status to a full time secretariat.

The East African Standby Force Secretariat in the same spirit on the 26 June 2014, the East African Standby Force Assembly of the Heads of State and Government during the Third Extraordinary Summit held in Malabo, Equatorial Guinea, signed the agreement for the establishment of the East African Standby Force as part and parcel of the African Standby Force.

In the process of scrutinising the agreement, the committee noted that the process is of little consequence since the agreement was already signed by His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda, in exercise of his constitutionally given mandate. 

That notwithstanding, the committee met and interacted with the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs as the head of the implementing ministry. We read the literature review which you can all see and the objectives of the agreement.

The objective of East African Standby Force is to carry out in a timely manner, the functions of maintenance of peace, security and stability as authorised by the East African Standby Force Assembly and mandated by the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. 

The legal mandate for the execution of the international treaties, conventions and agreement
The parent law for execution and notification of treaties and agreements is Article 123 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It provides that, (1)“The President or a person authorised by the President may make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organisation or body, in respect of any matter.

(2) Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause (1) of this Article.”
The law enacted by Parliament in this regard is a Ratification of Treaties Act Cap 204 of the laws of Uganda, section 2 which provides that all treaties shall be ratified as follows:

    • By Cabinet; in case of any treaty other than the treaty referred to in paragraph (d) of this section. 
    • By Parliament by resolution; where the treaty relates to unsafe, neutrality and all peace or in the respect of a treaty in respect of which the Attorney-General has certified in writing that its implementation in Uganda would require constitutional amendment.

Parliament is, therefore, thought to ratify the agreement in issue under the provisions of section 2(b)(1) of the Ratification of Treaties Act. 

However, like earlier observed, the process is not participatory enough as Parliament is only required to ratify instruments that have already been executed by the Head of State or his lawful delegatee. It is crucial that in ratification of all treaties, the public and parliamentary participation are guaranteed in line with Article 38(1) of the Constitution.

Article 23(1) of the agreement is to the effect that the Agreement shall enter into force, provisionary upon signature by the heads of state or Government but under Article 23(2). The agreement shall definitely enter into force upon deposit of instruments of ratification by simple majority of member states. Ratification, honourable members, is the confirmation or adoption of an act that has already been performed – I already explained that in the earlier report.

Observation and recommendation

The committee observed that the Government of Uganda, in signing the agreement for the establishment of the East African Standby Force and participating in the formation or the constitution of the East African Standby Force, is complying with National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XXVIII (ii) which require Uganda to actively participate in international and regional organisations that stand for peace and for the well-being and progress of humanity.

The East African region represented by the East African Standby Force is one of the five regions of the African peace and security architecture and is as such developing the standby forces as a component of the African Standby Force. Currently, the East African Standby Force draws its membership from 10 active member states including:

    i) Burundi
    ii) Comoros
    iii) Djibouti
    iv) Ethiopia
    v) Kenya
    vi) Seychelles
    vii) Somalia
    viii) Sudan
    ix) Uganda

These countries are signatories to the Memorandum of Understanding on the establishment of the Eastern Africa Standby Force with the Republic of South Sudan enjoying observer status, which it attained in April 2013.

Articles 52 and 53 of the Charter of the United Nations recognises the role of regional arrangements in dealing with such matters; relating to maintenance of international peace and security appropriate to the regional action.

The purpose for the agreement is to establish a mechanism for prevention, management and resolution of inter and intra-state conflicts. To provide a mechanism for consultation and cooperation for peaceful settlement of disputes and capability for response in a timely manner to conflicts in Africa, through an operational structure or the effective implementation of decisions to promote regional peace, security and stability.

The signing of the agreement by His Excellency the President of Uganda is consistent with the provisions of the Charter of UN 1945 and the Constitutive Act of the African Union and the Protocol relating to the establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union. 

Uganda as a country has often defaulted on their financial obligations to regional and international bodies and associations. The committee recommends that right from inception, the implementing ministry or department should work with the Ministry of Finance to ensure sufficient allocation in the releases from the national budget, to meet the country’s share of contribution to the budget of the East African standby force to avoid the imposition of functions as envisaged in Article 19 of the agreement. 

In this regard, Article 23 (i) of the agreement is to the effect that the agreement shall enter into force provisionally upon signature by the heads of state or Government but under Article 23 (ii), the agreement shall definitely enter into force upon deposit of instruments of ratification by a simple majority of member states. 

The committee further recommends that this Parliament ratifies this agreement in order to enable the Executive comply with the requirement of Article 22(ii) of the agreement by depositing an instrument of ratification to the director of the secretariat.

The committee recommends that this sitting of the Tenth Parliament adopts this report and collectively resolves to ratify the agreement for the establishment of East African standby force signed by the President of Uganda under his constitutional authority on 26 June 2014. Mr Speaker, I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chairperson. Honourable members, this particular agreement falls within the category of the one we have just handled. 

I now propose the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the proposed ratification of the Agreement for the Establishment of the East African Standby Force and the subsequent substantive motion for ratification of that agreement. If you would like to debate, debate starts now. 

2.38
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to move a motion that this being a straightforward matter having all the requirements that we need, let the question be put for the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that motion is seconded and it is a requirement of our rules that when such a motion is moved, unless the Speaker has reservations-

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, I did not stand up to second the motion but rather, I would like to bring to your attention that I have some issues of clarification for the honourable minister. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What do I do with the motion? The motion has been moved that the question be put. I need to put the question to that motion first and if that motion is carried then we let that one be but if it is not carried, I will come to you. 

Honourable members, I now put the question to the motion that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, that means I now proceed to put the question to the motion. I now put the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the sectoral Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs on the proposed ratification of the agreement for the establishment of the East African Standby Force. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that the agreement for the establishment of the East African Standby Force be ratified. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. This matter has been outstanding for a long time. I thank the committee for bringing it to a conclusion and I thank the House for handling it expeditiously.

MS NABAKOOBA: Mr Speaker, allow me lay the minutes and also the related documents on the Table. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. 

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY ON THE REQUEST BY GOVERNMENT TO GUARANTEE LINES OF CREDIT US$ 10.0 MILLION FROM THE ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK (ISDB) AND US$ 16 MILLON FROM THE ARAB BANK FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN AFRICA (BADEA) FOR LINES OF CREDIT TO CREDIT TO UGANDA DEVELOPMENT BANK (UDBL)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on National Economy? Debate had started on this particular matter; can we continue with the debate and if there is no further debate, we conclude. 

What it means is that the debate conducted so far is satisfactory for this House to take a decision on this motion. Would that be a fair position to take by the House? 

Honourable members, I put the question for the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on National Economy on the request by Government to guarantee lines of credit US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank, and US$ 16 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development in Africa (BADEA) for lines of credit to credit Uganda Development Bank. I put the question for the adoption of the report of the committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question for adoption of the request. I put the question that the request by Government to guarantee lines of credit US$ 10 million from the Islamic Development Bank and US$ 16 million from the Arab Bank for Economic Development for lines of credit to Uganda Development Bank be approved.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON UGANDA’S FOREIGN MISSIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson Committee on Foreign Affairs; debate is continuing. 

MR NIWAGABA: Thank you. Mr Speaker, this particular report was presented by the chairperson in this House but I noticed in the presentation that the executive summary that she gave, which was captured on the Hansard, is totally different from what is contained in the report.

In particular, the executive summary tended to divert itself from the realms of the Committee on Foreign Affairs into the realms of the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises in recommending that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs takes over the management of properties managed by an entity under the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Mr Speaker, I would implore that you direct the Clerk to first look at the component I have raised and see whether indeed this particular report matches with what the executive summary reads, and whether it was proper for the Committee on Foreign Affairs to digress into the works of another committee.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member. Two options would arise here. Yes, Member for Mbale Municipality - is it on the same issue raised by the Member for Ndorwa East?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I am wondering if we are proceeding normally because I don’t see the chairperson of the Committee on Foreign Affairs. I also don’t even see the Minister of Foreign Affairs. Therefore, I don’t think it would be prudent for us to debate the report when the chairperson and ministers are not here. There are quite a number of issues that affect this country in countries where we are represented. We would like the minister to come to the House and answer these questions.

Mr Speaker, you can even recall that just recently, there was a list of newly appointed ambassadors published in the newspapers. We want the minister to clarify on some of these people who have been appointed. So, I would beg that we defer this debate until these people are in the House to answer our questions. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the records reflect those two issues: The first is that there seems to be a variance between the executive summary presented and the substance of the report of the committee. On that same line there seems to be an issue with a recommendation that cuts across mandates and seems to fetter the authority of other institutions of this House. Those are the two issues we need to harmonise and proceed. 

The third and the last issue is a request for a deferral of this debate since the key people who should guide us on concluding this debate are not in the House.

Honourable members, should we defer this debate to facilitate these two processes? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, debate is deferred. Thank you.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE STANDARD GAUGE RAILWAY AND LIGHT RAILWAY TRANSIT

2.47 
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Denis Sabiiti): Mr Speaker, I would first wish to lay on the Table, a report by the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Standard Gauge Railway, which is one of the flagship projects being implemented in the country. 

This report is premised on a comparative study visit the committee undertook to the Ethiopian Railway Corporation in Addis Ababa, where a similar project has been carried out and is currently being operated by the Ethiopian Government.

I also wish to lay on the Table, the following supporting documents which were referred to during the drafting of this report:
    (i) Minutes of proceedings of the committee meetings held.
    (ii) Agreements between the Government of Uganda and Kenya for the joint and seamless operations of the Mombasa-Kampala Standard Gauge Railway, November 2016.
    (iii) Joint communiqué at the joint integration project summit in Kigali, Rwanda, Mombasa, Kenya and Kampala, Uganda.
    (iv) Extracts of a Cabinet Memorandum CT/2014 (145) on the ratification of the protocol on the development and operation of the Standard Gauge Railway under the Northern Corridor Integration Projects: Minute 62(CT/2016).
    (v) Extracts of a Cabinet Memorandum CT/2016 (44) on the approval of the Standard Gauge Railway development in Uganda under the Northern Corridor Integration Project.
    (vi) Contract agreement for engineering, procurement and construction of the Eastern and Northern Standard Gauge Railway Network Project between the Government of the Republic of Uganda and M/S China Harbour Engineering Company Limited, March 2015.
    (vii) Addendum No.1 to the contract for engineering, procurement and construction for the development of the Eastern and Northern Standard Gauge Railway Project.
    (viii) Datasheet for the Standard Gauge Railway bridges along the eastern route (Malaba-Mombasa) as at 31 December 2016.

Mr Speaker, I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Mr Chairperson, would you like to lay them one by one. You have lifted eight documents, but I see one coming on the Table.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, this is the report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: These are the minutes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the minutes.

MR SABIITI: This is the agreement between the Government of Uganda and Kenya for the joint and seamless transport operations of the Mombasa-Kampala Standard Gauge Railway.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the agreement.

MR SABIITI: This is the joint communiqué at the Joint Integration Project Summit in Kigali-Rwanda, Mombasa-Kenya and Kampala-Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture the joint communiqué.

MR SABIITI: The joint communiqué has three documents. This is the Cabinet Memorandum, Minute No. 107 CT/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: This is the agreement between the Government of Uganda and China Harbour Engineering Corporation, March 2015.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: This is the addendum to the contracts, which is the contract agreement between the Government of Uganda and China Harbour Engineering (Addendum No.1).

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: This is the datasheet for the Standard Gauge Railway bridges along the eastern route (Malaba-Kampala) as at 31 December 2016. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR SABIITI: Mr Speaker, can I proceed to present?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, proceed.

MR SABIITI: This report is on your iPad. Page 1 has the title that reads: “The report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure’s visit to the Ethiopian Standard Gauge Railway and Light Rail Transit Project.” Page 2 is about the composition of the delegation. Page 3 has a list of acronyms and abbreviations. Page 4 is where the report starts.

Introduction

The Committee on Physical Infrastructure is mandated under Rule 147(c) and (e) and Rule 177 (e) and (f) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda to oversee, assess and monitor the performance of Ministry of Works and Transport and related agencies and departments, to ensure compliance with approved plans and programmes and to report to Parliament on their functions.

Among the key projects being implemented by Ministry of Works and Transport is the Standard Gauge Railway (SGR), with a proposed network length of 1,724 kilometres, covering the entire country and the Light Rail Transit (LRT) system, covering 45 kilometres. The SGR is being implemented in a phased manner starting with the Eastern Route namely - Malaba–Kampala, covering 273 kilometres, by the Chinese Harbour Engineering Company (CHEC).

In order to effectively oversee the implementation of the standard gauge railway, the committee undertook a benchmarking visit to the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia to learn from the experiences on both the Standard Gauge Railway network and Light Rail Transit for mass transportation. In accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the committee hereby presents its findings for considerations to this august House. 

Background

On 1 May 2011, the East African Community (EAC) states agreed on regional Standard Gauge Railway protocol to guide the construction of a seamless SGR network to interconnect all countries in the region. 

Currently, each of the EAC states is at different stages of constructing the SGR with Uganda acquiring the right-of-way and compensating the project affected persons on the Eastern SGR route. 

Feasibility and other detailed engineering studies to determine the alignment and design are underway for both the SGR and Light Rail Transit for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area.  

Also, the funding arrangements for the SGR are in advanced stages and construction is expected to start soon. 

The tentative cost of the Eastern, Northern and Western routes of Ugandan Standard Gauge Railway is estimated at $12.8 billion, for the 1,724 kilometres. This network is expected to be single-track Class 1 railway for both freight and passengers. 

The passenger speed is expected to be 120 kilometres per hour and the cargo speed will be at 100 kilometres per hour, with overhead traction across the entire network. 

The Greater Kampala Metropolitan area Light Rail Transport system is expected to cover 45 kilometres at a tentative cost of $700 million. The Light Rail Transit design speed will be 80 kilometres per hour while operating speed will be 70 kilometres per hour and it shall have a capacity of 15,000 passengers per hour and per direction.

On the other hand, the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia has completed a Light Rail Transit system and the Addis Ababa-Sebeta/Mieso-Dire-Dawa-Dewele SGR route, both of which are similar in nature and scope to those proposed in Uganda. However, Ethiopia is located at a higher altitude compared to Uganda and Addis Ababa soils are mainly volcanic and inappropriate for construction as compared to Kampala soils, which are appropriate for construction. 

The committee deemed it necessary to visit Ethiopia due to the capacity the country had exhibited in the implementation of infrastructure development programmes, including SGR and Light Rail Transit System.

Objectives

 The objectives of the benchmarking were:
    (i) Assess the nature and implementation of the SGR and light rail project in Ethiopia (integration, coordination, linkages among the various responsible agencies) and compare them to Uganda.
    (ii) To learn the experiences and success factors encountered during the implementation of the SGR and Light Rail Transit projects in Ethiopia, including the cost to inform the implementation of the same in Uganda.
    (iii) To evaluate the local content in implementation of these projects and how they help to attain sustainability - the Ethiopian local manpower and contractors/consultants in comparison to Uganda. And 
    (iv) Propose improvements to the SGR and Light Rail Transit projects in Uganda.

Approach and methodology

In carrying out this work, the committee interacted with officials from the Ethiopian Railway Corporations. During our discussions, the committee learnt about the experience of Ethiopia during planning, procurement, implementation, supervision and monitoring of both the SGR and LRT projects. 

These experiences were compared with Uganda where an engineering, procurement and construction contract has been concluded with the contractor and right-of-way acquisition is currently being implemented.

The committee visited the Ethiopian Light Rail Transit and interacted with its officials on the planning, implementation and post construction management and operations of the Addis Ababa Light Rail Transit system.

The committee visited the control centre of the Light Rail Transit system and road on the trains currently in operation on the north-south route in Addis Ababa in order to appreciate the quality of service of the light rail transit. 

Furthermore, the committee visited the Addis Ababa-Dewele portion of the SGR and used the operation along this route.

Lessons drawn from the Ethiopian experience have been compiled in this report and shall inform recommendations for the on-going process of the implementation of the SGR network, and the proposed Light Rail Transit for the Greater Kampala Metropolitan area.

Findings 

The Ethiopia Standard Gauge Railway Project and Light Rail Transit System 

Ethiopia has been constructing the Addis Ababa-Dewele Standard Gauge Railway route connecting to Djibouti. The Ethiopian Standard Gauge Railway has been built Class 2 standard with electric traction across the entire network with passenger speed of 120 kilometres per hour, and 80 kilometres per hour for cargo.

The Addis Ababa-Dewele electric Standard Gauge Railway network cost $3.4 billion and covers a distance of 669 kilometres with a unit cost of $5 million per track kilometre. 

The cost of construction of the Addis Ababa Light Rail Transit was $475 million, covering a network length of 34 kilometres with a unit cost of $14 million per track kilometre. 

The Ethiopian Railways Corporation carried out the project in two phases, from Addis Ababa/Sebeta to Mieso and from Mieso to Dewele. There are 16 stations on these railway lines and in future, the number of stations will be 55. 

Likewise, the Djibouti Government constructed its portion of the Standard Gauge Railway line from the border with Ethiopia at a total cost of $505 million, covering a distance of 100 kilometres with the unit cost of $5.05 million per track-kilometre. 

The Ethiopian Light Railway Transit was completed and a railway manager was contracted to operate and maintain the Light Railway Transit while local staff were attached to learn and take over, after 41 months, from the contractors. The contracted companies were Shenzhen Metro Group and China Railway Construction Corporation Limited. 

The Addis Ababa Light Railway Transit covers a distance of 34 kilometres and serves the metropolitan areas of Addis Ababa. The Ethiopian Railways Corporation set up a technical advisory bureau to look into an implementation framework for the railway network in Ethiopia.

Observations and Recommendations

Standard Gauge Railway Network and Light Railway Transit System

Class of Standard Gauge Railway Network in Uganda

The committee observed that the Ethiopian Standard Gauge Railway Network has been built to Class 2 standard with a maximum design speed of 120 kilometres per hour, for passenger train and 80 kilometres per hour, for cargo train. The annual tonnage of the Standard Gauge Railway network is 25 million tonnes. On the other hand, Uganda proposes to construct a Standard Gauge Railway Network to Class 1 standard, with the design speed for passenger train of 120 kilometres per hour and cargo train of 100 kilometres per hour, with an annual tonnage of 20 million.

The committee notes that for all intents and purposes, Uganda’s proposed Standard Gauge Railway has the same specifications as regards the design and the operating speeds and it is expected to serve the same purpose as the Ethiopian and Kenyan networks. 

Also, from our interaction with Ethiopian Railway Corporation, the committee established that all standard gauge railways constructed in Africa are at Class 2 standards. The committee noted that in South Africa, Morocco, Algeria and Egypt, which are the countries operating Standard Gauge Railways, they are all at Class 2 standard in accordance with the AU Protocol. 

In Africa, there are no railways that have been constructed to Class 1 standard due to high cost of construction, maintenance and operational costs, since the speed of such are in the range of 300 kilometres per hour and are majorly passengers-dedicated. Middle income countries use Class 2 railways while Class 1 Standard Gauge Railways have been constructed mainly in developed countries and those aspiring to be developed such as China, Japan and United States.

The committee observed that specifications of the standard gauge railway in Uganda are the same as those in Ethiopia and Kenya. Therefore, the railway line that Uganda is referring to as Class 1 is actually Class 2 as per the specifications. The branding of Class 2 as Class 1 is likely to lead to the inflation of costs. 

There is no justification for Uganda to refer to its class of railway as Class 1 instead of Class 2. Moreover, Class 2 specifications provide for maximum design speed of 120 kilometres per hour and the class of railway is majorly determined by the designed speed.

It should be noted that construction of Class 2 rather than Class 1 railway line would lead to a significant reduction in construction costs, from the tentative $12.8 billion, currently proposed for building the entire network. 

The committee observes that the management team has been deliberately misguiding and misleading the country on the actual work to be undertaken on the standard gauge railway.

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends that the Government of Uganda should revisit and renegotiate the engineering, procurement and construction contract with China Harbour Engineering Corporation for the eastern route, with the view of constructing the railways to Class 2 standard as envisaged in the contract. This will reduce the cost of construction for the Eastern Route from the now tentative $2.3 billion for a distance of 273 kilometres.

Mr Speaker, in the table below is a comparative cost per track-kilometre for Standard Gauge Railway between Kenya and Uganda. From the table, it is seen that Ethiopia constructed its standard gauge railway at $5 million per track-kilometre. 

Kenya has constructed its standard gauge railway at $6.2 million per track-kilometre. However, Uganda is proposing to construct, as per the current signed contract with the contractor, at $8.2 per track-kilometre. The contracts for the western are not yet signed and the northern route should be Class 2 standard.

The third recommendation is that punitive action should be taken against any officials who might be culpable of making misleading claims of the actual work that is going to be done.

Capacity Building for the Railway Sub-sector

The committee established that Ethiopia instituted a deliberate programme to build the capacity of the Ethiopia Railways Corporation to effectively manage the affairs of railways in the country. 

It should be noted that until 2007, there was no established legal and institutional framework for the management of railway lines in Ethiopia and all railways infrastructures were dilapidated. 

The Government of Ethiopia undertook the following steps with regard to the standard gauge railway:

    (i) It established a legal and institutional framework for management and administration of the railway system; 
    (ii) It recruited 630 young trainee technicians with zero experience, but relevant education background and they were sent for training to China for a year and attached to a construction project upon return to Ethiopia. This was done one year before the construction started. Therefore, when construction started, these young people were already engaged in the construction;
    (iii) It launched railway engineering education programmes at the Addis Ababa Institute of Technology in collaboration with Ethiopia Railway Corporation targeting 500 graduate students. 

This is unique and it is the only graduate railway education programme in Africa. Through this programme, 500 students have been trained and their costs of trainings were fully covered by Government. 

The programme has three major schemes at Master’s level - civil railways engineering, electrical railway engineering systems and rolling/engineering. So far, the programme has trained 300 graduates at Masters Level which implies 300 research topics in the railway subsector. 

In 2016, the University of Addis Ababa began the process of transforming the Institute of Railway Engineering into a centre of excellence in railway engineering with the World Bank support. This was all deliberate and aimed at enhancing the capacity of Ethiopia to procure, implement, supervise and manage the standard gauge railway network in a sustainable manner.

One the other hand, Government of Uganda is planning to build capacity of UPDF in railway engineering, construction, maintenance and consultancy services. There is no capacity building programme for Ugandans who shall be responsible for managing the standard gauge railway and the light rail transit project in Uganda.

Uganda is currently in advanced stages of implementing the standard gauge railway yet there has been no deliberate effort to build the capacity of local engineers and other required personnel. 

The UPDF is expected to offer labour to the project contractors and is expected to learn construction and supervision processes in the course of implementation of the project.

However, there is no collaboration with the universities in the country to organize trainings that will ensure sustainability of the railway sub sector. Failure to build critical mass of skilled personnel with the capacity to implement, maintain and manage, the railways shall lead to dependency on the foreign expatriates and shall affect the sustainability of the standard gauge railway network.

In Uganda, it seems most of the capacity building for contracting and consultancy is being planned to be built in the Uganda People’s Defense Forces, which has little, if any, capacity. 

Limited capacity building is planned among the private sector and individuals in all other technical Government institutions that shall have the responsibility to manage, operate or supervise the standard gauge railway network.

The committee established that the standard gauge railway design review and supervision consultant is required to employ 70 per cent of the 230 required staff locally. While the contractor is expected to employ 90 per cent of the required staff locally. The deliberate plan to recruit staff locally is commendable for purposes of skills transfer and sustainability of the sub sector. 

However, the committee notes that there is clear strategy stating how the foreign staff will transfer the skills and gradually be phased out during the project implementation.

In Ethiopia, freshly trained graduates receive same militarised training to instill discipline and hard work in them rather than the armed forces being directly engaged in the process like the case is in Uganda.

Recommendations of the committee
    (i) The ministries of works and transport; education and sports, science, technology and innovation; and that of public service should immediately undertake an elaborate needs-assessment of the available railway related skills and determine the training gaps needed, and develop a strategy for immediate implementation. This strategy for capacity enhancement should immediately be availed to the committee to enable it oversee the implementation of the project;
    (ii) The Uganda Railways Corporation and Ministry of Works and Transport, in collaboration with relevant authorities, should introduce railway engineering at public universities and institutions. A collaboration framework should be established with local universities to train and equip students with railway related skills in Uganda within the next three years. All these graduates should be fully sponsored by Government to complete their training courses since this is a top priority;
    (iii) The railway engineering graduates should undertake same militarised patriotic training for purposes of achieving the necessary discipline and skills required to operate and manage the railway sector. The steps taken by Ethiopia to equip her personnel in the railway sub sector should be emulated by Uganda; 
    (iv) In the next one year, scholarships should be equitably and transparently offered to technicians to train abroad in railway related engineering. We could now even train them from Kenya since construction is already taking place there; and
    (v) A clear exit strategy should be incorporated in the contracts of the supervising consultant and works contractor, stating how foreign staff engaged as project consultant and works contractors, shall transfer their skills and be phased out during project implementation.

Mr Speaker, let me now present something on the recruitment of fresh graduates on the standard gauge railway. 

Ethiopia has established a policy of recruiting fresh university graduates capable of easily adapting to the new and emerging knowledge and technology that is key to the operations of a modern rail system; old people may not easily adapt. 

The zero experience policy targets fresh graduates who are trained to take over the expatriate roles of the contractors and consultants involved in project implementation. There is a clear phased training and succession plan for the local personnel to manage the railway sub sector with timelines and mile stones that are strictly observed.

In our case, Uganda has not yet developed a clear and deliberate policy to recruit and train fresh graduates in the areas of railway management and operation despite the technology intensive nature of the work. 

Instead the current recruitment has emphasized the experience in railway work which threatens the acquisition of new and emerging technologies and knowledge, which the sub sector requires.

The committee established from Uganda Railways Corporations that its strategic plan provides for a grand strategy for the development of technical human and other capacities for the railways sub sector in the medium term. There are ongoing negotiations with the organisations locally and in South Africa in building partnership and the training of personnel in the railway sub sector management. 

The committee recommends as follows:

    (i) A staff recruitment plan should be developed to ensure that staff with the capacity to learn and adopt new emerging technologies are recruited; and
    (ii) The Ministry of Works and Transport should ensure that Uganda Railways Corporation capacity building strategy, under the strategic plan, is fully funded and adequate personnel are trained to manage the railways sub sector.

Policy and Legal Framework of Railways in Uganda 

Mr Speaker, in Uganda, Uganda Railways Corporation is the body mandated to regulate, construct, operate and maintain the railway and marine services for the carriage of passengers and goods under the Uganda Railways Act, 1992.

Under a Cabinet decision, a project board and a project management unit were formed and are now spearheading the process of planning and implementation of the standard gauge railway in Uganda. 
This is contrary to the practice in Kenya and Ethiopia where Kenya Railways Corporation (KRC) and Ethiopian Railways Corporation (ERC), spearheaded the planning, construction and operations of the standard gauge railway network in those two countries respectively.

The committee established that in 1999, Cabinet approved a plan for increasing private investment in the operations of the Uganda Railways Corporation with the aim of improving its operating efficiency since the corporation was receiving large Government subsidies.

Consequently, in 2000, privatisation and restructuring advisors were appointed to evaluate mechanisms for implementing the first stage of restructuring and, therefore, Uganda Railways Corporation is currently categorised under Schedule II of the Non-Performing Asset Recovery Trust Act, 1994.

The committee established that in order for Uganda Railways Corporation to effectively perform its mandate, this categorisation and the mentioned Act should be repealed. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport is yet to develop a national railways policy that would define the roles and responsibilities of the different stakeholders in the subsector. They have not attempted but only planning to begin.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should immediately amend the NPART Act, 1994 to allow URC to effectively perform its mandate. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport should immediately expedite a process of formulation of a National Railways Policy and the accompanying relevant legal framework to guide the processes and activities in the railway subsector.

Institutional framework for standard gauge railway in Uganda

The committee established that Uganda’s institutional framework is guided by regional and national level agreements and protocols. 

At the regional level, the Standard Gauge Railway is guided by the following: Standard Gauge Railway Protocol, Northern Corridor Infrastructure Project, Joint Ministerial Committee, Standard Gauge Railway Commission, Regional Technical Commission and the Joint Technical Committee.

At the national level, the Standard Gauge Railway Framework is composed of the following: 
    1. Project Board: The Standard Gauge Railway Project Board is chaired by the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Works and Transport and composed of representatives from several ministries including defence, finance, planning and economic development, lands, housing and urban development, justice and constitutional affairs, energy and minerals development and Uganda Railways Corporation. The board is the policy making organ for the project and has the mandate to supervise the Project Management Unit to ensure that the project is delivered as expected. 

    2. Project Management Team: This is headed by the Standard Gauge Railway Project Coordinator and is composed of project employees and most of them were former staff of Ministry of Works and Transport and this is what also happened in UNRA.

The committee observes that the Standard Gauge Railway National Level Institutional Framework is disjointed and poorly structured and organised. Whereas Uganda Railways Corporation is the institution mandated to develop the railway subsector in Uganda, the Standard Gauge Railway activities are being spearheaded by a project staff of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

The committee was informed that the decision to mandate the Standard Gauge Railway Board Management Unit to guide the process in Uganda was informed by a Cabinet decision. 

The functions and operations of the Standard Gauge Railway in Uganda are not fully harmonised with those of the Uganda Railways Corporation as the two agencies are supervised by different ministries. This may in future complicate management and further development of the railways system in the country including acquisition of right of way.

Committee recommendations:
    1. We are recommending that Cabinet revisits its decision to mandate a project board and management unit to spearhead the implementation of the Standard Gauge Railway network in Uganda;
    2. That the supervision and oversight of Uganda Railways Corporation should be transferred from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to Ministry of Works and Transport;
    3. That the Ministry of Works and Transport expeditiously reviews the current institutional framework to ensure that Uganda Railways Corporation plays a prominent role in the implementation of the Standard Gauge Railway network as per its mandate in the railway subsector.

Stakeholder Management and Involvement

The committee notes that Ethiopian Railway Corporation faced challenges ensuring that all relevant stake holders were actively engaged and involved in the implementation of the Standard Gauge Railway and the light rail transit.

Implementation of these projects disrupted several services and this caused conflict among the different utility companies. This required harmonisation of the work of the different stakeholders and care for stakeholder management was instituted. 

The committee notes that Uganda Standard Gauge Railway Project is a major undertaking that requires a wide range of stakeholder involvement and consultation during the project planning, development, operation and management phases.

The committee also established that a stakeholder engagement plan and strategies were developed by Ethiopian Railways Corporation to guide the implementation of the project. 

It was expected that the project works would disrupt several existing or proposed works like road works, electricity and water services. This requires harmonisation of the works and engagement of all key stakeholders to ensure successful implementation of the project.

Mr Speaker, despite claims by the Ministry of Works and Transport to have developed a Stakeholder Engagement Plan, there is poor coordination and involvement and the relevant stakeholders. 

The Ministry of Works and Transport is also yet to enact a National Railways Policy that would define the roles and responsibilities of the different stakeholders in the subsector.

The committee recommends that:
 
    1. Ministry of Works and Transport should formulate a clear stakeholder mapping and management plan for the Standard Gauge Railway Project and Light Rail Transit Systems.
    2. Regular meetings with various stakeholders should be held and clear roles and responsibilities defined and accountability guidelines agreed upon so that each stakeholder is held responsible for their actions or inactions.
    3. The various agencies should harmonise the relocation of their services with clear timelines. All future planned development should be identified early and integrated into the plan during construction of the Standard Gauge Railway and Light Rail Transit Project.

Post Construction Management of the Standard Gauge Railway Project and the Light Rail Transit System

The committee notes that post construction management is a key to success of a modern railway. It requires the services of an experienced manager with pedigree in management and maintenance of railways.

Ethiopia has contracted Shenzhen Metro Group and China Railway Construction Corporation Limited to operate and maintain the light rail transit on a three-year contract with clear milestones and time lines to be achieved. 

The number of expatriate staff is expected to progressively reduce over this period as locals are trained and prepared to take over the management and operational roles.

There is close supervision to ensure that the locals are learning and a number of the expatriate staff are expected to leave the country and return to China at the end of each year. The Ethiopian Railways Corporation monitors the achievement of timelines and milestones to ensure compliance by both the trained personnel and expatriates.

Uganda is in the preliminary stages of implementation of its Standard Gauge Railway Project. Lessons from post construction management of the Standard Gauge Railway in Ethiopia are key for Uganda to adopt and use in the future.  

Committee recommendations 

    1. A Post Management Strategy be designed for the Uganda Standard Gauge Railway with clear timelines and milestones and exit strategy for the expatriate staff;
    2.  There should be clear mechanisms for monitoring the implementation of the strategy and punitive measures should be designed to deter the managers from non-conformity. 

Source of Power for the Standard Gauge Railway

The Committee was informed that the classical standard railway that uses electric traction requires adequate power supply from at least two independent and reliable sources. The two independent sources would ensure that there is reliable power supply for the operation of the project. In addition, there should be a generator back up in the event of power failure of the two power sources. 

Uganda’s planned Standard Gauge Railway corridor and right-railway transit corridor are not fully electrified at the moment despite plans to use electric traction for the trains. 

Some of the areas along the corridor are currently not connected to the nation’s electricity grid and this would pose sustainability and reliability challenges to the operations of the services. 

The committee established that discussions are underway to use power from Isimba and Nalubale stations for the Standard Gauge Railway traction substations across the country – I think this should be the eastern line. 

Both Isimba and Nalubale are two independent sources which are located in the Busoga sub region with Nalubale complete while Isimba is still undergoing construction. However, it is unlikely that power from these two dams would supply the entire Standard Gauge Railway network across the country effectively and efficiently. There are no contingency plans to provide for generator backup in the event of power failure. 

The committee strongly recommends that:

The Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development work together to ensure that the entire Standard Gauge Railway corridor is provided with adequate power supply. For purposes of liability, the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development and Ministry of Works and Transport should work out modalities of connectivity of the corridor – two independent power sources and a standby generator in place for use during emergency blackout. 

Reconstruction of Isimba Dam should be expedited to ensure that there will be adequate power supply for a Standard Gauge Railway. 

Connectivity to other power sources across the country should be made in order to ensure effective power supply across the entire Standard Gauge Railway network in Uganda. 

This report on the modalities of electrification of the proposed Standard Gauge Railway corridor should be availed to these committees within six months of adoption of this report. 

Madam Speaker, right of way acquisition, the Ethiopian Railway Cooperation informed the committee that the land tenure system in Ethiopia is that land belongs to the state. However prior to the occupation of land by Government, extensive negotiations with the various stakeholders are held. Agreements on the cost of compensation and location plan for the occupants must be reached prior to utilisation of land by Government. 

A clear relocation plan and business plan must be availed to the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) to ensure that they utilise the compensation funds properly and therefore have an acceptable standard of living after compensation. The funds for the compensation are deposited with the local authorities that supervise the resettlement of the PAPs. 

Regular audits are undertaken by independent audit firms to ensure that all funds for resettlement, relocation or compensation of the PAPs are well utilised and this ensures transparency in the process of right of way acquisition. 

Uganda currently uses the guidelines of section 77 of the Land Act, 1998 as amended in 2010 for the computation of compensation requirements for the Project Affected Persons (PAPs). 

Valuation of land and property is undertaken to assess and compute the compensation due to the PAPs within the right of way based on the provisions of the relevant laws. The crops, lands, developments are Project Affected Persons are paid accordingly. 

However, there is no clear requirement of induction or management of the compensation received by the persons affected. Uganda is currently in advanced stages of the amendment of the law that determines acquisition of land for the right of way. 

 Recommendation 

There should be adequate community engagement and sensitisation on the use of compensations received by persons affected. 

Local Content and Quality Control for the Standard Gauge Railway 

The committee established that discussions have taken place between Government of Uganda and local steel manufacturing companies to ensure that the steel for the construction shall be obtained locally. 

Government of Uganda has guaranteed purchase of local steel for the project from local manufacturers. Cement for the project shall also be purchased from local manufacturers. 

The committee established that in order to ensure quality of the locally available construction materials, Government plans to establish laboratories for material testing to ensure conformity to the quality control requirements and standards. 

Uganda National Bureau of Standards is expected to be resourced to effectively determine the quality of materials used for the project. 

The committee commends Government of Uganda for its deliberate efforts to utilise locally available materials for the construction of the Standard Gauge Railway network across the country. 

The committee recommends the following: 

    1. A clear quality control and management strategy for the Standard Gauge Railway network should be developed and implemented expeditiously. 
    2. UNBS and the Central Materials Laboratory of Ministry of Works and Transport should be adequately resourced to acquire the required materials testing equipment to service the construction needs of the project. 
    3. An inventory of the equipment’s by these agencies should be developed and shared with the committee within three months of adoption of this report and the Ministry of Works and Transport should ensure that the procurement processes for the acquisition of the equipment is expeditiously undertaken. 

Conclusion

The project between the two countries, Uganda and Ethiopia, reveals glaring differences. Much as Ethiopia had to deal with a very difficult terrain, the cost involved was much lower than the one being quoted under the Ugandan project. With a total range of 969 kilometres, the Ethiopians completed their Standard Gauge Railway project at a total cost of $3.4 billion and $5 per track kilometre. The Ugandan Standard Gauge Railway project of Malaba to Kampala, which is 273 kilometres, is quoted as $2.3 billion which translates to a total cost of $8.42 million per track kilometre. 

The same can be said of the light railway transit where Ethiopians managed theirs at a cost of $475 million covering a total distance of 34 kilometres. Comparatively, the greater Kampala Metropolitan Area Railway Track System is expected to cover 45 kilometres at a tentative cost of $700 million. You can also compare.

There are huge differences in cost considering that the Ugandan terrain is considerably fairer for construction; our soils are more stable.

More important to note is that the specifications being quoted for the Standard Gauge Railway in Uganda are the same as those in Ethiopia. Therefore, the railway that Uganda is referring to as “class one” railway, we think is actually “class two” as per specifications. The branding of “class two” as “class one”, therefore, raises a lot of questions as it is likely to lead to inflation of costs.

There is no justification for Uganda to refer to its class of railway as “class one” when it is actually “class two”.Like it is already highlighted, “class two” specifications provide for a maximum design of 120 kilometres per hour and the class of railways is majorly determined by the design speeds.

Construction of “class two” would lead to a significant reduction in the construction costs. Other pertinent issues like right of way acquisition, post-construction management and stakeholder management and involvement are highlighted in this report with clear lessons to draw from Ethiopian experience.

Maybe in addition to that, you can also note the confusion in the institutional framework because it is quite very important.

My prayer is that the recommendations suggested in this report are adopted for a more cost-effective and efficient implementation of this important project. Mr Speaker, I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chair, for that very detailed and elaborate report. I will be proposing the question shortly.

Honourable members, in the Public Gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation of students from Handong Global University, South Korea. They are led by Dr Young Gil Lee, Vice Chancellor of Kumi University and Ms Sharon Brown, President of Malku Institute of Technology. Dr Lee is to present the projects that they are undertaking in Kumi University, Kumi District. They are represented by hon. Monicah Amoding and hon. Charles Ilukor. I think they have left but we will acknowledge them in absence. 

We also have a delegation of staff from the National Assembly of Kenya; they are here on a one-day benchmarking visit under the auspices of the East and Southern African Management Institute. Please join me in welcoming them. (Applause) You are welcome.

Honourable members, that is the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the issue of the Standard Gauge Railway. Can I propose the question for debate?

I now propose the question to the motion for adoption of the report of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure on the Standard Gauge Railway and light railway transit. I propose that question for your debate.

Honourable members, you will recall that all references to “light” railway were stated as “right” railway. So let the records show that where there was “right”, it was “light” – (Laughter) - for purposes of the people transcribing the Hansard.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. You recall that on this very Floor, we took a motion for an investigation of the Standard Gauge Railway. And indeed a report was laid on the Table; that very report by the select committee on the Standard Gauge Railway was laid before this House and was awaiting debate.

And now we have the committee coming up with the report – a separate report before we took a position on the select committee’s report which was adopted by this very House.

The procedural point I am raising is this: Whereas I welcome the committee’s effort, but procedurally, if this House sits and resolves to set up a select committee; tables a report and before it is debated and adopted or otherwise, now another similar report is brought, how can we proceed on this matter? That is because, ordinarily, it should be “first come, first served.” That report that came first should have been disposed of to see if the issues that were raised by the select committee are still relevant or pending. Then we can receive this as any other normal committee report.

I would imagine that a select committee would take more emphasis because it is special and so should be handled in that very manner. I imagine the Clerk would have furnished your office with that information – that indeed there is a matter pending for debate and adoption by this House, Mr Speaker. So, how do we proceed in view of the two reports?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member for Lwemiyaga. I recall that a select committee was indeed set up – I think it was chaired by the Member for Nakifuma – if I recall correctly. And it also went to Ethiopia and other places and it came back. I never heard what happened to the report but that was a select committee of the Ninth Parliament.

The technical issue that I need to deal with is whether work of a select committee can be saved. That I need to come back to – I need to consult on that. Can the select committee’s work of a Parliament that has passed be carried forward – that is work of a select committee and not an institutionalised committee of the House? I need to look at that a little more and then come back to the House next week so that we proceed properly on this matter.

In light of that, we will defer debate and then see if we can harmonise the two and then proceed that way. This will help us to avoid starting and then going back on this same issue. Thank you.

That is how we will proceed, Members; we would like to proceed on the railway in an orderly manner – (Laughter) This is the railway; it should be smooth. I will seek guidance and then next week, guide on this particular matter and see how to proceed with the debate. So today’s debate is deferred.

There was the issue of a report that was on item No.3; can we go back to that?

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS ON THE REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE HEALTH SECTOR FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/15

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chair, I apologise because I was looking for hon. Angelline Osegge as the chair; I did not know there was another chair ready to proceed. So please proceed, chair.

3.53
THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (Mr Gerald Karuhanga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable members, I beg to present the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the health sector for the financial year 2014/15. Mr Speaker, I beg to lay the minutes on the Table for the same report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker and honourable members – 

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, as the Public Accounts Committee, at the beginning of this financial year, we were allocated 87 entities, which fall under 16 sectors of Government. I am glad to report that the Public Accounts Committee has done about 80 per cent of its work and will soon be presenting “a bush of reports” to this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, what do you mean by “a bush of reports?”

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Speaker, I meant that there are so many reports that are coming because they are largely ready. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You see, a bush is not necessarily clean so you need to be - 

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Today we are presenting the biggest sector, which is health and consisting of 15 entities. 

Mr Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee considered the Auditor-General’s report for the financial year 2014/2015 on the health sector as mandated by rule 162(2) of the Rules of Procedure and Article 90 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The report covers audit queries of the Auditor-General’s report for the year ended 30 June 2015, in respect of the health sector. This comprised of the Ministry of Health, Mulago National Referral Hospital, Butabika Hospital, China Uganda Friendship Naguru Hospital, the regional referral hospitals of Mbale, Moroto, Soroti, Jinja, Gulu, Lira, Fort Portal, Hoima, Mbarara, Arua and the Uganda Heart Institute.

Mr Speaker, the committee interfaced with the accounting officers and also had physical impromptu visits to most of these hospitals. This report has been uploaded and it is quite voluminous and, therefore, I beg to go through the summary of the report with a few references to the main body of the report and this would save our time.

Glaring Salient Features

Undeclared source of funds

Under the Uganda Sanitation Fund Programme, the annual report for the period revealed that since project inception in July 2011, the project had received a total of $ 1,885,625 for purposes of grants and procurements. The corresponding cumulative expenditure however amounted to $ 2,417,609.28, creating an excess expenditure of $ 531,984.28, about Shs 2 billion. The source of funding for this excess could not be ascertained.

Refund to Global Fund 

Although Shs 3,198,224,060 had been refunded, investigations revealed that only Shs 1,895,617,227 was refundable and only a total of Shs 23,479,000 had been recovered from the individuals involved and remitted to the Consolidated Fund.

Unutilised funds

Under the Tuberculosis component, the committee found unutilised funds amounting to Shs 2,625,487,180 brought forward from the previous year. During the year, funds totalling to Shs 18,131,924,330 were received, resulting into a total of Shs 20,757,411,510 available for use, of which Shs 14,898,067,350 was spent leaving Shs 5,859,344,160 unutilised. You can imagine.

Unaccounted for advances on drugs under the Uganda Sanitation Fund Project

Mr Speaker, the audit reveals that Shs 274,961,905 advanced to various project staff and sub-grantees remained unaccounted for.

Land grabbing at Butabika Hospital

While the hospital management, NEMA and Environmental Police were in the process of completing eviction of the encroachers, the Inspector General of Police physically halted the exercise.

Undeclared funds under the Uganda Sanitation project

Failure to declare $ 360,000 (about Shs 1.3 billion) in the financial statement is a clear picture of how gross corruption with impunity has become in the health sector.

Recycling of Accounting Officers

Accounting officers who have become perennially un-accounting officers should never be reposted but dropped permanently from Public Service. Thus, the committee recommends that the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health at the time should be dropped permanently.

General observations 

Those were the salient features.

Mischarge of expenditure

The committee is concerned by the continued practice by most accounting officers to reallocate money within their respective Vote items without authority. For the financial year under review; 2014/2015, a total of three hospitals mischarged their expenditure to the tune of Shs 726,001,826. This is contrary to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, which requires accounting officers to always seek authorisation from the Minister of Finance before re-allocating funds within a Vote.

Mr Speaker, the committee observed that the accounting officers abuse the law with impunity and calls upon the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury to impose tough sanctions against such accounting officers with the mischarge query as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act and other laws.

Unaccounted for Advances

The committee found that a total of Shs 616,397,481 spent by several officers remained unaccounted for by the end of the financial year, contrary to financial regulations that require all expenditure to be accounted for within 60 days. This can be an indicator that the activities for which money was advanced have not been carried out. 

Poor Planning and Budget Management 

The committee notes that not all monies budgeted for were released by the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and even the monies released are not properly utilised because of mischarges. The committee is concerned that this impairs service delivery. Even with hindsight that as a country we run a cash budget, we would expect to see coordination and adjustments as we go along. 

Encroachment on Hospital Land

The committee observes that many hospitals exist without land titles. In some cases, hospital land has been encroached on and trespassers have erected permanent structures without any challenge from the hospitals. The committee further observed some cases where private individuals are in possession of titles of land where hospitals are sitting. 

Understaffing

Mr Speaker, not a single hospital is fully staffed; many are at staffing levels of about 45-50 per cent and lack critical staff like surgeons and physicians. The committee is concerned about continuous lack of critical staff in many hospitals. This problem is exacerbated by staff who, upon admission to the public service, fail to report to their respective workstations. There is also incompetence on the part of the Ministry of Public Service and the Health Service Commission in effectively addressing staffing needs of hospitals. 

Procurement Anomalies and Poor Contract Management

The committee observed that the procurement and disposal units of several hospitals do not have the capacity to handle public procurements. This was manifested through violations of procurement procedures and regulations relating to due diligence, bid evaluations and contract management. 

A case in point is Naguru Hospital: 

Payments for Construction Works without a Payment Certificate Review of the contract for construction of the drug store, together with the payment records, revealed that a sum of Shs 453,849,200, representing 60 per cent of the contract sum, was paid for works estimated at only 30 per cent. The over payment was attributed to lack of certificates of works done. It was further noted that the work stalled after the KCCA authorities stopped the construction because of lack of approved plans. 

The accounting officer explained that- 
    a) The payment was based on progress reports by the contract manager. 
    b) The contract had expired and was re-engaged but he emphasised that the contractor would be re-engaged upon getting approval from KCCA; and 
    c) There was an attempt to recover the funds.  

Mr Speaker, the committee observed thus:
    i) Contrary to the response of the accounting officer, there is no evidence that the advance payment was recovered.
    ii) Further review revealed that the architectural plans had not been approved by KCCA and the contract had expired. 
    iii) The hospital further made 30 per cent payment for all the works, including the preliminary works. The payment was illegal because it was made in the absence of the certificate of completion. 
    iv) The initial contract was exited and a new contract was to be engaged.
    v) The management of the hospital allowed commencement of civil works without approved plans. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the funds overpaid to the contractor of Shs 150 million be recovered from Dr Edward Naddumba, who was the accounting officer, for having made an illegal payment without certificates of completion.  

Conditions of Hospitals

Mr Speaker, some of our hospitals are sicker than the patients. The committee notes that there is a general state of decay in the infrastructure of hospitals. Despite some hospital wards being over 50 years old and having been condemned as inhabitable, the hospitals still use such facilities. Most equipment in hospitals are non-functional. This affects service delivery. 

Lack of Essential Drugs and Sundries

The committee observed that despite the reforms in the procurement of drugs for public health facilities, there are still challenges in procurement of drugs resulting into perpetual shortages in most hospitals. This problem is attributed to failure on the part of the National Medical Stores to meet the orders of many health units and budgeting implications. 

Mr Speaker, this is clearly buttressed by the case in Mulago Hospital: 

Drugs Supplied to Mulago Hospital

Fixed Budget Allocation for Essential Medicines and Health Supplies 

The audit revealed that the annual budget allocation of Shs 11,365,600,000 for essential medicines and health supplies for Mulago National Referral Hospital had remained constant since FY 2011/2012 despite the remarkable increase in the number of patients over the same period from 1.3 million to 1.6 million. This is about a 20 per cent increment. 

The accounting officer explained that the current budget was too small for the hospital and is expected to worsen when the hospital becomes fully specialised and starts providing services like kidney and other organ transplants where drugs and sundries are very expensive. He further stated that they were liaising with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other key stakeholders in the health sector to improve on the current budget provision for drugs. 

Committee Observations

i) 	Mulago, in spite of being a national referral hospital, has continuously experienced shortages of essential drugs and medical sundries. 
ii) 	The committee is concerned that such inadequate supplies may lead to unnecessary loss of lives. 

Performance by Internal Audit

The committee is alarmed by the fact that accounting officers do not implement recommendations of internal auditors. Whereas the key function of the internal audit department is to provide advice on internal checks and control systems to the accounting officers, the committee notes that abuse of public funds continues to go unchecked. 

Performance by Accounting Officers

The committee noted, with concern, the poor performance by some accounting officers, particularly in respect of- 
a) 	failure to respond to management letters from the Auditor-General; 
b) 	poor preparation and response to audit queries; 
c) 	late submission of documents at the time of audit; 
d) 	failure to act on recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee and certain recommendations of Parliament. 

Unsatisfactory Performance by Contractors

The committee notes several cases where performance of contractors was unacceptable. The serious cases included fraud, poor workmanship and slow progress of work on account of inefficiency, inadequate equipment and poor planning. There are also cases where late releases of funds by the Ministry of Finance resulted into delays in effecting payments with resultant penalties and interest.

Mr Speaker, that is largely the summary of the Public Accounts Committee report on the health sector. However, I would like to implore you, honourable members, to read this report as it is uploaded on your iPads. It is quite voluminous but you will find the details very particular and touching.

In conclusion, I have two issues to raise. One, I strongly believe that the Committee on Health will be coming here with a very particular report. However, our country should begin focusing and moving from the current health service policy to the insurance policy. 

Honourable members, I would like you to join me, in a very special way, to appreciate the members of the Public Accounts Committee. We drove at night most of the time and worked during the day. We drove across the entire country. I honestly would like you to join me, Mr Speaker and Members, to appreciate this committee. (Applause) 

Finally, there is a very disturbing trend where there is selective unbalanced or inequitable release of funds by the Ministry of Finance to different entities. Some entities will get 100 per cent of their budget, some will get 40 per cent and others will even get 35 per cent. One wonders, when we pass the budget, what happens. We appreciate that we run a cash budget but the release of these funds should be equitable; there should be some formula. These hospitals are spread all over the country and they affect all of us; I, therefore, think that this should be noted and taken very seriously.

Mr Speaker, I appreciate the support that we received from the Office of the Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the support that we received from the Office of the Clerk and the staff; we have several staff that supports the committee. 

Mr Speaker, it is my singular honour to appeal to Members of Parliament to adopt this report and my prayer is that the health sector improves. 

I now beg to lay on the Table the report of the Public Accounts Committee and the report of the Auditor-General on the health sector for the Financial Year 2014/2015. I beg to lay.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let the records capture that. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this report. Honourable members, as you will notice from the flow of this report, it is a hybrid report; that is the way I have understood it. It is not a typical accountability report where you point out particular individuals that have taken monies and must be held accountable. That too has come up, but also the aspect of operational or rather sectoral issues of the health sector have come up. Therefore, it is a hybrid report. 

I do not know how we are going to proceed with the debate because there are no specifics of the accountability issues. Maybe it is in the details where identification of funds lost and things of that sort are specified, and then we come to the sectoral issues that the chairperson says might also be supported by an additional presentation by the chairperson of the Committee on Health. I will proceed to propose and we debate this matter.

4.21
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI JACK (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Public Accounts Committee for the good work they are doing in bringing to book those who have stolen and those who have misappropriated funds that are given to them by Government - tax payers’ money. 

Mr Speaker, the chairman touched on different sectors. I would like to speak on Naguru Hospital that was built by the Chinese. Mulago Hospital was put on halt and is under repair –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you debating now?

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Yes.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I have not proposed the question. I thought that you had an intervention on the issue I had raised. If you are going to debate – 

MR HENRY MUSASIZI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The reporting by the Auditor-General has, over the years, improved. When you look at most of the reports now, the aim is systems improvement. In other words, you identify weaknesses that the auditee is facing and try to bring them out with a view of helping the auditee to improve systems. I am sure that is why you are seeing a hybrid of operational issues vis-à-vis the financial issues. 

I would like to request the House to debate the report with this in mind. The modern reports do not only focus on the funds lost or funds not properly used but they go beyond to look at other weaknesses the entities face. I am sure that with this clarification, the debate can proceed now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much but you also notice that the debate will not be very different from the debate on a report from the Committee on Health. That is where the challenge is. When the Committee on Health will report, it will be almost the same. So, how do you distinguish the issues of accountability and operational issues? Which one is which? I am just looking through.
 
MR KARUHANGA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I was conscious about our time, but when you look at our observations and recommendations, they are very particular on who should be punished, charged, prosecuted and dismissed. There are a number of issues but we thought that it would take a long time for the House to go word by word over several pages. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: That is why I was raising the issue. Are we also debating the operational things, which might come from the sectoral angle, and dealing with real accountability issues that come from an accountability committee? What are we going to do? I was just asking.
 
MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, the substance of the accountability committee reports is on the financial aspects; in other words, who should be accountable for the funds not properly used. Other matters will then come in. 

When you look at our recommendations, they actually put sanctions on the responsible persons for the funds not properly used. That is where the emphasis should be. Other matters can then come in, in the debate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. With that guidance, can I propose the question and we start the debate? Honourable members, I now propose the question on the motion for adoption of the report of the Public Accounts Committee on the report of the Auditor-General on the health sector for Financial Year 2014/2015. Question is proposed and debate starts now. 

4.26
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. The Public Accounts Committee looks at the issues that come from the Auditor-General and our health sector is most affected. What people in this country want is to have medicine in the hospitals. However, look at Mulago National Referral Hospital; the equipment that was bought many years ago in the 1960s during the Obote time has broken down. Look at the cancer machines that people have been lamenting about; there is nothing functioning in Mulago Hospital. 

They made it worse when they started rehabilitation of Mulago Hospital and everybody was transferred to Naguru Hospital. You find it overcrowded. The Ministry of Health did not even post health workers to Naguru Hospital. The lines are going up to the main road. 

The situation is so bad but then you will find officials in the hospitals stealing money. That is why I would like to ask Members of this House to resolve that those who took money from Naguru Hospital and all these hospitals must pay it back because they make our people suffer. Even in my own hospital in Mbale, as a Member of Parliament I have gone to the extent of buying mattresses, beds and wheelchairs to deliver to the hospital, moreover this is a Government referral hospital. 

We pass budgets here on the Floor of Parliament to make sure that medicine is taken to all these hospitals but at times it is shocking that medicine that comes from National Medical Stores is expired. It makes me feel so bad because I participated in signing an agreement where the Danes give us medicine at National Medical Stores through the Essential Drugs Programme. However, the medicine comes in but it is delivered to the hospitals when it has already expired. 

The Ministry of Health should put emphasis in making sure that our hospitals function, that people get medicine and that there is equipment. In addition, those found culpable should be punished and this House should adopt and pass the recommendations brought by the Public Accounts Committee. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.29
MR JULIUS OCHEN (Independent, Kapelebyong County, Amuria): Mr Speaker, when we start to discuss issues pertaining to health in this country, one feels like relocating to another country. Issues of health are at the heart of every nation. When you consider the issues that have been raised by the Public Accounts Committee about accounting officers not adhering to the advice offered by internal audit, it tells you that the accounting officers are violating the guidelines required to protect resources. 

Mr Speaker, the person in charge of appointing accounting officers is the chief executive. Where is the problem? We cannot correct problems, which affect health unless this Parliament works on very strong systems that must be put in place to fight corruption in Uganda. This is where we must begin from. These systems must be tabled by the Executive because they are the chief implementers of all the programmes in the country. 

You cannot run the country without putting in place very strong systems and policies that can guide implementation so that services are accessed by ordinary Ugandans. How can essential drugs be missing in the different hospitals? How can the meagre resources allocated to hospitals get lost under the eyes of the Executive? This tells one about the absent or weak systems that are in place to prevent looting of resources that are meant for the ordinary people. 

This Parliament stops at appropriating resources; who must do the other part? I would like, in a humble way, to put it to this Parliament that even while we sit here, we are a shame in the eyes of the public. How does this shame come about? The Executive has let us down by not putting in place strong measures to control the abuse of public resources. 

Mr Speaker, the problem is that as Parliament, we do not do daily implementation; it is the Executive. However, you can see the report we have heard from the Public Accounts Committee showing billions of shillings meant for health lost. Where I come from, the health centres III and IV have no drugs and equipment and the theatres are not functioning. In Kapelebyong, we have no functioning theatre. It is a civil society organisation trying to rehabilitate the theatre and yet the ordinary citizens pay taxes every day in billions of shillings and money is being misused. Is this a country one can be proud of? 

Mr Speaker, I find your work very difficult - presiding over a Parliament that is trying its best to approve resources yet every day, reports come with no accountability. My humble appeal to the Parliament of Uganda is to go an extra mile to address this without putting our political affiliations at the centre. We must put Uganda at heart and tackle the problem in Uganda.

Before I conclude, I just want to say that this country is no better than the Uganda of the 1960s during the Uganda Peoples’ Congress Government in terms of services. (Laughter) I am not afraid to say that during the 1960s, this country was the pride of Africa. What is happening now with Shs 24 trillion to Shs 34 trillion? We cannot afford equipment in the hospital. Where is this money going? Money of this country has been looted by the people who are here pretending they are in charge. I am very sorry to say this but how can you stand before the people as a leader when you cannot afford an aspirin?

Mr Speaker, I would like to raise this as I retire to my seat:  my humble appeal to the Executive is that all these messes we see about corruption must be put right by the Executive. Parliament has done its part. The Executive should remove this country from shame. The rest of Africa is looking at us. What has bewitched Ugandans? (Laughter) You, the Ugandan people, take colossal taxes from the ordinary people and you cannot pay them back in turn in terms of medical services. Why? 

This happens and yet you are taking your children to be treated abroad. You can afford to treat yourselves at very high costs but for the ordinary Ugandans, who pay taxes, you pay them by looting resources in the public coffers and there is no measure to control that. Some people cannot even feel the shame now. You find them driving along the streets and counting bungalows. 

Mr Speaker, this is the country we call Uganda. (Laughter) I pity Members of this Parliament. Tomorrow, when the Members of Parliament return to their constituencies, they are wiped out by voters saying that they have failed to deliver yet the problem is not with the Members of Parliament; the problem is with the team, which is in charge of our resources. We do not sit to divide the resources at the centre; we only appropriate here. What happened; what stops you from using an iron hand to ensure the money allocated to the health sector is directly delivered to the ordinary people? Where is the weakness? You have the police and the IGG; where is the problem? 

Mr Speaker, as I conclude, I can tell you that the problem in health and across all other sectors can only be put right if the Executive accepts to put this problem right. It cannot be put right by anybody. It is the Executive letting Ugandans down and they must be pointed out for this weakness. I thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, hon. Ochen from Kapelebyong. The honourable member made a statement to the effect that accounting officers are appointed by the chief executive and I am supposing that the chief executive he is referring to is the President. 

Accounting officers are appointed by the Secretary to the Treasury. A permanent secretary may be appointed by the President but that does not make that person automatically an accounting officer until the Secretary to the Treasury appoints that person an accounting officer for that financial year. Let the records bear what the operations and actual things are.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee who read the report today. 

My concern is something I had wanted to speak on when you inquired as to whether we were proceeding rightly. The issue is that the Auditor-General’s report with respect to the health sector is a very important report that the public is very interested in. When I look at the front bench, however, the ministers who are responsible for this sector are not in the House. 

I have had a lot of valuable feedback from the Members who are submitting. I know that there might be a leader of Government business around but given the concerns we have seen in the media, among others, I am wondering whether it would be procedurally right to proceed with all this valuable feedback without these ministers being in the House.

The second point is that - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is this still procedure?

MR EDWARD OTTO: Yes. I know that you had previously raised this; the chairperson of the committee indicated that there are a lot of finer details in the report. My fear is that given the summary he gave, - he alluded to the fact that he did not go into the details - we might end up debating this report without actually capturing a lot of the finer details that I believe are very critical for us to make a considered opinion about the issues being raised. 

Therefore, my proposal is that if it is procedurally right, we could defer this debate to a time when these ministers are in and Members have concretely consulted with respect to the details that are in this report. Those are my procedural concerns. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the rules anticipated this kind of thing. Actually, once reports of Parliament are presented, the debate should be conducted when Members are fully abreast of the facts and details of the report. 

I was hoping that this would have come at the beginning, especially when the chairperson was very clear in saying, “I have given a summary of the report”. It means we have not been exposed to the details and we have not had the opportunity to look at it. I was hoping that that would have been raised at the beginning so that we could have proceeded properly. I do not know whether we are able to debate the details of this report or as requested, maybe Members come back later. 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. We were supposed to discuss this report yesterday and we had it on our iPads –(Interjections)- At the time it was deferred, for us who had our iPads, it was there but on other iPads it was not showing. I had it but I had not read through. 

The Speaker in the Chair yesterday said we shall discuss it today when everybody is ready with the report. I believe some colleagues who wanted to discuss came when they were ready with it. Therefore, I think it would be procedurally right that we continue and discuss this report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let me have the committee chairperson.

MS OSEGGE: Mr Speaker, I appreciate the enthusiasm and the interest the Members are putting in this report. However, I would like to inform the Members that this report was first uploaded in December. It has been on our iPads since December when it was ready. Probably, that shows us that sometimes we are too busy to look at the documents that we should look at. 

My question is: what is the guarantee that we are going to be able to read through and be prepared for debate next time? More reports are coming, and I would just beg that as the debate is going on, look though the report and pick out the issues. You are not going to debate on all the points. Pick out one issue and debate it and let us proceed. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR MUSASIZI: Mr Speaker, reading the mood in the House and considering that the matter under debate touches our lives, it is important that Members be given time to appreciate how the funds appropriated to Ministry of Health are being managed.

That notwithstanding, there is an issue, which was raised on whether we can continue with this kind of debate when the Ministers of Health are absent or not. We need to note that this House receives various kinds of reports. Some reports come from sectoral committees while others come from the accountability side, and those are reports from the parliamentary accountability committees of Parliament. 

With reports like this one, which is from the Public Accounts Committee, we expect feedback by Government through a Treasury memorandum. I am sure this is where the role of the minister is paramount. I thought the House needed to be informed about how the feedback from parliamentary accountability committees comes back to this House. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That was the second issue we are going to deal with. So, honourable members, what do we do?

4.46
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.  There were conflicting reports on the Floor of the House this afternoon regarding this report that is now the subject of debate. It was said that the report was uploaded way back in December, while some Members say it was not uploaded and others say it was uploaded but some Members could not access it and so forth. 

Mr Speaker, that points to one thing. I think that, indeed, not all of us here are actually ready to give due attention and due debate to this report. It would, therefore, call for a bit of time so that maybe Members go and look at the report tonight and are ready to debate it when everybody has read and has known all the problems. It could then be debated next week. Today is Thursday; we could debate it on Tuesday so that we do justice to this very important report.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I think the minister should have been straightforward and said to the House that the Minister of Health is not here instead of saying Members are not ready and they cannot debate. That is what my colleague had suggested. Just tell us that the minister is not here and, therefore, we cannot debate. 

How I wish hon. Baryomunsi was within the Ministry of Health because he is here and we would have gone ahead to debate, but he is now in a different ministry - displaced. So, we defer debate because the minister is not here.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, the point hon. Muruli Mukasa was raising is not the issue of absence of ministers because as ministers, we are here and we can take note of the issues.

However, you need to appreciate the point raised by hon. Musasizi that this is an accountability committee report, which does not necessarily require a response from the minister at this point because we respond through Treasury memoranda. 

The point, which is appreciated, is that Members seem not to have gone through the detailed report and yet health is a very sensitive matter which touches all of us; we need to read the report so that when we come to debate, we can give justice to this debate. Otherwise, on the side of the ministers, we are here and we are ready to listen and take note of the issues.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when is a report deemed to have been brought to the House? Is it when it is uploaded on the iPads or is it when it is laid before Parliament? If, indeed, this report had been uploaded three years ago, for as long as it has not been laid on the Table, it is not officially a debatable report of the House. It is only now that you can say the House has received this report, can we proceed to debate it or it requires time? Now everybody is alerted that such a matter is now ready for debate, so people can prepare. 

Honourable members, let us just defer this debate to Tuesday and by that time, there will be no other issues but only straight debate. Members would have looked at the details of who stole what and all those things will come out quickly. Let us proceed that way, please.

Honourable members, we have another report that we need to handle. I will handle your issues -

MR OBIGA KANIA: I am not rising about the date of the postponement but I would like you to give guidance to the House so that they gain from your long-term wisdom. So, when we come on Tuesday, on a report of an accountability committee, we are not coming to give a general debate but we are coming to deal with specifics of that report so that we can point out the areas where funds were properly spent and where funds need to be recovered. I thought you could give that guidance. I know you have that guidance and it will be a very important guidance you would give to the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, take advice from the senior member of this House, hon. Obiga Kania.  That should be the spirit of what we will do on Tuesday when debate resumes. Let us have this debate focused.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Mr Speaker, I would like to get something clear; do we have the Parliamentary Week next week or we are coming on Tuesday to debate this? We were told that next week is the Parliamentary Week and we are not going to be in the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am not aware that we are suspending plenary. Are we suspending plenary? No, plenary will proceed. However, activities that affect Members will be in the morning but in the afternoon, we will proceed with the business as usual. Let us defer this debate to Tuesday and then we proceed.

MR KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you, honourable members, for receiving the report. My appeal to Members is that please, read the report because this is the fourth time we are appearing on the Order Paper and my prayer –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, just leave it like that.

MR KARUHANGA: My prayer is that Members please, read it. This is a very critical report. We can change our health system in Uganda. Thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Members have now received the report. They have absolutely no reason not to look at the report properly and then we proceed with it. Before that, they were doing many other important things. 

Honourable members, there is a report that is still pending. It had been deferred, but the chairperson is here and the minister is here and we still have time. That is the one on foreign affairs. Can we go back to it, review the decision to defer it and we finish with it so that we can move on?

MR NIWAGABA: I had raised two fundamental issues that touch the credibility of this report, where the executive summary is totally at variance with the main report. The precedent you have set in this House is that once such an issue is raised, you direct the Clerk to get the Hansard, look at the report and come up with a report to determine whether this report should be entertained by the House.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I had not remembered that well. When the chairperson said they were here and I saw the minister coming in, I kind of got carried away. However, I think that is the point that you had raised, which was a substantial point, and the basis on which we deferred debate on this particular matter. Like I said, the Clerk should clarify this so that I am guided in writing on how to deal with this particular issue. Thank you.

Now I have caused an alteration to the Order Paper to accommodate a Bill’s first reading.

BILLS
FIRST READING

ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2017

4.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): Mr Speaker, I beg to move that a Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill, 2017” be read for the first time. With the same, I lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications related to that Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. That Bill stands referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Your attention is drawn to rule 130 of our Rules of Procedure; you have only 45 days to come back to the House to move a motion for the second reading of the Bill. If you cannot do it in 45 days, the rule insists that you come back to the House and ask for an extension. If that extension is granted, then you go back and finish. If that extension is denied, the House will proceed without your report. That is what the rule says. We are going to start observing this strictly to avoid these backlogs that are not necessary for the operation of this House. Thank you. 

MR ANYWARACH: Mr Speaker, I thought that out of decency, he should have mentioned what the amendment intends to achieve, at least in a sentence. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, that is not at this stage. This is the first reading of the Bill. The justification comes when the committee is ready to proceed with it.

MR ANYWARACH: Most obliged, Mr Speaker, but anything to do with terrorism is quite sensitive and when a minister moves to make amendments without a prior copy of such a very important legislation, we raise eyebrows. That is why, out of decency, you should have mentioned it. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. That Bill is not being passed today. It has been read for the first time. Since it is going to the committee, you can look at it properly. 

Hon. Anthony Okello had raised a matter of national importance yesterday and it was deferred to today.

4.58
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity to rise on a matter of national importance. This is a matter I should have raised yesterday but the presiding Speaker guided that I should raise it today because the ministers were not available.

Mr Speaker, on the 19th of January 2017, a fisherman from Kayago, one of the landing sites on Lake Kyoga, Sam Amadra, went fishing and unfortunately, he did not return alive. Four days later, on the 23rd, his body was discovered with both hands and legs tied and in the water near a floating island commonly known as suds. When the body was discovered, it brought a lot of tension between the tribesmen of Mr Amadra and that of the suspect.

The anchoring of suds in Lake Kyoga has continued to cause death and there seems to be no critical action taken on this by Government. This is not the first time I am raising this matter. There are people who are ferrying sand to anchor the suds and in the process, they are not observing our policy on sustainable management of water resources. 

The biggest concern that is affecting the fishing community and me is the security of the people at the landing sites. Quite often, there are many deaths that happen in the water and also on land. Just during the eve of the New Year, a policeman went on the rampage firing his gun indiscriminately and a stray bullet killed one fisherman. 

Therefore, the fishing community are extremely vulnerable to death. I rise up to seek assurance from Government in as far as the security of the fishermen is concerned. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members and ministers, there is a similar issue on item No. 9 under business to follow - statement on illegal fishing on the floating islands of Lake Kyoga. It was raised by hon. Anthony Okello. Is there a way this matter can be handled comprehensively, taking on illegal fishing and the current issue that has been raised on security, so that we can have a full statement and dispose of this matter on Tuesday?

5.01
THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Mr Speaker, yes, there could be a way of handling this problem comprehensively. The President has indeed issued guidelines to the relevant minister to ensure the matter is handled. However, I beg that this matter is handled on Thursday next week. We will alert the minister concerned to come after Cabinet has met with the relevant statement to Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would that be okay, hon. Anthony Okello, so that it is comprehensively handled instead of dealing with it piecemeal?

MR ANTHONY OKELLO: Mr Speaker, this is an urgent matter that concerns security and life of the people. However, if it is in the wisdom of the minister that Thursday next week is adequate, then I will be patient enough to wait. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In the meantime-

5.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Obiga Kania): First of all, we extend our condolences upon the death of the fisherman. On any criminal matter, our police will be able to act immediately. We will get the location and other details of that particular reference from the Member to see to it that we contain the immediate insecurity that may arise between the communities. That will give us an opportunity to investigate and make a further statement as you have directed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Clerk, on Thursday next week, bring up this issue which is under item No.9 on business to follow and combine it with the other issues secondary. In the meantime, the Minister of Internal Affairs has clearly stated that they are going to take some action and liaise with hon. Anthony Okello to see that the people do not continue in desperation about their security situation. 

Honourable members, there being no further business for this day, this House stands adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 5.04 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 7 February 2017 at 2.00 p.m.) 

