

Thursday, 4 February 2021

Parliament met at 11.37 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca A. Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning sitting. It is a special sitting convened to pay tribute to two of our colleagues who passed away in the recent past. It was necessary for us to acknowledge their contribution to the Republic of Uganda. Thank you for turning up.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. PAUL ORONO ETIANG, FORMER THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF LABOUR AND DISASTER PREPAREDNESS

11.40
The first deputy prime minister and deputy leader of government business (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the Late Rt. Hon. Paul Orono Etiang, moved under rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament of Uganda.

“Whereas the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the demise of the Rt. Hon. Paul Orono Etiang, the former Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Labour and Minister for Disaster Preparedness, which occurred on Thursday, 31 December 2020 at the Internal Hospital Kampala;

Aware that the Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang has had an illustrious career spanning over 57 years, serving in various capacities both in the public service of Uganda and holding different portfolios in the Cabinet of Uganda;

Recognising that the Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang served Uganda meticulously in several key responsibilities, which include the following:

    a) District Commissioner for Gulu and Jinja in 1964,
    b) Uganda’s Ambassador to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, the present day Russia, in 1968,
    c) Assistant Secretary General of the Organisation of African Unity in 1975,
    d) Cabinet minister holding different portfolios in the Government of Uganda including:
    i)  Minister for Transport and Communications,
    ii)  Minister for Regional and Co-operation Affairs,
    iii)  Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister in charge of Labour and Disaster Preparedness;
    e) Member of the Constituent Assembly representing Tororo County from 1994 to 1995.

Appreciating that the Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang was an industrious leader who immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism.

Now, therefore, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows:

    1. The Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of our distinguished citizens of this country.

    2. This Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that the Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang has rendered the people of Uganda.”

I beg to move.

The Speaker: The motion is seconded. 

(Motion seconded.)

THE SPEAKER: What is the justification?

Gen. (RTD) MOSES Ali: On Thursday, 31 December 2020, the country received the sad news of the death of a veteran and distinguished Ugandan politician, the Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang. He left an impeccable legacy as a politician and distinguished diplomat who effectively represented the people of Uganda in several parts of the world and more so, the people of Tororo.

The Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang was born on 15 August 1938 in Mella Village, Kwapa Sub-county in the then Bukedi District to the late Keziron Orono and Merabu Achom Adacat. His father was the Sub-county Chief of Kwapa.

The Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang attended his early education from Kwapa Primary School in Kwapa Sub-county and joined Ngora High School in Kumi for his Ordinary Level. Thereafter, he was admitted to Busoga College Mwiri for his Advanced Level.

He enrolled at Makerere University where he attained a Bachelor of Arts Degree in Political Science.

After completion of his education from Makerere University, hon. Paul Orono Etiang was appointed District Commissioner in 1964 and posted to Gulu. He was later transferred to Jinja. He was the second secretary to the Uganda Embassy in Moscow from 1965 to 1967.

Rt hon. Paul Etiang acted as Minister of Foreign Affairs. He also served as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Information. He was a member of the Uganda Mission to the United Nations for a year before being appointed First Secretary. He was also appointed as High Commissioner to Britain from June 1969 to 1971.

Rt hon. Paul Etiang also served as Uganda’s Ambassador to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic, the present day Russia. 

Between 1971 and 1986, he served as a Minister for Transport and Communication. He was appointed as an Assistant Secretary General for the Organisation of African Union (OAU) and served as a Minister for Transport and Minister for Regional and Cooperation Affairs. 

In 1995, he represented Tororo County in the Constituent Assembly. In 1998, he represented Tororo County as a Member of Parliament, where he was appointed Third Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Labour and Disaster Preparedness. 

It is worth noting that Rt hon. Paul Etiang was one of the most diligent and loyal public servants and a highly competent diplomat. He was a pillar and an advocate of development and good governance. He was also an educationist. He was very central in advocating for the establishment of Tororo Teachers’ College based in Mukuju, Tororo Technical College and Asinge Secondary School. In addition to that, he was supportive to students.

Rt hon. Paul Etiang is the father to Flight Captain Mike Etiang, who is currently a chief pilot in the Uganda Airlines. He is the one who recently flew Uganda’s first airbus as it landed at Entebbe from Paris, France last month. (Applause) 

Rt hon. Paul Etiang succumbed to COVID-19 at the age of 82 at International Hospital, Kampala. We sincerely extend our condolences and sympathies to the family, the people of Tororo and the people of Uganda at large. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

This message is by the Prime Minister but read by the First Deputy Prime Minister. I beg to submit. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. Before I invite the Leader of the Opposition to speak, let me formally introduce Mrs Zahra Etiang. You are most welcome. (Applause) Our famous Captain Michael Etiang, Airbus and Bombardier, Arthur and Marion Busingye, Emmy, Isabella, Maria, Mr Patrick Igela and Mr Andrew Lukwago, a friend of the family. You are all welcome. (Applause) 

I would also like to welcome the family our late friend, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa: Mrs Christine Kisamba, Jacob Kisamba, Agnes Kisamba, Esther Kisamba Bwisho, Mr Michael Bwisho, Joseph Kabwama and Marian Kisamba Bwengye. (Applause) You are all welcome.

Let me now invite the Leader of the Opposition to make her contribution. 

11.53
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Rt hon. Paul Etiang who breathed his last on Thursday, 31 December 2020. I rise on behalf of the people of Gulu District and the Opposition fraternity. 

The demise of Rt hon. Paul Etiang is a great loss to this country. He was an icon, statesman and consummate diplomat who cherished exchange of ideas related to development. 

Rt hon. Etiang was a father, a leader and a role model who encouraged young people to uphold respect for humanity, embrace work and dissociate from corrupt tendencies.

He was a disciplined, hardworking public servant and a leader that served his country in various capacities and in all governments as a district officer in Tororo and Second Secretary to the Uganda Embassy. He was the First Secretary to the United Nations High Commission to Britain in the Government of Milton Obote, Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Labour and Disaster Preparedness. 

It is very unfortunate that Rt hon. Etiang becomes the Second Deputy Prime Minister, after our Deputy Prime Minister, Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, to succumb to COVID-19. 

Rt hon. Etiang played a major role in the liberalisation of media in the early 1990s. The late also fought and advocated for the growth of the Catholic faith and above all, the establishment of parishes to ease administration. 

He was also among the brains behind the establishment of Cairo International Bank, which has played a big role in boosting the country’s economy. 

Apart from his great service at national and international levels, he was a veteran of Tororo politics and instrumental in the agitation of self-autonomy for the Itesot in Tororo County. He always championed unity.

Today, I join the multitudes of Ugandans grieving the departure of the Rt hon. Etiang; from the National Resistance Movement to the people of Tororo and Uganda at large. To the family, please, accept my sincere condolences. 

I call upon the Government of Uganda to carry out free testing of COVID-19 in Uganda. I also call upon the public to up their guard against the deadly virus and also observe Standard Operating Procedures. 

Rt Hon. Paul Etiang, your legacy was one that was very inspiring and will shine on. We loved him but God loved him more. May the good Lord grant him eternal rest. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I do not see the leader of the independents. Hon. Aogon, can you speak on behalf of the independents?

11.58
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the independent MPs in the House, I stand to convey our condolences to the family and the nation at large. 

I went for the burial in Tororo. Madam Speaker, I start with the complaints; Government was not properly represented at the burial and I thought I should mention this. We were nearly left alone. Since I am speaking on behalf of the independents – 

THE SPEAKER: Wasn’t the minister in charge of minerals there?

MR AOGON: There was only one minister. We are here to acknowledge the contribution that the late made to this country. He served this country at a time when there was a lot of turbulence - there were many insurgencies - but you there was no trace of anything wrong in his leadership. He showed that he was a true Etesot and I am proud of him. (Applause)

We are also proud of what he did in terms of educating his family. We have just revamped our Uganda Airlines and the principal pilot comes from this very famous family. We want to appreciate the contribution of the late. He did a very great thing. This Parliament indeed deserves to pay tribute to this fallen hero.

To serve in the country in various responsibilities and you come out clean is not something simple. He served in Gulu, in Jinja and he came out smart. He served at the level of Deputy Prime Minister and he was not mingled up in issues of disaster preparedness like the posho or hoes that we heard about. He has never been identified with any saga. I really pay tribute to him because he is a hero who has left with clean hands. It is something that we must all emulate.

He served in the Soviet Union, in the Organisation of African Unity and the United Nations; he was everywhere around the world and nobody said that he stole any dollars. It is not something simple. He was a great man. He did all he could. We reached his home and the place was elegant. It shows that he was a leader that everybody should aim to follow. He defined what we should do to better the Uganda of tomorrow.

My question now is: what is Government doing for the families of the leaders that have fallen? We have seen past leaders, including Members of the Sixth or Seventh Parliament; if you look at their lives now, they are terrible. What are we doing? What is our strategy? What is our policy? What plan do we have for such people? What special treatment are we going to give to families of great men who have done a lot for this country? It is something that I would like to front to Government on behalf of the independents.

Otherwise, I second the motion fully. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Now that the movers have made their submissions, the rest will have a seamless start.

12.03
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on behalf of the people of Mbale and my own family to convey our sincere condolences to the family of late Paul Etiang.

He was a phone service officer and he grew in rank until he reached the rank of an ambassador. I would like you to understand the difference between a political appointed ambassador and a career diplomat. He rose through the ranks and he reached the highest rank in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs - ambassador. It is a rank which anyone who joins that ministry will aspire to get.

He served this country with one heart. He was a soft-spoken person, a man of good record. He never cared to serve this Government because of “so and so”. He was a civil servant and he remained a civil servant. He rose through the ranks and served in London and other places like the UN. He became the Assistant Secretary General of the African Union (AU).

I remember Paul Etiang very well. I went to Addis Ababa to attend the AU meeting and the late Mwalimu Nyerere was chairing the meeting. Paul Etiang had organised a dinner for us, delegates from Uganda, but we could not go to that dinner because he was Assistant Secretary General of the AU and we sat until 3.00 a.m. What a devoted person! What a devoted Ugandan! What a wonderful person!

He has left a legacy. When you go, what type of legacy shall you leave behind? You hear people have stolen left and right but Paul Etiang never stole. He remained a simple person, a uniting factor in Tororo. We have had problems in Tororo but he tried to bring together the people of Tororo so that there are no problems. 

We are mourning a great person, a great Ugandan. How I wish we, in politics, would emulate such a person to serve above self and go when we have left a wonderful legacy. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

12.06
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me add my voice in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the Rt Hon. Paul Etiang, on my behalf and on behalf of the people of Amuru District.

As a young girl, I grew up hearing names such as hon. Paul Etiang. I never got the opportunity to closely relate with him. I read extensively about him and hearing the tribute today, I can only say he was a great man. To the family, this should console you.

In a very particular way, I would like to thank and congratulate Capt. Michael Etiang for carrying on the legacy of your father. In Acholi, we believe that a father is not dead if he has children to carry on the mantle. 

I am sure that our father is not dead; he continues to live through all of you, both the men and women in that family, including Mama. So, carry on the legacy. You have heard all the beautiful attributes given to him. Do not put him to shame; you must all carry all these things forward. 

Secondly, I heard that he studied at Ngora High School and it got me thinking; we have so many traditional schools in Uganda that are no longer performing well. But going back to Ngora High School, is it at the same standard with when our late father attended it? We must be asking ourselves now and it is very critical.

As we pay tribute, we must look forward. These are the schools that groomed key people in Uganda but how are they performing, how much has Government put into these schools to make sure that they are strong and are helping many people?

We have also heard that our father was an educationist and if we are sincerely paying tribute to him today, the question to Government today is; what are we doing differently to make sure that this legacy does not go down and our children go to schools where the facilities, infrastructure, the teachers are there to attend to them? If we do this, then our tribute to hon. Paul Orono Etiang will not go in vain but instead improve the education system that we are talking about.

Allow me end here and pay my deepest condolence to the family and I wish you well. Rest assured of my prayers for the family to stand together to carry on the legacy that started long ago and continues to grow, may God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Are there any Mwiri Old Boys, the alumni of Busoga College?
 
12.10
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to pay tribute to my OB of Ngora High School, where I studied. 

We have had activities concerning that school and my late OB was very instrumental; sometimes he was not available but he would send a message and a contribution. On behalf of the OBs and OGs of Ngora High School, we would like to send our condolences to the family and the people of Tororo for having one of those few powerful men who lived a life of simplicity, full understanding and care for the community.

Secondly, on behalf of the people of Ngora and Teso in general, since I am the spokesman for Teso Parliamentary Group, I would like to bring my condolences to the entire family and the people of Tororo for the great loss that we have witnessed. We have lost a very wonderful man.

The few times I met him, he was a humorous man, who would want to hear every statement you made. He was not the type of man who would say it is okay; he would listen to you carefully because he wanted to understand what you were talking about. That was Papa Paul Orono Etiang.

Madam Speaker, allow me read one verse from the Bible, Romans 14:8 which says, “If we live, we live for the Lord and if we die, we die for the Lord.” Therefore, whether we live or die, we belong to God. This is an encouragement for the family that all of us will live, walk and serve because of God. Now that we have lost our Papa, I would like to appeal to the family to remain united to continue promoting his legacy because he was caring.

He loved education because in the entire Uganda, we have a principal pilot in the names of Micheal Etiang. If he was not concerned about education, his children would have been beggars in the city but because he believed that a situation can be changed, that is why I am happy and I would like to appreciate him. 

He was not corrupt; these days there are a lot of investigations but I have not heard of a report that he was a corrupt man. He was investigated, having rose through the ranks right from district administrator, Prime Minister, Foreign Affairs minister to an ambassador. What a great career, Papa Orono Etiang had!

My prayer to the family is that do not destroy the name and legacy of our Papa, a man who understood the history of Uganda. When we had the insurgency in Teso, he was one of the people who promoted peace, discussed, debated and tried to look for solutions for the peace and security of Teso.

That is why I am proud of him. Although he has gone, I pray that the powerful God who is in heaven will preserve him and give a powerful seat such that as we talk here-in my opinion we believe that when we die, we just change life so I presume by now he is seeing us talk the powerful things that he has done here on earth. 

I also pray that God continues preserving and protecting the entire family today. Thank you, Madam Speaker. May the family be blessed in Christ whom I pray. 

12.15
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion as moved by the Deputy Prime Minister. On behalf of the people of Kasilo County, Serere District, I convey our condolences to Toto, my brothers, sisters and the people of Tororo on this demise.

I was one of the few people that attended the burial in Tororo together with hon. Silas Aogon but I would like to appreciate the role the Government played toward the burial arrangements; to ensure that we accord our own a decent burial.

A number of speakers have spoken about how wonderful Papa Paul Etiang was. He was a decent man of integrity, who loved education. He raised his family as one and that is why you see them seated in the gallery as one. 

I would like to appreciate Mama for raising such a wonderful family. When you hear that Capt. Etiang came to pilot after the start of the Uganda Airline, it is not a surprise. You would have read that Paul Etiang refused to go and work in the international community and decided to come and work back home. I am not surprised that my brother decided to leave and come back to settle for Uganda Airlines. Thank you very much, my brother.

I am not forgetting that the flying school is in Teso and I am not surprised that, that was the profession he took. My late brother was also a pilot. We pray and also ask the Government, again, that, please, do not forget Soroti Flying School. You need to lift it to the right level because you call it “the school of excellence”. It should live up to that.

Madam Speaker, I would also like to thank you. When we had the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference in Uganda, you instructed us who were part of the organising committee to invite the Rt Hon. Paul Etiang to be in attendance. This morning, when we were going through the magazine that we are going to publish, I saw his picture, where he was seated with Bishop Egesa.

Therefore, when we launch and distribute the magazines, I think we should send one to the family. I thank you, Madam Speaker, for recognising him for the role that he played in this country.

The Iteso Cultural Union and the kingdom of Teso have lost a great leader and a great person who supported the Teso cultural institution. One thing that Paul Etiang loved was to see Tororo District get its status as a district.

I ask Government to speed up the process of granting Tororo the status they have been crying for. Everything has been said; why would we take so long to simply declare Tororo District?

Paul Etiang was one of the first people to establish a radio station in Tororo. We have been told by the Prime Minister that he was a person who pushed for theliberalisation of the airwaves. I am not surprised that he started that in that part of the country.

Madam Speaker, because of little time, I want to say that Maama, we shall keep praying for you and the family. We pray that the Government does all it can to support the family. We shall continue being your voice and part and parcel of the family.

We have lost an advisor and a great son of Teso and this country. We thank God for the many years he has lived. It is not easy to live for all of those years.

It would be very painful for a parent to bury his children. We thank God that he lived and educated many people in his community. We are seeing the fruits of that great son of Teso and Uganda. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Hon. Baba-Diri -

12.20
MS MARGARET BABA-DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to our gallant son, Paul Etiang. I had been hearing this name since I was young, until I came to Parliament in 1996 and met him. 

Paul Etiang was a very dedicated Ugandan and he served Uganda with distinction. That is why he has been there, patiently, throughout all the regimes. He served in Obote I Government. Even during Amin’s time, when other people ran away, he was still there as an ambassador, serving under Idi Amin. When NRM came around, he came back. That shows that he was a man who was hardworking and had Uganda at heart.

He was also an educationist. He educated not only his children but also the children around him in Tororo. He made sure that the schools served the children. He was very hardworking and we shall remember him for that.

Despite him rising through all these ranks of Prime Minister and so on, he was a very humble man. You would come and greet him and he would give you time and talk to you. He was not proud at all. In fact, hon. Etiang deserved a decent state burial, if it were not for this COVID-19.
I would like to say that COVID-19 is finishing all our elderly people. Very soon, we shall not have them there. When shall we have the vaccines to save the remaining few? It is very important that we have the vaccine now so that we do not lose more elderly people.

To the family, I thank you very much for being with him when he was sick, until the time he died. Your family will be remembered for what you have done for him. 

May his soul rest in eternal peace.

12.24
MR ANDREW KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also second the motion, as we pay tribute to hon. Paul Etiang.

On behalf of the people of Toroma and the Teso fraternity, we have lost a great leader in Teso. Teso region has lost a leader; a true son of Teso. He was a uniting personality for the development of Teso and, particularly, in the education sector.

when Paul Etiang was around, he used to love education. He used to move to all schools in Teso, especially Ngora High School, Teso College Aloet and Tororo College. I think that is why education in Teso, by then, was very good.

The second thing I would like to mention about the late is that he played a very big role in the peace building of Teso, together with the late Bishop Ilukor and the late Bishop Odongo, during the rebel activities in Teso. He ensured peace, which led to the development of that region.

The Government should try to improve on education, particularly in Teso sub-region. Also, the masks, which were given to the people are now worn out and the Government should try to add more masks to the people, in order to control this COVID-19.

May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have hon. Oketayot, hon. Angura and then hon. Opendi. We have another tribute for DrKisambaMugerwa.

12.26
MS LOWILA OKETAYOT (NRM, Woman Representative, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I also rise to support the motion to pay tribute to the late Rt Hon. Paul Etiang.

Personally, I did not get the opportunity of knowing him closely. However, following from what has been highlighted in the motion and what has been coming out from the public from the time he passed on in December, it shows the late Rt Hon. Paul Etiang made great contributions to this country and indeed, he left a great legacy.

I would like to take note of something that has come out strongly, that the late Rt Hon. Paul Etiang, during his active days, championed unity among the people of Tororo. Many of us have been following what is happening in Tororo amongst the leaders. Sincerely, we shall miss him a lot.

He also mentored many people. I have been following what many people have said from the time he passed on. I discovered that he mentored many people. It is, therefore, in order to pay tribute to him and we would like to appreciate you, Madam Speaker, for giving this time to accord him this tribute.

To the family, we share and understand the pain of losing a loved one. I would like to request you to find comfort in the fact that it is only God who has the power to give and take away life. Therefore, let us use this opportunity to thank God for the time he gave the late Rt Hon. Paul Etiang to live and make a contribution to this country. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

12.28
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in supporting the motion. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank you, in particular, for according us this opportunity to pay our last respects to the late Ambassador Paul Etiang, especially here in Parliament, so that Members have the opportunity to share this grief with the family and the country at large. Thank you very much. 

Allow me to also thank the Government - His Excellency the President, the Prime Minister and all leaders of the Government who came together to share with us during this difficult moment by supporting us in time of need. I would like to also thank the family for taking care of papa during that very difficult time. I know it was very painful, but since the Lord decided that it was his time, let us allow him go. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

As someone who has been talking at all functions after papa died, I would like to make a few remarks. One, many of you who have known papa or associated with him will attest to the fact that the late Rt Hon. Paul Etiang was an international person; he made friends internationally. He was also a national person. When it came to issues and affairs of the country, we all know the contributions he made. No wonder, all those who have spoken, even those who did not know him, heard about him through the work that he did while he was a minister and a leader in various capacities as he served this country.

I would like to also add that even at the lower level, the late Rt Hon. Paul Etiang was a down-to-earth gentleman. Whereas most of his time he lived abroad, whenever he came home, papa would not forget his old friends he lived with during his teenage days. I remember one incident when my father died, he was out of the country but one day I was surprised to see a car coming to our compound. When I went to receive the visitors, I saw papa Paul Etiang who had come to empathise with us for having lost our father. 

He remembered all his friends that he associated with when they were in the village before he went off for his international assignments. Therefore, I would like to thank the family for always encouraging papa to remember those that he had left at home during his diplomatic engagements.

You will also recall that while abroad, papa participated in purchasing very strategic properties for this country, including the house that we have in the UK. That was papa’s arrangement. He negotiated for it. He used to tell us how he was involved in those negotiations and how he saved this country a lot of money by getting these properties at very fair rates. You can see the kind of integrity the person we are talking about had. He was a very straightforward person. This country benefited a lot from him while he was abroad. He saved a lot of resources in the transactions that he also conducted for this country. 

Many have talked about papa’s involvement and relationship here. Back home, he hosted over four presidents as his personal friends. They slept at his home in Tororo and even in the village. You can see the kind of loss this country has suffered. He was involved in relationships not only at service level but also at personal level. Thank you very much, toto, for hosting those dignitaries and for supporting papa whenever they were with us at home in Tororo and in Senior Quarters. 

Papa has gone. He participated a lot – You have heard colleagues from Teso talking about the insurgency. We did not only have an insurgency in Teso, the motherland, but we also had one in Tororo. Papa’s contribution towards harmonising the volatile situation that was running out of hand leaves a lot to be desired. He did all it took together with his friends and returned all those who had intentions of continuing to live abroad. They came back home and we joined hands. No wonder, Tororo and other places are now settled. This was because of the effort papa had put in towards peaceful co-existence in this country.

Madam Speaker, as hon. Okupa said, papa was so passionate about the issues of Tororo. He wanted the division of Tororo to be very specific and concluded while he was alive. He gave an opportunity to all those who wanted to verify anything to do with the boundary of Tororo. He allowed that to be done. 

The truth will, however, remain that these two counties need to get their own independence as separate districts. No wonder, after all that has been done, including our London trip, papa has gone. I would like to request the Government, through the Prime Minister, to grant this wish. How I wish it could come very soon - that Tororo District be divided into two so that each county gets a district status.

I know, as many have said here, while papa rests, he will definitely have his eyes on us and the Government, wishing that this is concluded very soon. Where necessary, Mr Prime Minister should give papa an opportunity before his eyes finally close to see the division of Tororo come to pass. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank, colleagues who attended the burial. I also would like to thank you, for joining us at All Saints and all the other leaders who participated in supporting us towards the sendoff of papa.

Thank you very much, hon. Okupa, hon. Silas Aogon, hon. Adoa; the honourable minister was there to oversee the function on behalf of Government. I would like to thank hon. Mike Mukula and many colleagues who contributed financially and otherwise for a peaceful sendoff of papa.

To Government, we are very grateful and indebted to you, for the state burial that papa was given, maybe the first of its kind in our district and the region at large. We are very grateful and we thank you for that.

Finally to Toto, thank you for the wonderful messages that most of the people who supported us have received. Everyone I have met has told me that you have reached them in one way or the other to appreciate their support. Let us remain together and continue to relate with the people left behind and also those here as we keep waiting for the 40 days to pass for us to have a service again at home, as we remember papa.

May his soul rest in eternal peace. Eyalama noi.

12.38
MR GEOFFREY MACHO (NRM, Busia Municipality, Busia): Madam Speaker, since the elections, I have never congratulated you; congratulations! We thank God that again, you will come to bid your candidature for the Eleventh Parliament; some of us are ready for the good work you are doing for this country.

Madam Speaker, this is a very special day in my life to make a statement about Mzee Paul Etiang. I used to call him Mzee Paul Etiang because he was a very good friend of my grandfather, Mzee Kyangomacho. Mzee Paul Etiang was the first person in the world to make me speak on the radio for the first time. This makes him special to me and truly, I will not sit back and not bid him farewell on this day.

However, I believe Bukedi has lost a great son and Uganda has lost a statesman and this country - although my colleagues, hon. Angura, hon. Elijah Okupa, hon. Ababiku said that the elders are leaving, the elders are dying in this generation because Government has left them to God.

I have a suggestion to draw the attention of the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that we, and I believe in particular, we have senior citizens dying during this time and we are blaming it on COVID-19 and other diseases but Government has left them to sit at home and to God to take care of them, moreover, they are your age mates. 

Some of us believe that we should copy from other countries that are developed. The more elderly you are in America or South Africa, the more the Government needs you because you have the brains and history. I, therefore, suggest to the Rt Hon. Prime Minister that Government should have a data of senior citizens who have taken part and built a brick on to this country, Uganda so that when they age, they are not left in the village because you all know politics has no pension and most of these people are politicians.

Therefore, it is my prayer that something special must be done and since we are all in Government, such that the senior elders are also placed somewhere to have attention so that we can use their history. Today, we are talking about Mzee Paul Etiang, tomorrow we shall talk about Mzee Aggrey Awori who has been left and dumped for God. 

I, therefore, would like to suggest to Government through you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister, that we should not forget the senior citizens who have contributed to the development of this country and we should not forget their children. Developed countries always mentor children of senior citizens so that they do not disappear from the system. 

Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish him to eternal rest. 

12.42
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama South County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to join my colleagues and indeed this Parliament in paying tribute to the gallant son from Tororo, a mukedi, a man who lived beyond his tribe and region.

We have heard testimonies that the Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang was an ambassador and among the first few people from Tororo that I knew as ambassadors and how diplomats take themselves. One of them was the late Ambassador Akosofeli Michael Ogola who was a very close friend to Ambassador Paul Etiang.

They were people who would not raise their voices; they spoke with dignity, clarity of mind and purpose that even when they were spoke, they would capture your attention. How we miss to emulate them in this generation which is louder than the loud speakers. We shout these days, Madam Speaker. 

However, Ambassador Paul Etiang, like the mover of the motion said, served Uganda with dedication and patriotism; that was true. I would add that he served Uganda and the world with distinction and integrity. One of the few people from Tororo that you never heard of that he went to jail over corruption scandals. What can we say in return to you Rt Hon. Paul Etiang but to thank you for the legacy?

You have left a challenge for us and we know, as students from the greater Tororo which included Butaleja, the greater Bukedi, he hosted us from 1997 and was a regular host of the students association where I was a speaker; not the Speaker of Parliament. I was the speaker of that association from 1998 to 2000 and he would host us and inculcate into us the etiquette and diplomacy and tell us about the whole of Bukedi.

Madam Speaker, it is a pain that to some of us, his death took place when we were in the trenches and we were not able to accord him the tribute. He played a role in uniting Tororo. He was a polished diplomat and devout Christian; an Anglican christian that even when he retired, there is one time they had to remove the asbestos in St Peter’s Cathedral Tororo and he personally was there throughout the whole exercise and gave generously.

Ambassador Paul Etiang, though you have gone, the works you did are evident that you were a very generous person, devoted and personally supervised the reroofing of that church. The Christians of that church would still join me in thanking you even in your death.

We talk about class. I never saw Ambassador Paul Etiang - either at his home or anywhere else - with a creased shirt, unpolished shoes or unkempt hair. I think he had a great wife and I must thank her for the great job she did. Without the help of the wife, I believe he would not have been what he was.

Madam Speaker, on the Tororo issue, I remember that Ambassador Paul Etiang was one of the guests that this Parliament invited. That was my last time to meet him. 

Before I came here, we were reviewing the magazine for the Commonwealth Parliamentary Conference (CPC) here in a meeting. There is a picture of him seated together with the Bishop of Bukedi. I was there with him. One thing he said to me was, “My son, find time and come home so that we can discuss a few things.” I have to first apologise that I never got that time to go there. But on issues of Tororo, he was the first person to raise that issue of the division. I believe Government will find a solution. I do not think that he raised the issue because he is an Itesot but I believe he did so because he wanted the services to be nearer the people.

We should not – and this is what I told him; “Sir, we are now tribalising the agitation for the district.” There is no way in Tororo you can make a tribal district because the tribes are on both sides. We cannot do that. I wish he were here now, I would have implored him to join me and others in agitating for a city status to subdue tribalism.

The late hon. Paul Etiang has a radio station called Rock Mambo. Whereas hon. Macho said that he was the first to give him the opportunity, I enjoyed free airtime and discounts. Whenever I could find him at the station, he would say, “My son, how much are they asking from you? Okay, manager, cut it by a half.”

When his death occurred, during this campaign, I was not able to use Rock Mambo because the person who could give me a discount or free airtime was not there.

We shall miss him in Tororo as a person who called for unity in diversity, a polished gentleman who by now - in the latest Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) language - could be referred to as a “Wikipedia”. He had been our encyclopaedia; a dictionary of all sorts. He joins the rest like the late Henry Obbo Joseph and Ambassador Ogola.

We wish you the very best. Ahead of you and me who are listening, we have the same challenge. We do not know how to avoid this challenge called death. Death is a bad reaper. It takes the ripe and even the unripe. We still needed Ambassador Paul Etiang in Tororo to resolve the issues that would be helpful for the development of Tororo and indeed, Bukedi. May his soul rest in eternal peace. (Applause)

12.51
THE Minister of state for mineral development (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to second the motion and say that we have lost a great statesman who served this country and beyond, with excellence.

I would like to first correct some statements that were made by colleagues; first, by hon. Aogon that the State was not well represented. We all know that the burial of Mzee Paul Etiang took place on the 7th of January and this was a critical time when many of our colleagues were actually out there fighting for their survival and looking forward to re-election.

I did represent His Excellency the President at this burial and Government also made the necessary contribution. Hon. Hellen Adoa, the Minister of State for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (Fisheries), equally joined us at the burial.

Secondly, I would like to also state that Mzee Paul Etiang, from what we learnt later, did not go to Ngora High School although he had wanted to. He was admitted in 1951 to Busoga College, Mwiri but some detractors came and told him that his eyes would be bewitched and he would go blind. We all know that the people of Busoga suffer from bacterial infection that affects the eyes. Therefore, he lost out.

He later joined Busoga College, Mwiri in 1955 where he met Mzee Rt hon. Kirunda Kivejinja and they both went to university.

Mzee Etiang was a real diplomat. Although he joined politics, he still carried through his diplomacy and was highly respected. He was a God-fearing person. Hon. Oboth has talked about his contribution to St Peter’s Cathedral, Tororo. That was not all. He made several contributions to several churches but most importantly, the church where he was baptised from - All Saints Church, Kwapa.

We have a wonderful building there and we organised a fundraising in December 2019, which His Excellency the President officiated. The structure is near completion. That was his brain child because he said that it is where he was baptised from.

Regarding the district issue, His Excellency the President, before proceeding to officiate at the fundraising drive for All Saints Cathedral, Kwapa met Mzee Paul Etiang and a few elders. He did pledge that he would handle the Tororo issue after elections. We all look forward to that.

I would like to also state that let us not run away from where we were. A team was sent to London using Government resources to bring a clear map for Tororo; after allegations had been made that the one in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development had been tampered with. We want a report from London and then we can see how to move on.

Mzee Ambassador Paul Etiang was a very generous person who supported many disadvantaged children. He contributed towards the education of many and supported many community initiatives. 

He also singlehandedly sponsored the Tororo Open Golf Tournament for six consecutive years. We need to appreciate him for supporting this activity, which not so many people actually join.

He invested in Tororo, something some of our leaders do not even do. He put up that radio station, Rock Mambo Radio, not because he was looking for income but to support and help provide employment. It is also for us to have a radio station where people could get information from. We used to connect to Butebo Channel, which was not regular. We need to appreciate him for that. 

I would like to end by saying that it is quite amazing that somebody served in various capacities for 45 years and beyond and they did not find any dirt on him, yet there were very many temptations. Can we emulate the late Ambassador Paul Etiang and know that the offices that we occupy are to serve humanity and the people, not to enrich ourselves? 

Madam Speaker, we would like to thank God that the man who actually flagged off Uganda Airlines as the Minister of Transport then in 1977, when we had our own planes, had his son there fly our planes back home when Uganda Airlines was revived. Thank you very much, Michael, because you are a lawyer who moved on to another career. 

With those few remarks, I would like to say that we shall definitely miss Ambassador Paul Etiang. At 82 years old, he could still have lived up to 100 and beyond but it is very unfortunate that the monster called COVID took him. 

He kept himself at home. We lost so many prominent people and he used to send condolences without attending funerals because of this COVID situation. Unfortunately, COVID followed him wherever he was and took him. May the soul of the deceased rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you may be aware that the Rt Hon. Moses Ali worked with our distinguished Ambassador. Let me ask him to just say a few remarks in his capacity as a comrade and friend before we close.  

12.58 
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was, of course, not aware that I would be playing this role today, so it is not a planned thing. At the same time, I am grateful to the Almighty for making it possible for me to do so. 

When I appeared here before, I was representing the Prime Minister. I am glad that the Speaker has allowed me to share with you my experience with our brother, the late Rt Hon. Paul Orono Etiang. 

From 1971 to 1979, there was a Government that many people refer to as a military government- of course, there were no elections anyway – and some people call it Amin’s Government. It is whatever you want to call it but it was there and I happened to be part of it. That Government came to power in 1971 and they displaced many people. At the same time, it came with new people because he needed people to help him run the country. From the army, I was one of those and from among the diplomats, Paul Etiang was one of those. 

Madam Speaker, indeed, we had a Cabinet that comprised of many types of people including the military and diplomats; we all met in Cabinet. We were all young. You can see from the record that he was born in 1938 and I was born in 1939; just a difference of one year. 

During the time we worked together, we met in Cabinet every week and we valued the late Etiang’s contribution as a diplomat. Those days, of course, the country was under attack by everybody everywhere. All the same, we had to sit and continue managing the country. Whenever Paul talked or gave advice, he did so based on his background of diplomacy and we would take it very seriously, which helped a lot. I remember now that even for the eight years this Government remained in power, I think some of this could be attributed to the good counsel from our brother and others. 

Of course, we are not forgetting other people but Paul was a kind man and if you talked to him one on one, he left you without doubt. He did not have any bad feelings but would help if he had to by telling you the truth. In most cases, the truth hurts and many people do not want to be told the truth but it is the best medicine. If you do not accept it, then you are in trouble. Paul could give you that medicine and we admired him for it. Therefore, we grieve. 

For most of these children that I see now, – probably, some of them were not born when we worked together with their father – it is good information for them that we worked together and their father has left a very good legacy. I am happy and proud that our son is heading this “bird” in the air. I wish him success there. That is very good because it makes us remember our brother, Paul. Please, know that we are here for you in case you need to consult. 

Thank you, once again, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am happy to be party to this contribution to the motion. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister and the honourable members. I think we just need to record properly that each time hon. Etiang had to choose between Uganda and anything else, he chose Uganda. 

In 1971, he accompanied President Obote to Singapore when the coup occurred. When they got to Tanzania, he was asked to make a choice to either stay or go away but he chose Uganda. He came back and became part of the Government. The second time is when he was at the United Nations when the NRM Government was settling down. He again was asked the same question, to either stay in New York or go home and he chose Uganda. We really want to thank him for that. 

Honourable members, I would like to thank you for your presence. I would like to put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do pay tribute as proposed by the Prime Minister. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Clerk will extract the Hansard and the tribute and pass it on to the family. Thank you very much. 


MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. DR WILBERFORCE KISAMBA MUGERWA, FORMER MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR BAMUNANIKA, MINISTER AND CHAIRPERSON OF THE NATIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY

1.07
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (Rtd) Moses Ali): Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa, moved under Rule 55 of the Rules of procedure of Parliament.

“Whereas the Parliament of Uganda received with deep sorrow the sad news of the demise of hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa, a former Member of Parliament, Minister and Chairperson of the National Planning Authority of Uganda, which occurred on Thursday, 7 January 2021, at Mulago hospital;

AWARE that hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa has had a distinguished career spanning over 50 years serving in various capacities both in the public and private sector as well as the international arena;

RECOGNISING that hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa diligently served Uganda in several key responsibilities which include the following;

    a. Principal Agricultural Officer for East Mengo and the Western region of Uganda and later Principal Agricultural Economist in the 1970s
    b. Member of Parliament for Luweero South East from 1980 to 1985
    c. Chairperson Luweero District from 1986 to 1991
    d. Member of Parliament for Bamunanika County from 1991 to 1995
    e. Cabinet minister holding different portfolios in the Government of Uganda including Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Minister for General Duties – Office of the Prime Minister, Minister of State in charge of Planning and Rural Finance (Entandikwa) in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Minister of State in the Office of the President responsible for rehabilitation of the former war ravaged areas in Luweero Triangle from 1991 to 2004
    f. Division Director, International Service for National Agricultural Research under the International Food Policy Research institute based in Addis Ababa Ethiopia from 2006-2008
    g. Chairperson, National Planning Authority of Uganda from 2008-2018
    h. Chancellor, Ndejje University from 2018 until his demise;

APPRECIATING that hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa was a diligent leader who immeasurably participated in shaping the destiny of Uganda and served Uganda with dedication and patriotism;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this Parliament as follows;
    1. That Parliament collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, friends and the people of Uganda for the loss of a distinguished citizen.

    2. That this Parliament takes cognisance of the dedicated service and contribution that hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa rendered to the people of Uganda. I beg to move.”

THE SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? (Interjections) The motion is seconded by all the Members in the House. Proceed.

(Motion seconded.)

GEN. (RTD) MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, on 8 January 2021, the country was yet again hit with sad news of the passing on of our friend and comrade, hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa. Dr Mugerwa was a distinguished agricultural economist, politician and academician.

At the time of his death, he was Chairman of the Uganda Microfinance Support Centre after effectively serving as Chairman of the National Planning Authority. At the National Planning Authority, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa provided sound leadership that steered the Authority from its inception to a highly respected agency of Government that it is today.

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was born on 7 July 1945 in Bamunanika County, Luwero District. He attended Muyembe Tree Nursery School in Bamunanika and Wampeewo Junior Primary School. He then transferred to Mukono Bishops Senior Secondary School where he completed his ordinary level education. Thereafter, he completed his advanced level education at Kololo High School in Kampala. 

In 1968, he was admitted to Makerere College and later joined Makerere University where he studied agricultural economics.

In 1971, Kisamba Mugerwa joined civil service, serving as Principal Agricultural Officer. After a few years, he enrolled for a Master’s of Science degree and also achieved a doctorate of philosophy degree in Agricultural Economics. 

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa then became a Research Fellow with Makerere Institute of Social Research. He was also a visiting professor of International Studies in Rural Development at Williams College Massachusetts, USA.

In 1980, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa contested for Member of Parliament and won on the Democratic Party ticket to represent the people of Luwero South East from 1980 t0 1985.

After the National Resistance Movement took power in 1986, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa successfully served as the first elected local council V chairman of Luweero District from 1986 to 1991. He was elected a Member for Parliament in 1991 representing Bamunanika County.

Due to his dedication and commitment towards work, he was entrusted with several leadership roles where he served in portfolios such as minister without portfolio in the office of the Prime Minister, Minister of State for Finance, Planning and Economic Development and later, as Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Dr Kisamba Mugwera quit elective politics in 2004 a satisfied man. After participating in democratic elective politics, he desired to have a stable Uganda where people could freely engage in democratic politics.

In 2018, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa authored a book titled; Luwero triangle in the Limelight in which he explained how the liberation war devastated the area; post recovery war efforts and issues that still hinder the development of the area.

In his concluding remarks in the book, he noted that the Luwero area was still traumatised requiring continued deliberate effort to address the effects of war.

It is against this recognition of the effects of war and displacement and other historical issues that Government established affirmative action for Luwero, Northern Uganda, Karamoja, Teso, Bunyoro and other regions to address these historical disadvantages.

The ever jolly warm and humorous Dr Kisamba Mugerwa’s last public function was at Makerere University where he addressed the college of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences Policy Seminar and called for increased investment in research, extension of water for production, marketing and processing in the country.

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa succumbed to COVID-19 on 8 January 2021 at Mulago National Referral Hospital. We extend our sincere sympathies and deep condolences to the family, relatives and country at large.  May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

1.20
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Gulu nad the Opposition fraternity, I rise to second the motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to a fine gentleman, senior research associate, agricultural economist, skillful servant, great leader and academician; the late hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa who passed on 8 January 2021 at Mulago Hospital. I humbly join fellow Ugandans to recognise and appreciate the distinguished carreer of hon. Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa that covers over 50 years serving in various capacities both in public and private sector, as well as on the international arena.

He was a former Member of Parliament, minister and chairperson of the National Planning Authority of Uganda; Director of International Service for National Agricultural Research Division. At the time of his death, he was the Chancellor of Ndejje University.

He will be greatly remembered for his abundant contribution to the agriculture sector where he championed model gardening, which helped community residents improve their farming skills.

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a rare personality of our times. He accepted squatters on his land at Kikonda village as tenants. They paid sympathetic ground rent locally known as “busuulu” without any disturbance.

He championed the sensitisation of the colonial land system that deprived the poor of land to cultivate. Through his research papers, some of these long-standing injustices need to be redressed for Ugandans to attain sustainable peace, security and ultimately, wealth.

Madam Speaker, it is also reported that at the celebration of his 70th birthday in July 2015, Dr Kisamba told his guests that he finished his mission in politics but loved to see Ugandans enjoy true democratic principles. 

He was cognisant of the fact that our politics is practiced undemocratically and Ugandans deserved better, I pray that we the leaders will listen to his voice.

To the family and Uganda at large, accept my sincere condolences. I pray that the almighty rest the soul of hon. Kisamba in eternal peace. Thank you.

1.24
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank you for according Parliament this very important opportunity to pay tribute to the gallant sons of this country that we lost at a time when the country was in the campaigns for general elections.

In the same vein, allow me to my tribute to the family of the late Paul Etiang for whom the House has just paid the last respect.

God ordained it upon them that on this day, the country should pay tribute in the presence of their families for the service they rendered to this country. From burying the late Etiang on the 7th and also losing on the same day a great son in the name of Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. There is something that God really wanted this country not to forget, Madam Speaker.

I happen to sit on the Committee on National Economy, which is chaired by hon. Syda Bbumba. Recently, when the committee was processing a loan facility for a solar-enabled irrigation scheme, we happened to visit the home of the late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa in Luweero. It was my first time to reach his home. What I saw at his farm mesmerised me. What the Rt Hon. Prime Minister has elaborated here about his academic accomplishments is exactly what he put on ground at his home village. We give him credit because there could be no other place to visit as a benchmark for Parliament to take a decision, other than the home of this distinguished gentleman.

Madam Speaker, as we pay tribute, we are at a loss. This is a loss that came at a time when we did not expect it. We lost Dr Kisamba Mugerwa at a time when he was still the Chairperson of National Planning Authority, the Chancellor of Ndejje University and a sitting member on very important governing bodies of our academic institutions like Makerere University. That means we still had more to expect from him.

The country has lost one of the vision bearers of Vision 2040. We are rolling out the National Development Plan III, which is shifting from sector-based to programme-based budgeting. This is a brain that we expected to advise the country as we transition from sector-based to programme-based budgeting. You can imagine the gap from his background, experience and level of knowledge.

Madam Speaker, we are mourning with heavy hearts because these are brains that have walked the path of development. These are people who have been sharing experiences of the past with us, the young ones, so that we guide this country on the right path of development.

I mourn because this Parliament, for the first time in history, granted 15 regional and strategic cities, which were the brainchild of Dr Kisamba Mugerwa and others. However, these cities have not yet taken off. How are we going to inspire and mentor these cities to give us the benefits that we envisioned when they were planned for in Vision 2040? That is the gentleman we are mourning, Madam Speaker.

As a country, we have lost a great brain. We sympathise with Uganda, but God’s time is always the best. We had him, he made his contribution and when his time came, he left us. We want to extend our condolences to the family for having looked after this great gentleman, who I am sure, like all of us here, dedicated most of his time to serving the country and left little time for the family. I am very sure that the family is the greatest loser because many times, a politician’s time is a full time job; 24 hours –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude.

MR ATIKU: Thank you. When you lose a politician of Dr Kisamba Mugerwa’s stature, with all the responsibilities that were still on his desk, you can imagine the kind of loss the family has suffered. So, we condole with you. We pray that his departure will yield in other forms, spiritually, upon the children and the people he has left behind in the country called Uganda.

We continue to pray for you and I wish you a peaceful rest until we join you. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. May God bless you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the movers have presented; can I have contributions from the Floor now. 

1.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand on my own behalf, on behalf of the people who I represent in Bunya County West, Mayuge District, the agriculture fraternity and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to condole with the family upon the big loss of a statesman. He was a dedicated and committed person, who served this country with all his energy. His results of serving this country could be seen in all aspects of life.

I personally got to know Dr Kisamba Mugerwa when I was an agricultural officer and he was my sector minister then. He was a very approachable person. When we were discussing issues of agriculture in Iganga District, where I was working then, he was a minister but approachable and readily practical in sorting out issues.

We really need to appreciate some of the things and have a lot of pain having lost Dr Kisamba Mugerwa when he was still strong and able to serve this country. I remember Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was one of the architects and champions of Plan for Modernization of Agriculture. This is after the Head of State, Gen. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, talked about the need to modernize agriculture. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was one of the brains that put together what the President had directed and came up with a framework onto which the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture was put in place.

When he was appointed Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture had seven pillars. Of the seven pillars, three were housed in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, that is, research, extension and agricultural mechanisation. The other pillars were in other sectors. 

When he was appointed minister, he came in and actualised the pillars that were under the agriculture sector. The research pillar, which was under agriculture, was actualised and we came up with National Agricultural Research Organisation (NARO), which, up to this day, is still a very strong organ of Government and really serving this country.

He also came up with the other pillar of agricultural extension, which is the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS). It came up and did its work and it is still here, to date. 

The other pillar that was in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries was agricultural mechanisation. He tried to revitalise Namelere but on that one, he had not finished. Under the leadership of hon. Ssempijja, we are really moving and putting Namelere back. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Kisamba Mugerwa was a very practical person. He worked in the ministry with all the passion. He led the technical people and to date, they still talk about him. I will give an example; when there was an outbreak of the banana bacteria wilt, he personally led the technical people to ensure that this disease was wiped out of this country. He would personally lead the teams to the farmers’ gardens and plantations and take off his jacket. 

While donning a white shirt, he would not shy away to get a panga and clean the banana plantations especially the ‘male’ part that was the source of the disease. At the risk of the sap getting onto his white shirt and necktie, he would still do it anyway. This helped the farmers to really adopt very fast and we kicked this disease out of the country. 

You would also appreciate Dr Kisamba Mugerwa’s simplicity. He loved people. He loved his staff that he worked with and on this, I would like to say that he was a man of rare character. He resided in Luwero when he was a minister and I think that was because his family and farm were there. He would commute from Luwero every morning and he would give a lift to his driver from Entebbe and drop him to Kampala. Then, he would give a lift to his Secretary and Office Messenger to Namelere where they stayed. Thereafter, he would continue to Luwero. 

He was a family man who loved his family and he loved his staff. Imagine he would not go with his driver but instead, he would give him a lift to Kampala. In the morning while on his way, he would pick his staff from Namelere and his driver from Kampala to go to Entebbe. He was truly a man of rare character.

He was a very strong researcher. Despite his other responsibilities, like when he was a minister, Dr Kisamba would go and spend a lot of time at Makerere University at the Makerere Institute of Social Research (MISR). At the time, he was heading a programme there. He would work long hours even on weekends. He would meet some of the staff in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries even late in the night at the ministry to do the work of the ministry.

He made friends both locally, nationally and internationally. The story told by some of the staff at the ministry was that when he became a Division Director in Addis Ababa and when our staff went there, he mingled with them. They were junior officers then but he welcomed them. He invited them to his house and treated them to a banquet. The staff felt they had their own in Addis Ababa. 

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a committed, dedicated, humorous and hardworking person. He was an intelligent character and a scholar. He was a very knowledgeable person. He stood for truth and he was ready to lose alone especially if he believed that what he was standing for was the truth. He was a warm gentleman. He was above petty issues. He was a respected person.

He was a statesman who served humanity with education and commitment, humility and patriotism. We shall miss him. Unfortunately, he succumbed to COVID-19. We thank God for his life and pray that God rests his soul in eternal peace. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

1.40
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Luwero, Katikamu County North in particular, on behalf of my family and I, I am here to convey our deep condolences to the family and the Government on the sudden loss of Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa. 

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a rare person. He was very simple yet serious and hardworking. He really loved this country. It is very difficult to talk about Entandikwa and NAADS without picturing Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. These two programmes are unique in the sense that they were focussing on the rural people. So, he was for the poor and the rural people. He wanted the poor to develop in line with everyone else, through programmes like Bonna Basome.

We have really lost a great man. You cannot talk about the National Development Plan I and National Development Plan II without mentioning Dr Kisamba. It has been a problem to follow the budget in line with NDP but he kept on pushing. I am happy that these days, NDPs are instrumental in the operation of the budget of this country.

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, set up demonstration farms at home. People could come and benchmark them. I wonder how many of us here have done such a thing. He put up farms for the rural people to come and learn from them. 

He has helped so many youths by educating them and showing them so many things. I really thank the late Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa. 

He was not only an agricultural economist but also a religious man. At home there, he built a church. I prayed in that church several times. You can see he was somebody with money and scientific knowledge who still believed in God deeply. In our diocese; the Luwero Church of Uganda Diocese, he was instrumental its development. We looked up to him for advice on what to do –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One minute to conclude. 

MR BYANDALA: Madam Speaker, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa has been part of the human geography of Uganda. When you talk of people who fall in the category of human geography, it would be very difficult to leave out Dr Kisamba Mugerwa because he contributed tremendously to this country. He dedicated himself for this country; he was not selfish. He put Uganda as a priority. May his soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

TEH SPEAKER: Thank you. 

1.44
MS LILLIAN NAKATE (NRM, Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On my own behalf and that of the people of Luwero, on behalf of the professionals from Greater Luwero: that is, Nakaseke, Nakasongola and Luwero and on behalf of Ndejje University Council, we are here to pay tribute and convey our heartfelt condolences to the family of Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa and the country at large.

When Dr Kisamba Mugerwa made it to Parliament in the 1980s, I was about to turn two years and through my childhood, we only used to hear about Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. My first time to meet Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was when I was about 15, when I was in high school. We went to visit him at his residence in Kikonda because he was the patron of my former school, Mulusa Academy. It was very amazing because it was my first time to interface with a very brilliant man.

I must say that I am what I am because of what I saw in Dr Kisamba. That time, we used to have the likes of Prof. Mwaka and Dr Kidhu Makubuya. We struggled hard to go to school through thick and thin because we had some role models in the community. Indeed, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a great man.

Madam Speaker, in 2016, we had a forum for all professionals from greater Luwero covering the areas of Nakaseke, Nakasongola and Luwero, where we had a team of young professional coming together. Dr Kisamba surprised us, when he gave us all his time for an entire day to mentor us.

Currently, we have very many young disciplined professionals in the public and private sector mentored by Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. As the fraternity for professionals from greater Luwero, we are proud of Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. We used to call him “Entandikwa freeman.” Madam Speaker, we are very proud of Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. Personally, he made my life easy. 

Honourable members, there was a time when life became very hard in this journey of politics. I could even run away from fundraisings in churches. However, he was a blessing in to me; he made my life easy and taught me how to manoeuvre and at times, he even delegated me to deliver a heavy envelope on his behalf. Therefore, I will never forget him. The people of Luwero will never forget him, the engineering fraternity and the professionals will never forget him for his dedicated service. Even when he was faced with challenges, he had to move on. He squarely met the challenges and turned them into opportunities for development.

This country is moving forward, leapfrogging ahead in the forefront of development because our father and many others built a solid foundation for us. I thank you. May his soul rest in eternal peace.
 

1.49
MR EDWARD SEMBATYA (NRM, Katikamu County South, Luwero): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I knew Dr Kisamba Mugerwa right from my early age. 

On behalf of the people of Katikamu County South, I wish to convey my condolences to the family and the people of Uganda for the loss of Dr KisambaMugerwa.

The late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a friend to my late father, the late hon. Africano Sembatya. They were both Members of Parliament in 1980 to 1985, under the leadership of Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere who was their Leader of the Opposition at that time.

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa used to come to our home to discuss issues regarding politics, most especially matters regarding the Democratic Party because they were both democrats. That is when I started picking interest to become a politician. Fortunately, in 1983, when my father passed on, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa never abandoned our family. He kept coming to our family to check on us. I congratulate him for that.

The late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was been a member of this august House in 1985. He was a friend to all of us at home. He was like a father to me because of that historical background I have just shared. When I joined politics, he used to advise me. 

He has been a chancellor of Ndejje University, whose main campus is within my constituency. We used to interact with him during graduation functions and he used to give me advice regarding my nature of work.

This man we have lost has been very kind to everyone and he counselled us all the time. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa will be remembered for his kindness. He was a very simple man, who was always with people. May God rest his soul in eternal peace. 

1.52
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to pay tribute to the gallant sons of Uganda. I stand here to pay tribute on behalf of my constituency, Nakaseke North Constituency, the people of Kalirokatono in Bamunanika, where my ancestral home is.

Before I proceed, I would like to register my condolences to my old girl, Christine Kisamba Mugerwa; the wife, the children, members of his diverse family and members of various agencies he worked with. By extension, Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was my uncle because my father got two sisters from his aunt. I called him kojja.

Kojja was a man of the people, who mixed freely with all the people without class limitations. He had a high sense of humour that whatever the occasion, DrKisambaMugerwa would find opportunity to crack a joke.

He was a scholar with diverse knowledge beyond his area of specialisation, which enabled him to serve in diverse positions. His contribution to Uganda’s economy was immense. He initiated many projects, programmes and policies in support of lifting the poor. The Entandikwa was one of them.

This entandikwa was supposed to be for greater Luwero. However, when political pressure was mounted, he accepted and it was rolled outall through Uganda. The NAADs programme - I remember, there was heated argument against the NAADs programme when many of us were in favour of the model farmer concept. He defeated us and the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) programme, as has already been referenced, has played a great role in modernising agriculture in this country.

He played a key role in having different co-ordinated planning frameworks in this country. Before he came to the National Planning Authority (NPA), we had ad hoc planning frameworks. However, with his coming, we got co-ordinated planning frameworks – NDP I, NDP II and now NDP III.

He played a key role in demystifying the operations of the Microfinance Support Centre. He had a passion for spreading out pro-poor funds. He was a mentor. He mentored and encouraged me to join elective politics. Even if I was a threat in contesting against him, he still mentored and supported me.

He has left a legacy, which has to be emulated by the people of Luwero in particular and the people of Uganda. He has left at a time when we have got challenges in planning. This is when our economy needs a lot of support because of high unemployment which is a time bomb, the challenge of getting 64 per cent of the population out of the poverty trap, the low rate of industrialisation, low GDP to tax ratio, and the aspiration of joining the lower middle income status.

The last time he was in my constituency, - two weeks before his death - he came to launch a branch of the Microfinance Support Centre. We discussed the kind of stimuli we needed to revitalise the economy with the advent of COVID-19. 

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was always positive whenever approached. I remember when I approached him to take a branch of the Microfinance Support Centre to Ngoma Sub-county, which is 120 kilometres away from any financial institution, he did it without hesitation and that branch is a big success. Four months before his death, I also requested him to establish a branch of the Microfinance Support Centre in my home town, Kiwoko. Two weeks before his death, he came and launched it and it is on the move.

I would like to thank Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, posthumously, for the great work he has done for this country. In a special way, permit me to thank Christine Kisamba Mugerwa for fulfilling her marriage vows. The support she gave to her husband, I think, enabled him to perform the great work. May his soul rest in eternal peace, and may the Almighty God sustain the family through this difficult time.

Madam Speaker, if you could allow me a minute. During the drafting of the Constitution, there was a proposal to set up an –(Member timed out)

The Speaker: Honourable member, you have taken six minutes.

Ms bbumba: Just half a minute – There was a proposal to set up an upper House. I think this is the time to re-activate that debate. There are a lot of our older people with a lot of knowledge, who are being wasted. We need to get these people in a place where they can guide this country, especially now that the age of the Members of Parliament is getting lower and lower. We need to get these senior people somewhere so that they can advise the country. Thank you.

1.01
Mr Kenneth eitunganane (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to also join the House to pay tribute to the gallant son of the soil, Dr William Kisamba Mugerwa.

Since the outbreak of COVID-19, the country has experienced a lot of loss, especially of our senior citizens. It is very unfortunate that we have lost quite a number of very useful citizens at the age of 75 and above. It did not spare the late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa.

Madam Speaker, the late was a very good veteran politician and academician, who liked to work very diligently and passionately for the common man. No wonder, he was behind most of the key poverty intervention programmes that the country developed. I think the President saw this in the person of Dr William Kisamba Mugerwa.

I remember when we had issues while I was still a student at Fisheries Training Institute in Entebbe, it was difficult to get the attention of a minister then, but when we approached him, he voluntarily drove to the institute to address key issues that were affecting the institute. We moved on after that.

He was such a humble man. Whenever he started a project, he would not rest until he saw it yielding results and not merely results, but positive ones that impact the lives of Ugandans. I vividly remember during the time when Busitema University was being created, he took up a key role in making sure that he annexed Arapai Agricultural College in Soroti to the university. This is because he wanted to see agriculture take root in this country. 

He also wanted to see to it that farmers, who constitute 68 per cent of the economy, are helped. No wonder, it was in agriculture and rural economy that he felt he needed to make his contribution to this country. We shall dearly miss him. 

We would like to ask the family to remain together. May the good God grant his soul eternal rest. Thank you.

1.03
Ms rose mutonyi (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to pay tribute to the late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. Before I say anything else, let me convey my condolences to the family and the people of Luweero, Parliament and Uganda at large.

Madam Speaker, I remember Dr Kisamba Mugerwa for two simple issues - maybe one is not that simple. When Heroes Day was organised in 1994 at a school called Kawomya in Mukono District, I was there as the principal of a teacher training institute and I had brought students to sing. It was then that I saw Dr Kisamba Mugerwa for the first time.

Many Ugandans do not remember how the Entandikwa issue came about and why it was named so. When Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was addressing the gathering, he told the President that the people of Luweero still had problems from the war and that they were crying out that they should get something to start them off. He used the word, “Entandikwa”. He said, “Your Excellency, the people of Luweero are crying for entandikwa”. The President asked what it is and he said it is something to start them off. That is how the name “Entandikwa” came about. It was originally meant for Luweero but it was spread out in the whole of Uganda. Many Ugandans wondered why the President used that Luganda term but that is how it came about. 

Secondly, I became RDC in Mpigi when hon. Kisamba Mugerwa was the Minister for Agriculture; so, that was the first time I heard of human urine being used as manure. Hon. Kisamba Mugerwa taught the locals there that the human urine can work as a substitute for cattle urine; if you do not have a cow you can use your own urine. 

I felt embarrassed but later on, I started using it and I got big bunches from my small farm. This is what I have been telling my people at home. Some of them look embarrassed but that is it. Madam Speaker, those are the two small issues that I wanted to raise; the “Entandikwa” and the human urine being used, first of all, as an insect pesticide and also as manure. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to bring out those two issues that Ugandans should always remember hon. Kisamba Mugerwa for. Thank you very much. 

2.07
MS SARAH NAKAWUNDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mpigi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you for allowing me to join the House to pay tribute to the late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. 

It is very unfortunate and sad that we have lost Dr Kisamba Mugerwa because he was such a down-to-earth person who would always wear a smile on his face. He was a God-fearing and humble person. I would like to thank his parents for raising him as such. 

At one time, I met him in the corridors of Parliament here and sought some advice from him. I asked when he would be in office so that I go and talk about some issues. He told me he was already there and asked me why I wanted to get another day to meet him. He urged me to talk about those issues even while we were in the corridors and we talked for over 20 minutes in the Parliament corridors. He was a very good man. 

The late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa served this country with respect and dignity. His contribution to the agricultural sector of Uganda will always be remembered. May his soul rest in peace. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

2.09
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Death is a terrible thing and it robs us of the good ones. Today is a historical day in Parliament because we are paying tribute to two great sons of Uganda who have just succumbed to Covid-19. 

Madam Speaker, working in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for 25 years gave me a chance to meet different important people in this country. One of them was Dr Kisamba Mugerwa who started as a civil servant and rose up until he became a minister and acquired his doctorate. 

However, when you met Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, you would not know that this man had got a doctorate because he was a very simple and friendly person. He was always laughing. That was Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. 

Uganda is an agricultural country and to get agriculture to take off in this country, you needed a person who knew how to handle it. That is where Kisamba Mugerwa excelled. Modernisation of agriculture was his docket and Uganda’s coffee, tea and flowers went up. The fish that brought in a lot of money went up because of Kisamba Mugerwa. He played a very important role in this country. When you lose such people, definitely, you look back and see.

You have heard of what he has done for the people of Luweero in terms of agriculture. In Bugisu, we look at coffee but he did modernisation of agriculture and that helped the people of Bugisu. It was the bonna baggagawale not the bonna basome project, as it was said. The bonna baggagawale was started by Kisamba Mugerwa. This country has lost a great man. 

There is a big problem in agriculture. We hope when President Museveni appoints people in ministries, he looks at people with professional knowledge like Kisamba Mugerwa. 

Kisamba Mugerwa became the chairman of the National Planning Authority; a very high post that requires a person that knows a lot in terms of planning for the country. Vision 2040 needed a person like Kisamba Mugerwa and we can see how the country was not excelling in economics because of such a person. May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

2.12
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to join my colleagues in supporting the motion to pay tribute to the late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa. 

I knew Kisamba Mugerwa way back in Makerere when he was a lecturer as I was doing my first masters’ degree. Later, I was to join public service and work as an ADC, Kampala, so I worked closely with his wife, Christine, who was a counsellor at that time.

I recall that when hon. Kisamba Mugerwa was appointed minister, there were mixed feelings at Makerere because here was a good dedicated lecturer being taken away. This followed another professor who had been appointed to the Ministry of Health so it was like Government was trying to deplete Makerere of its best lecturers. Nevertheless, we can all see how important it is that such dedicated Ugandans are recognised and placed in the right places. 

Dr Kisamba Mugerwa has been a very dedicated academician and professional. He gave advice freely but above all, as colleagues have said, everything he did was so that we could uplift the standard of the ordinary Ugandan and make their life better. 

The basis, even behind the National Development Plan was so that every coin can be put to maximum use for the good of every Ugandan. That is the bonna baggagawale programme. We will certainly miss hon. Kisamba Mugerwa. It even sounds like a dream that we are here talking about him as a late because we all knew
that he was full of life. We do not know what this COVID-19 will not do to our lives. 

I would like to point out that Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a highly learned, highly professional and highly knowledgeable man. He was a man of high integrity. His “no” was a no because it was based on facts and expertise. This is a challenge and all of us should try and make ourselves better and give advice freely without the things that we see these days of having to be given something before you can offer advice.

He was a simple man, much as he was very highly educated, knowledgeable and placed in high places in Government. He was very down to earth and a friend to many. May his soul rest in eternal peace.
2.16
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, honourable colleagues, bereaved families of late Etiang and late Kisamba Mugerwa, I rise to join my colleagues to support the motion. 

The late Dr Kisamba Mugerwa was a great man of many hats. He was a civil servant. I first met him in 2002 as a Principal Private Secretary to the President. He was very supportive to the President through writing papers on agriculture and on economic recovery. 

He was an astute politician. He was an instrumental cabinet minister. He provided guidance in areas of economics. 

He was a farmer. He worked in UN as a very outstanding person responsible for overall guidance on research and capacity development.

When you look at all the programmes he spearheaded under Vision 2040, they were premised on vulnerable grassroot communities. He was indeed a resource as far as the economic recovery was concerned. 

His vast wealth of experience and knowledge enabled him to serve with distinction and diligence in various capacities. He executed his leadership role with integrity, focus and commitment to principles and ethical values.

He was an amazing listener who would listen to everybody and then provide advice. He had answers to all challenges especially when we were in Cabinet. In fact, when he retired, we missed him and on a number of occasions, the chairman would call for Dr Kisamba Mugerwa’s comment on issues but he had left.

He supported me in the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives especially as far as the cooperative movement was concerned, quality and standards and he would voluntarily give me papers. He would make sure I read them because he would keep asking for my comments on them. He was very thorough.

On behalf of Mawokota North who greatly benefitted from his programmes like Entandikwa and free education, I would like to pray that his soul rests in peace. 

Let me use this opportunity to salute the Late Paul Etiang whose calibre and stature are rare amongst our citizenry. May the souls of these great people rest in peace. 

Fellow Ugandans, COVID-19 is real. Let us continue observing SOPs.

2.20
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing Parliament to pay tribute to our two gallant sons, Dr Paul Etiang and Dr Kisamba Mugerwa.

I join colleagues to condole with the family of the Lt Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, our elder brother in the ministry. He was a kind, welcoming and always jolly man.

I agree with the comments made by my brother, hon. Bagiire, with whom we agreed that we should be here to put emphasis to the comments that we are making as the ministry but also fellow ministers who are serving after him.

He was a leader who took time to listen and to explain what he thought was right. He always made his point clear.

We also want to grieve with the people of Katikamu and Ndejje University where he has been the Vice Chancellor. We are also grieving with the Parliament and everybody in Uganda for losing this great man.

Many people have talked about Entandikwa. His legacy has influenced many Government programmes. All these things we see, youth livelihood funds, women funds, microfinance, all have their origin from Entandikwa. 

We know that hon. Kisamba Mugerwa has been a farmer. On top of what he did in the ministry, which has been well mentioned by hon. Bagiire, he himself has been an exemplary farmer and his farm has been used as a model. I know many leaders who are doing that but allow me to thank hon. Dr Kisamba Mugerwa for being a model in his area. 

Even recently, through his counsel, Ndejje University, agreed to have a coffee farm for the university as an income generating project but also as a model, for the students from the University to be able to do it. 

He has also been following the process to have a coffee processing factory in his area. I would like to assure the family that our ministry will certainly follow this up to make sure that his dreams come true. (Applause)

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I would like to thank you for bringing this motion. I support it and wish everybody to support the tribute to this gallant son of Uganda. 

Allow me to say that although I missed the opportunity to talk about the hon. Dr Paul Etiang, we all know that he was a selfless committed worker who served his country diligently. I wish to pay tribute to him and his family. May the good Lord bless the souls of the two gallant sons as we mourn their departure. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, you may recall that the Prime Minister worked with Dr Mugerwa. He may have one or two closing remarks.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS IN PARLIAMENT (Gen. (rtd) Moses Ali): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. Once again, I would like to share with colleagues that I had a chance to work with Dr Mugerwa in two governments, from 1971 to now. 

When I say 1971 to now, that was the time when Dr Mugerwa was a young officer who had just joined the Public Service. At that time, I was the Minister of Finance and I wanted a personal assistant who was an economist. I asked my Permanent Secretary who talked to his colleague in the Ministry of Public Service. The following day, we saw a young man who was introduced as my personal assistant and we worked together. 

At that time, I was a Brigadier General and not as old as I am now and he was not yet a doctor. We travelled widely. His role was to tame this Brigadier General or to make him think as an economist. If there was a speech to be made, he would write it and when I stood, I would read economics. I had to read what he knew, everywhere up to the World Bank meetings.

When that Government came to an end, everybody found their way. I went away and I left him behind. After 10 years, we came back and again met. He was a doctor but I had not left him one.

It is very important to me and the family that we are talking of the same person who we have worked with at different times. In this Government when he came and joined us in Cabinet in different positions, the most important is that he became a Minister of Agriculture and I think rightfully so because that was his line. 

What I discovered was that the doctor was a determined, cooperative and very flexible person. Working in a military Government then and with a Brigadier General, many people would find it difficult but the late doctor found it easy and we made life easy for him. He was determined and that is why he rose to being a doctor and to all the positions that he got. 

I pray that his children who are left behind follow their father’s legacy. Their father left many friends and I am one of them. Therefore, we are open to work together with the family. May his soul rest in eternal peace.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Prime Minister. I would like to thank the honourable members for coming to pay tribute. Each time you saw Dr Kisamba Mugerwa, you would think about production, agriculture and people. We would like to thank him for the work done. Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House do pay tribute to Dr Wilberforce Kisamba Mugerwa as proposed by the Prime Minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I direct the Clerk to extract the Hansard and the tribute and pass them on to the family. 

The House is adjourned to 3.15 p.m. Thank you very much.

(The House rose at 2.31 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 4 February 2021 at 3.15 p.m.) 

