

Thursday, 20 February 2020

Parliament met at 2.53 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon sitting. I have two issues to communicate. I would like to reassure the members that despite what transpired yesterday, your security is guaranteed; only that we shall have to balance between the right of the people to come and our capacity to do our work. When they are here, we shall have to find a balance.

The second issue is to ask the Minister of Health whether they have any plans to alleviate the looming shortage of blood, which has been reported about in the last one week in the country. I think it is an area where the Minister of Health may need to engage the country to see how we can improve on the supplies of blood.

2.56
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Madam Speaker, on the issue of health, this morning I checked on a patient in Mulago Hospital. The interaction I had with the doctors is that it is not only blood but there is also a shortage of the anti-malarial drugs. 

In the last two to three months, they have seen an increase in malaria patients and so, the drugs have run out. They were getting most of the drugs from China so the consignments, which were supposed to come from there, have been affected by what we all know. 

Also, the cost of Artesunate is about Shs 40,000. The quinine or chloroquine costs about Shs 8,000 and that is affecting them.

The second issue was on the fears that we have about the Coronavirus. They don’t have masks. If they diagnosed somebody with the infection, they wouldn’t be able to cover the population of 30 or 40 million people. They asked me if the Ministry of Health can take this seriously and make sure that these are secured. Even within the hospital, they do not have enough to protect themselves when treating patients with Tuberculosis.

I also saw it at the airport. I do not know whether our immigration officers have it or not. At entry, there were barely two or three people who were wearing the masks yet they are at the front. Most of the people who come in here travel by air. 

Those are the issues, which were raised by the medical team from Mulago Hospital and I think it cuts across. The Ministry of Health needs to come in and stock enough masks if we are to protect them and also address the issue of shortage of antimalarial drugs.

The Speaker: Does the Minister of Environment want to say something? You are waving your hands.

2.58
The minister of state for water and environment (Environment) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to respond to your communication. We appreciate that you have assured the House about the safety of the Members as per yesterday’s incident.

However, we need to get extra assurance because for strangers to jump into the chambers of this House is a serious thing. Madam Speaker, you will allow us to express our concern over this issue and more so, extra checking needs to be done. I am aware that before our visitors reach here, the officers at the entry get clearance from members of Parliament and there is extra checking. We would like to know what went wrong that we had strangers putting you, honourable Speaker and the members of this House, at the highest risk. 

As we sit here, if we just talk about it and let it go - Members are all scared. I had just stepped out of the House when I saw the clip of Members already diving under the chairs. This is scary. I think we need more submissions on this and assurance so that Members of this House are safe and more so you, Madam Speaker, and all the dignitaries in this House. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, of course, I would not like us to engage in the debate at this stage because matters are under investigation but I would like to assure you that we are alive to the situation. I cannot give details of what we are going to do. We are alive to the situation and you will be informed about the outcome of the investigations.

3.00
Mr moses kasibante (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to appreciate the confidence you are giving us as members of Parliament in as far as security is concerned.

I would like to inform the House and request the Minister of Security, if possible, to make a statement. Apart from the strangers who came yesterday, over the weekend, there was a list of members of Parliament that was published. It was titled, “The most wanted.”

I am one of the members on that list and it is connected to the business that we transact here. The list was followed by a press conference addressed by people who claimed to be in support of Gen. Tumwine. They were warning Parliament that if it went ahead with the motion to censure Gen. Tumwine, there would be havoc. 

I think that it is prudent that the General himself, who is in charge of this ministry, comes and makes a statement in that regard before he is censured. Thank you. (Laughter)

The Speaker: I do not know; where these threats? [HON. MEMBERS: “There are leaflets.”] Are they leaflets?

3.02
Mr Ibrahim ssemujju (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the same issue, which you addressed in your communication to which hon. Beatrice Anywar has requested for reassurance, I agree with her entirely. 

It is important because this is not the first time. Some of us still have scars. Strangers did not only storm Parliament but they beat up members of Parliament, including me.

Therefore, if you are going to express this matter, I only request that we expand it to include those strangers who came here and beat up members of Parliament.

The Speaker: Honourable members, let us go to item three.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED THE PUBLIC HOLIDAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2020

3.03
Ms Juliet kyinyamatama (NRM, Woman Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move a motion seeking leave of Parliament to introduce a private member’s Bill entitled, “The Public Holidays (Amendment) Bill, 2020 moved under Article 94 (4) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

WHEREAS Article 79 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers Parliament to make laws for the peace, order, development and good governance of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS Article 94(4)(b) of the Constitution and the Rules 120 and 121 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament recognises the right of a Member of Parliament to move a Private Member's Bill;

AWARE THAT the Public Holidays Act, Cap.255 specifies public holidays that are kept and observed in Uganda, including those declared by the President under the same Act and their respective dates on which they fall, where practicable;

FURTHER AWARE that it is international and national practice for the public holidays to be observed through public celebrations and call for citizens’ participation in order to give the days the deserved recognition, honour and visibility;

APPRECIATING that public holidays not only afford citizens an opportunity to participate in the commemoration of such important days but also enable them take some time off to rest;

CONCERNED that in instances where a public holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday, which are already designated days of rest, public holidays may not be given their deserved recognition, honour and visibility and some may even pass unnoticed;

CONVINCED that in order to ensure continued recognition, honour and visibility of public holidays, it is necessary to have public holidays that fall on a weekend observed on working days to avoid them interfering with the rest days and coinciding with weekend activities like prayers, marriage celebrations, political activities and many others;

REALISING that observance of public holidays on weekdays will not only improve their visibility and enable participation of all and as a result, build a stronger sense of nationalism and togetherness but also afford citizens an opportunity to rest;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:
This House grants me leave to introduce a Private Member's Bill for on Act entitled, “The Public Holidays (Amendment) Act, 2020", a draft of which is here attached and do order the publication of the said Bill in preparation for its first reading.

I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? It is not seconded. Honourable member, apparently, it has not been seconded. 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Madam Speaker, it is seconded.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, belatedly, there are two seconders. What is the justification? 

(Motion seconded.)

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start my clarification by giving an example of the Women’s Day of this year that will fall on a Sunday. There is reason as to why such a day was made a public holiday. First of all, it gives a significance of women in this country; what we have contributed to this country. When it falls on a weekend, which is a public holiday already and a rest day, it takes away the value and essence of such a day.

Secondly – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, do not heckle. Every Member has a right to come here with their business. Please allow her submit. 

MS KYINYAMATAMA: Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is a reason as to why a day is declared a public holiday. It talks about the importance of such a day. It means the origin of it was to put down your tools and honour this day. This is why when it falls on a Sunday, there are responsibilities. For example, it is a worship day; people would want to go and pray. So, it loses the meaning, the significance and the visibility. 

This is why I beg for your support that it is very important for such public holidays that are already important to us to make sure that they are celebrated on a working day because that is when the visibility of such a day comes out. Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the honourable member is only asking for the opportunity to go print a Bill, then come back and we discuss on merit. 

Honourable members, I put the question that the Member be given leave to produce a Private Members’ Bill to come here for first reading. 

(Question put and negatived.)

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members! The House is in session, please. 

STATEMENTS BY MINISTERS

STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS ON THE CONTINUED ROLLOUT OF THE LOWER SECONDARY SCHOOL CURRICULUM CONTRARY TO THE PARLIAMENTARY RESOLUTION OF TUESDAY, 4 FEBRUARY 2020 THAT HALTED ITS ROLLOUT PENDING FURTHER CONSULTATION AND PREPARATION OF KEY STAKEHOLDERS

THE SPEAKER: Let me invite the Minister of Education and Sports to present the statement. 

3.11
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Ms Janet Kataaha Museveni): Madam Speaker and honourable members, allow me to begin by informing this House that on Tuesday, 18 February, 2020, we were not able to be here because we already had information from the Clerk to Parliament that we were to be here today, Thursday, 20 February 2020.

Therefore, we were confident that there was no problem until we learnt later that our presentation was on the Order Paper for Tuesday. However, one of us, hon. Seninde, was in Parliament that day, anyway. So, I believe she explained the mix up, which was not intended at all. We regret any inconveniences this may have caused and please know that it was not intentional. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, when Parliament asked us to halt the curriculum rollout on 4 February 2020, as a Government Sector, we could not change plans on our own without a Cabinet decision. We had to consult Cabinet first, being the policy-making organ of Government and we were guided as follows:

    i) That we should not halt the rollout because it was too late to change plan; 
    ii) That we should continue engaging the stakeholders until there is an understanding. 

Allow me now, then, to shed new light on the new curriculum –(Mr. Ssemujju rose_)

THE SPEAKER: What rule?

MR SSEMUJJU: Rule 217. Madam Speaker, the statement we directed the Minister of Education and Sports to come and make is not a statement on the curriculum. It is a statement on defying a parliamentary resolution.

Rule 217 requires a minister to come and brief Parliament on steps taken on implementation of a parliamentary resolution; and not to come and brief Parliament on steps taken to defy a parliamentary resolution and we made these rules for a purpose.

The procedural issue I am raising is whether this Parliament that made a resolution and it was defied by the minister in question – I am asking whether we would be procedurally right to allow her deliver a statement not provided for in our rules – because rules provide for only a statement to explain steps taken in implementing a parliamentary resolution. Is she procedurally right?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think that you should allow the minister to make her statement. I do not know what is contained in the statement; I do not know what she is going to say.

Rule 217 is about an action-taken report. Therefore, allow the minister to explain what she wants to say, and then we can later decide whether it is what is under Rule 217 or something else. Madam Minister, please proceed.

MS MUSEVENI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You may recall that Government, through the Ministry of Education and Sports, had planned to start the implementation and rollout of the reviewed lower secondary curriculum last financial year. However, this was postponed to January 2020 in the current financial year. The delayed implementation was partly due to financial constraints but also due to the need to make adequate preparations for the successful implementation. 

As a result, last financial year, Parliament appropriated Shs 3 billion to the National Curriculum Development Centre to support the implementation of the preliminary activities for the rollout exercise.

This Statement presents the background to the curriculum review process, the objectives, new aspects, the justification and the benefits of the revised lower secondary curriculum; the implementation strategy for the new lower secondary curriculum and the ministry’s responses to the questions you raised on the 4th February. 

Background 

Honourable members, the current curriculum for lower secondary education has been in existence since the colonial times. It is largely knowledge-based with little emphasis on skills and values and therefore, it is inadequate to address the issues faced by the learners of today and the socio-economic needs of our country. 

There has been public concern over the relevance of the curriculum that is being phased out. The Government White Paper on Education of 1992, which is the current macro policy framework, also recommended the review of this curriculum. 

In view of the above, the Ministry of Education and Sports, through the National Curriculum Development Centre (NCDC), embarked on the process to review the curricula at all the levels.
   
The review process started with the Early Childhood Development (ECD) level in 2005. This led to the development of the ECD Learning Framework, followed by the review of the Primary Curriculum to make it competency-based. 

At this level, learning for Primary One to Primary Three is based on themes and for Primary Four to Primary Seven was to be based on subjects. 

Themes are based on what is familiar to the children, such as the community, home and the environment. The rollout and implementation of the primary curriculum started in 2007 with Primary One and the first cohort taught under the competency-based curriculum completed Primary Seven in 2013. 

According to the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), a curriculum should be reviewed every after five years due to the rapid global changes. 

UNESCO further notes that the key indicators of curriculum success include; the quality of the learning achieved by students and how effectively students use that learning for their personal, social, physical, cognitive, moral, psychological and emotional development.

To ensure alignment to the primary curriculum, the Ministry of Education and Sports embarked on the review of the lower secondary curriculum in 2008, to make it competency-based and learner-centred.

In 1987, the NRM Government instituted the Uganda National Education Review Commission, chaired by the late Prof. Senteza Kajubi, to review the whole education system of Uganda and to recommend adjustments and new trends in the education system. 

The Education Policy Review Commission (EPRC) produced a report of 1989, which Cabinet approved in April 1992 as the Government White Paper, entitled, "Education for National Integration and Development". This Government White Paper on Education recommended the review of curriculum across all levels. This has to date never been done as approved by Cabinet then. 

You may note that in 2007, the Ministry of Education and Sports undertook a study on the secondary education and training curriculum, assessment and examinations and produced a report titled, “Uganda Secondary Education and Training Curriculum, Assessment and Examination”. This report was meant to inform the curriculum review process. 

In addition, the National Curriculum Development Centre conducted a labour market survey in 2012, to inform the curriculum review and development process. The findings of this study guided the NCDC on the kind of generic skills that are needed in our labour market so as to have them integrated in all the subjects.

You may recall that our Government embraced the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and SDG 4 aims at ensuring inclusive and equitable quality education and promoting life-long learning opportunities for all by the year 2030. In developing this curriculum, a number of benchmarking studies were undertaken – both in Africa and in other parts of the world – on best practices on the appropriate curriculum for our country. 

Accordingly, the technical officers visited several countries namely; Ghana, Singapore, Botswana, Malaysia, Turkey, Kenya, South Africa and Finland. There was also local benchmarking with some international schools like Kabira International School, Rainbow and Kampala International School of Uganda. Also, some local schools like Amazima Schools, Nile Vocational Secondary School, Mbarara Vocational Secondary School and Namugongo Vocational Secondary School were visited to study how they teach the competence-based curriculum. The lessons learned from the international and local exposures informed the design and development of the lower secondary curriculum, which is now rolled out for implementation. 

Madam Speaker, you may note that the curriculum review process was in line with the Uganda Vision 2040, the National Development Plan (NDP) II 2016-2020, the Education Sector Strategic Plans (ESSPs) of 2004/2005 to 2019/2020, the National Resistance Movement (NRM) manifesto of 2016-2021, and the East African Community (EAC)’s Harmonisation of Education Systems Protocol in line with the East African Secondary School Harmonised Curriculum Framework. 
 
You may note that an effective curriculum is supposed to prepare a learner to be a global citizen both in his/her community and globally. 
 
Were adequate consultations made on the new lower secondary curriculum? Madam Speaker, let me confirm to you that during this process, several stakeholders were consulted between 2016 and 2018 and even earlier. These include His Excellency, the President, honourable members of Parliament on the Committee of Education and Sports, the Regional Chairpersons of the Uganda Secondary Schools, Head teachers’ Association (ASSHU), the Vice Chancellors from both public and private universities with the President chairing the meeting, members of the Vice Chancellors Forum, the representatives from the National Teachers’ Colleges, the deans of the schools for education from both public and private universities, some parents and learners, representatives of religious institutions, and the representatives of cultural leaders, among others. 

During the process of interactions and consultations, members of Parliament on the Committee of Education and Sports met the Minister of Education and Sports at Entebbe and expressed their dissatisfaction of the learning area approach, especially for the sciences and they guided on their expectations of the curriculum menu.  

During the committee meeting held at Munyonyo in 2016, the members of Parliament then further noted that the budget for implementing the Lower Secondary Curriculum (LSC) was big and needed Government’s intervention if the curriculum was to be rolled out in 2020.
  
During their visit to the NCDC in August 2018, the members of Parliament on the Committee of Education and Sports, among other guidance, advised the Ministry of Education and Sports that it was not necessary to pilot the curriculum as had been planned since there were no major changes apart from reverting to the subject approach and changing the methodology of teaching and assessment. 
 
They expressed the need for Government to provide the required funds for a nationwide rollout. It is against this background that the Lower Secondary Curriculum is now being rolled out and implemented.
 
What is wrong with the current Lower Secondary Curriculum? 

A study conducted and documented in a report titled, “Uganda Secondary Education and Training Curriculum, Assessment and Examination (CURASSE) Roadmap for Reform” by the Ministry of Education and Sports in 2007 under the support of the World Bank on why Uganda needed a new secondary curriculum, identified the following as the main weaknesses: 

(a) 	The teaching methodologies do not promote effective learning and acquisition of skills; 

(b) 	The existing curriculum does not address the needs of the majority of learners who join secondary education. It focuses mainly on the academic elite who will go to the university and not those who prefer to join the BTVET institutions and the world of work; 

(c) 	The existing curriculum does not address the social and economic needs of the country because: 
(i) 	It is not aligned to reforms, which have been conducted at the primary and BTVET levels; 
(ii) 	It is not aligned with the international best practices; and  
(iii) 	It is not aligned to the needs of further education, the workplace and society generally. 

(d) 	The existing curriculum has no documented framework, which outlines the overall learning goals or the profile of graduates from this level of education.
 
(e) 	The textbooks are oriented towards the kind of rote learning and mechanical exam question answering that conspire to ensure good marks but minimal understanding of the subject. The norm referenced examination mainly tests knowledge and a limited range of competencies. This is not appropriate to address neither a wider range of abilities nor for a curriculum that addresses a wider range of competencies to be assessed. 

(f) 	The existing curriculum does not include the key 21st century skills such as: 
(i) 	Learning how to learn, learning how to think and be self-directed learners. 
(ii) 	Being an innovator and problem solver. 
(iii) 	Working constructively in teams. 
(iv) 	Applying knowledge and skills effectively to known and difficult situations. 
(v) 	Creating change and transferring knowledge, and 
(vi) 	Communicating knowledge effectively using a variety of media. 

What is in the new Lower Secondary Curriculum? 

In view of all the above weaknesses, the Ministry of Education and Sports reviewed the Lower Secondary Curriculum to align it to the needs of society and to make it relevant to the 21st Century with the following objectives as listed below.  

The Lower Secondary Curriculum aims at achieving the following specific objectives: 

(a) 	To promote effective learning and acquisition of skills by developing a curriculum that builds meta-cognitive (is that part of the learning process that focuses on knowledge, awareness and understanding) and promoting abilities and skills so that individuals are better placed to adapt to their evolving roles in society and the dynamic workplace. 
	
(b) 	To reduce subject and content overload.
 
(c) 	To address the needs of all students and lay foundation for improved pedagogy (Teaching methods especially as an academic subject or theoretical concept) and assessment procedures that allows learners to realise their full potential more effectively.   

(d) 	To address the social and economic needs of the country by meeting the educational needs of the learners aspiring for higher academic learning as well as those that wish to transit to the labour market. 

(e) 	To allow flexibility to absorb emerging fields of knowledge in the areas of Science and Technology. 

(f) 	To address the 21st century skills required in the world of work.  

(g) 	To address issues of effectiveness and efficiency with regard to utilisation of resources (teachers, school facilities/space, instructional materials) so as to ensure that they are used optimally.

The reviewed lower secondary curriculum 

This curriculum is now results-oriented or outcome based. It emphasises nurturing values, attitudes and what is referred to as 21st Century skills. These include, critical thinking, creativity, collaboration or teamwork, communication, information literacy, ICT and flexibility. 

Each topic has a competency that is well spelt out to show the learning outcomes. These are done either individually, in pairs, in groups or as a class. 

They would be assessed through observation; talking to the learner and asking for a product that may have been made can prove that learning has taken place. Again, the key learning outcomes for this curriculum clearly set out the qualities that young people will develop. 

By the end of the educational process, young people are expected to become: self-assured individuals, responsible and patriotic citizens, lifelong learners and positive contributors to society. This will translate into an ‘O Level’ graduate as presented in the profile attached (see Annex 2).   

The generic skills are high-order, transferable skills that are important to the work place, education and life in general. These are the 21st Century skills and they are at the centre of the curriculum.  

These skills enable learners to access and deepen learning across the whole curriculum. They are the same skills that are sought by employers and which will unlock the understanding that empowers one to be field ready. For that reason, the generic skills lie at the heart of every subject and must be developed among our school graduates.  

These skills allow young people to develop into life-long learners, who can adapt to change and cope with the challenges of life in a challenging world. 

Young people need to think critically and solve problems, both at school and at work. They need to be creative and innovative in their approach to learning and life. They need to communicate well in all forms, cooperate with others and work independently. They need to use functional mathematics and ICT effectively using the generic skills emphasised above. 

Emphasis has also been given to the acquisition of values as provided for in the National Ethics and Values Policy (2013).  These include: respect for humanity and environment, honesty – uphold and defend the truth at all times, justice and fairness in dealing with others, hard work for self–reliance, integrity – moral uprightness and sound character, creativity and innovativeness, social responsibility, social harmony, national unity and national consciousness and patriotism.  

Cross cutting issues such as climate change, patriotism, human rights, peace education and others have been integrated in the various subjects.

ICT is to be used both as a pedagogical tool for learning but as a subject too. Its use as a pedagogical tool has been integrated into the learning activities in the syllabus. 

The reviewed curriculum has embraced inclusive education by providing for the different categories of learners’ needs in the curriculum. For instance, the learners with visual impairment will study general science, which does not have a component of practical aspects in Physics, Biology and Chemistry, to enable all learners in this category to learn scientific concepts in order to live a balanced life style. 

Likewise, Ugandan sign language has been introduced to allow normal learners to communicate with their counterparts who may be deaf.   

The teacher is a facilitator of learning, meaning that learners are expected to contribute to their learning with guidance from that teacher. The curriculum further emphasises the freedom to ask questions until clarity is provided. 

Under the formative assessment, the teacher will be required to take note and record the learner’s achievements on signs of acquired values, skills and change in attitude and take record of this in addition to assessing knowledge and understanding, during the classroom-based learning. 
 
All these are reflected on the learner’s record card throughout the term and ultimately the end of the year. These scores will constitute 20 per cent of the learners’ total score at the end of the cycle. 

The marks will be captured throughout the four years, averaged and computed into a score for each individual learner. Thereafter, the results will be submitted to UNEB for the overall grading of the learner. 

Summative assessment by UNEB will be administered at the end of senior four; it will constitute 80 per cent.  

The new curriculum allows learners to be subjected to the Directorate of Industrial Training (DIT) and the Uganda Business, Technical Examinations Board (UBTEB) examinations, which are skills based for subjects like Nutrition and Food Technology, Entrepreneurship, Agriculture, ICT, Technology and Design, Performing Arts, Art and Design and Physical Education,  to allow them acquire a competence certification of level I on the Uganda Vocational Qualifications Framework (UVQF) for the world of work. 

Such learners will exit with two certificates initially. Proper and detailed guidance on how to manage assessment at school level has been provided in the assessment framework.  

New subjects have been included on the revised curriculum, while other subjects have been integrated and have taken on new forms. The subjects with new names are:  

(1) 	In the category of languages - Chinese language has been added to the list of foreign languages. It will be optional and for those schools, which will have the trained teachers, materials and facilities to teach it.  

(2) 	Subjects which have taken on new forms are: Music, which has now included dance and drama to become Performing Arts;

(3) 	Fine Art has been redesigned to include elements of design and it is now called Art and Design; 

(4) 	Technical Drawing has been integrated with elements of woodwork and metal work and technology and it is now called Technology and Design; 

(5) 	History has been integrated with Political Education; 

(6) 	Accounts and Commerce have been integrated in Entrepreneurship Education;

(7) 	Subjects like Kiswahili, Physical Education, Religious Education (C.R.E/I.R.E) and Entrepreneurship Education are now compulsory at Senior 1 and 2 only.  

The reviewed curriculum, therefore, aims at a holistic education system for personal and national development. The lower secondary school curriculum thus, envisions producing a secondary school graduate with employable skills that are competitive in the job market. 

What is the justification for the new curriculum menu? 

During consultations with the various stakeholders, they unanimously agreed on the composition of the curriculum menu to be 21 subjects (See Annex 3 for details). It was also agreed that since learning at this level is still part of basic education, there was need to expose learners to a wide range of subjects given the fact that children in a developing country like Uganda do not have opportunities to interact with a number of situations where they can learn from, apart from the schools.

The other reason for the 21-subject curriculum menu was to guard against early specialisation since the brain of the learner is still developing and discovering where to belong either in terms of talent or abilities. In the developed countries, learners are exposed to many learning situations right from the home, which may be difficult in the case of Uganda and other developing countries.

In identifying and packaging the 11 compulsory subjects, the curriculum experts and stakeholders were convinced that the concepts in these subjects were critical for learners to undertake further education or for self-reliance and life skills. At Senior Three and Senior Four, having been exposed to a broad range of concepts in the 11 compulsory subjects, learners would be in position to undertake seven subjects and a maximum of two electives (See attachment for the subjects on the curriculum and justifications for having them on the revised curriculum).

Implementation strategy

The following departments in the Ministry of Education and Sports have key roles to play in the implementation of the reviewed curriculum as indicated in the roadmap attached as Annex 4: Teacher and Instructor Education and Training (TIET); Instructional Materials Unit (IMU); Communications Unit, Guidance and Counselling; Special Needs Education; Directorate of Industrial Training (DIT); Directorate of Education Standards; Uganda Business Technical Examinations Board (UBTEB), Secondary Education, Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB), universities, NTCs, Department of Physical Education and Sports and National Curriculum Development Centre, (NCDC) among others.

The Ministry of Education and Sports has started the implementation of the new Lower Secondary Curriculum at the beginning of the new term of school year 2020. The following have so far been achieved: 

    a) Distributed the curriculum framework and syllabuses to all schools; 
    b) Trained 21 lead trainers, 90 National Facilitators and 1600 Master Trainers, who trained the 20,000 teachers in preparation for the roll out; and
    c) Developed prototypes and textbook specifications, which are being used by publishers to write textbooks. 

In the meantime, the available prototypes will be used to teach Senior One Learners as the Ministry of Education and Sports finalises the procurement of textbooks. Thereafter, the ministry will conduct Continuous Professional Development (CPDs) programmes for head teachers and teachers throughout the implementation process, using the Secondary, Science and Mathematics Teachers' (SESEMAT) Regional Training Centres during termly holidays. The training of teachers will continue in a phased approach to ensure that all teachers are trained.

A roadmap to the activities to be undertaken during implementation has been developed. Details of each Departmental role have been presented. These activities will be continuous throughout the implementation process. The key critical activities in the implementation process, among the many, will involve continuous professional development (CPDs), recruitment and retooling of teachers where subjects have been merged.

Harmonisation of the teacher-training curriculum with the reviewed lower secondary curriculum has started in an effort to prepare the in-service teachers to deliver the competence-based curriculum.

The ministry will continue to procure textbooks for learners and Teacher’s Guides.

Training of school administrators and District Education Officers, District Inspector of Schools, Members of the Board of Governors will be conducted to ensure effective implementation of the reviewed curriculum.

Continuous sensitisation of the different stakeholders will be conducted using the various avenues such as examination and assessment modalities by the relevant evaluation and Assessment bodies.

Develop and implement a monitoring and evaluation framework for monitoring the implementation.

In the medium term, the Ministry of Education and Sports is developing the National Curriculum Assessment and Placement Policy, which when approved by cabinet, will institutionalise future curriculum reviews, assessment reforms and placement changes in the education system and implementation arrangements. The policy will also inform the review of the relevant laws in respect of curriculum and assessment.

Conclusion

The implementation of the reviewed curriculum has started, taking a grade-wise (gradual) approach from Senior One to Senior Four. The training of teachers will be continuous. The first examination of the end of cycle will be conducted in 2023, which now means that the summative examinations per term are no more and this will allow children to use all their time to do the actual learning as opposed to simply cramming.

I beg to move. (Applause)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am rising on procedure –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please, take your seat. I have not asked anyone to do anything. Honourable members, as you recall, on 4th February, we received a statement from the Minister of State for Education and Sports (Primary Education). There were a number of issues raised, which the Ministry of Education and Sports was asked to answer for the elucidation for the public, information of the stakeholders and Parliament. 

Majorly, the minister’s statement has responded to those issues.

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Education and Sports for the statement. The statement gives a highlight of some issues we raised here but it fell short of going into the nitty-gritty why Parliament resolved to halt the curriculum implementation.

From the onset, the need for a revised curriculum is not controversial –(Interruption)

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, this content was presented to this Parliament by the Minister of State for Primary Education. Parliament took a decision to halt the implementation and guided how the implementation should resume. Of course, we had the pain of listening to a similar statement being given today.

The decision that Parliament made today, under rule 217 of the Rules of Procedure is for the minister to come here and explain the steps taken in the implementation of the parliamentary resolution, not to regurgitate content that was presented here by the Minister of State for Primary Education. Madam Speaker, these are our rules.

When I tried to raise a procedural matter, Madam Speaker, you said it was premature. I painfully waited to go through these pages, which are the same thing. The procedural issue I am raising is whether this statement is made under our rules. Otherwise, it was because of that defiance that we asked the minister to come and explain why she defied. However, that explanation has not been given. All we are told is that now, there will be Personal Curriculum (PC) and other things in the curriculum.

All this was given but we said, “Thank you very much. Please, do not start until the following are done.” Now the minister has comfortably come here and said “Yes, I defied you. Please, I can provide more information why I defied you.” Therefore, is she procedurally right to come and defy Parliament even on the Floor of Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, when hon. Mawanda raised this issue, he wanted the country to know about the new curriculum that is being talked about and what will start in the new term. That is why hon. Mawanda raised this issue and why we asked the Minister of Education and Sports to come and tell us about the new curriculum and how it is going to work. This is what the minister has done and it is what we asked for. (Applause)
MR NIWAGABA: Madam Speaker, if the Hansard of 4th February is critically examined, you will find that Parliament took a decision on this matter following the submission by hon. Seninde on the same matters of fact as have been presented.

With that decision taken on 4th February, today, we expected the minister to proceed under Rule 217 and give us the action take on that decision. In light of that decision, Rule 219 comes into play. If Parliament is to revisit its decision of 4th February and you go to Rule 219 - there is no motion to revisit the decision of Parliament. 

Therefore, for that matter, I would like to invite you, Madam Speaker, to consider the provisions of Rule 219(1). If you find that they apply to this situation, then, the only recourse we would have is to expunge this statement from the record because it is a regurgitation of what was presented on 4th February, the same day Parliament took a decision on the matter. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that you look at those rules. Otherwise, this statement is not made under Rule 51 of our Rules of Procedure. The statement under rule 51 was made by hon. Seninde. We only required a statement under Rule 217. However, what has been presented falls short of rule 217 and so, Parliament cannot proceed to say we are now taking a statement that violates rule 219. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that you consider this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think anyone has moved to rule 219. We are not reconsidering a decision of the House. Is there a motion to reconsider? So, rule 219 does not apply. 

MS SENINDE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. (Interjections) The minister has made it very clear in the statement she has presented to this House, the reason the ministry went ahead to roll out the implementation of this curriculum.

The minister’s statement clearly shows the reasons why we had to go back to Cabinet. It is very clear in the minister’s statement. (Interjections) We all agree that Government -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is not a market.

MS SENINDE: Madam Speaker, the minister has clarified very well as to why after the decision of Parliament, the Ministry of Education and Sports had to go back to inform Cabinet what Parliament had resolved.

Cabinet is the policy making organ of Government. Being a policy making organ of the Government, we could not simply fail to go back to give information to Cabinet such that Cabinet could guide. The minister has made that clarification in her first presentation. I, therefore, do not see why my colleague hon. Ssemujju should continue insisting that the minister has not explained that.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, these controversies are returning again because the minister did not do the honourable thing we expected from her. When you make this matter controversial by regurgitating the same debate on the Floor on 4th February -

Cabinet, as a policy-making organ and Parliament are not in competition, that when we make a decision here, Cabinet must vet it and then go ahead and do whatever it wants. We are not competing because our roles are complementary.

The statement of the minister on page two is an attempt to say, “yes, we heard you but we had it our way.” That is really – we are Parliament; we have our duty and Cabinet has its duty. At the moment, on a rather non-controversial matter, you do not have Parliament with you. 

Madam Speaker, I invite you to look at the logo frame the minister has provided, as an attempt to respond to issues that were raised on the Floor of Parliament on this subject. I will pick one or two but let me begin with four. Four says, why Agriculture is not a compulsory subject –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The statement the Minister of Education and Sports presented reflects rule 50 of 	the Rules of Procedure. I do not have any problem with it because it is a ministerial statement. However, what we are waiting for that I would like to seek your guidance on is that this House took a decision, which should be reported by the ministry under rule 217, which has not yet come.

The House had proposed that before the Minister of Education and Sports comes here on any other matter, that minister should first report on actions taken under rule 217. Therefore, before we even discuss this statement under rule 50, Madam Speaker, I would like to seek your guidance on what happens to the resolution of this House that was passed?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is true we had a resolution. But before we made it, the Minister of State for Education and Sports had already indicated that they were going to come here with a comprehensive answer, which is what they have done.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, a curriculum is like a constitution. It is a consensus of a people on how they want their children to be taught and their clear path of education. There is a kind of controversy we are inviting into this.

I am insisting that the minister missed an opportunity on the Floor to clearly explain to this House why she agreed with Cabinet to defy Parliament. My understanding of the rules - unless otherwise guided - is that we expected the minister to explain because she is sort of telling this Parliament that even the key issues, which raised questions are still pending as far as implementation is concerned.

One of the reasons Parliament was insisting on halting the process until clarity is sought was the readiness of the recipients - that is; the schools, teachers and students. There are no materials in the schools.

I have sampled a number of schools and they have not received the materials needed to have these programmes start. We expected an unequivocal explanation as to –(Interruption)

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I am an educationist and I have done a lot of survey and research on the new curriculum. I have also interacted with many people in the ministry concerning the new curriculum. Being a teacher, I got a lot of interest in this. 

I would like to assure you that we have schools that have textbooks and other materials. I do not see any problem because it is still the old concept that is being translated into a new curriculum. Is the Shadow Minister in order to say that the recipients of the curriculum are not ready when the teaching has started in various schools?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the minister’s statement, there was guidance from the Cabinet, to continue with the rollout and to continue discussing this issue with Parliament until we come to an agreement. I do not know when the minister proposes this dialogue to start and continue because we cannot end it here. However, you said that you had been advised to continue discussing this matter.

4.07
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I would like to give some useful information to the honourable members of Parliament and to explain why Cabinet took the position it took and advised the minister to come back to the House. 

Parliament was concerned about the readiness of Government and the ministry to roll out the new curriculum and therefore, took the resolution it took. The minister reported to Cabinet and in addition, reported the readiness and that she had prepared the ministry to roll out the new curriculum. 

After listening to her, Cabinet was convinced that indeed, Government had not only the will but also the capacity and readiness to roll out the new programme and therefore, ask the minister to come and explain to this august House. 

With that readiness and explanations already given, it is only appropriate that this august House positively considers the minister’s statement and adopts it. This will sort out this debate and we make progress.

MR MPUUGA: The minister needs the unequivocal consensus of this House. Education is not a controversial matter and I would like to invite colleagues from across to move to the centre and we help the ministry do a good job for our country. 

I would like to invite my colleague, the honourable teacher from Busia, that education is demographic and I can tell you that you will be ashamed to go to your community to find schools without a single teacher who has ever received orientation on what we are discussing but you are here pontificating about readiness. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was here when this Government took a decision to introduce Universal Primary Education (UPE). The debate then from some people was “Do we have enough schools and classrooms?” and we said, “let us proceed.”

At that time, the number of children who were going to school was 2.5 million. When we said let every child get an opportunity to go and face with the teacher, the number rose to 7.5 million pupils. Up to now, we are providing for teachers’ houses. (Interjections) I am seeking for clarification; hon. Cecilia Ogwal, through the Speaker, please, sit down. 

My honourable friend, whom I respect very much, if we rolled out this curriculum, aren’t we about to discover the challenges in such programmes, which can make Government handle as we roll it out?  The issue of curriculum development is not contested but we need to test it. (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I will answer my honourable friend and the Government Chief Whip.
 (Interjections) – Let me clarify and then, I will cede ground. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude.

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, these are very key questions we are raising and I would like us to get consensus so that the controversy about a curriculum for the benefit of all of us goes away.

Government Chief Whip, the latest reports on UPE are that literacy levels have gone down by 60 per cent and numeracy levels by 50 per cent. That is not a good report.

On whether we shall find challenges along the way, it is inevitable, which is why we advised for a possibility of piloting. Somebody said that you cannot pilot a curriculum. We said, yes but you can pilot subjects because you have a whole catalogue of subjects with financial, human and logistical requirements. 

Can’t you undertake a pilot to give our children a better package, such that along the way, you are able to cure –(Interjections)– Madam Speaker, let me conclude and allow Members to debate because I do not want to dominate the Floor. Let me conclude –(Interruption) 

MR RUHUNDA: There is a very serious matter you are pointing out and we – Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The honourable –(Interjections)– I am on the Floor –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order.

MR EDWARD OTTO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your indulgence. I am concerned and this is the reason for the point of order. There are two procedural issues that were raised and you guided the House very well that previously, a statement was supposed to have been made and this is the statement that has been made today. You also cited the fact that the minister gave two reasons as to why they have proceeded with the curriculum, one of them being guidance from Cabinet. 

Under rule 86 of the Rules of Procedure, irrespective of whether you agree or disagree with the Speaker, you cannot review the ruling of the Speaker. You cannot continue discussing the matter without a substantive motion. I can see that Members may not be satisfied but they cannot keep debating the ruling of the Speaker, contrary to rule 86(2), which states:

“The decision of the Speaker or Chairperson on any point shall not be open to appeal and shall not be reviewed by the House, except upon a substantive motion made after notice.”

Madam Speaker, that is the point of order. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I guided you that in the minister’s statement, she had explained why there was a departure from what was agreed here. She also explained that she had been advised to continue discussing with Parliament until Members are satisfied. 

I would also like to remind you that at the end of the debate on 4th February,  the Minister of Education and Sports had wanted to organise a workshop where all the Members could participate and hear extensively about the curriculum and the preparations.

Therefore, honourable members, we are not even required to take a vote. We asked for information; that is what hon. Mawanda wanted. It has been given. Let us now proceed to have the dialogue. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE CRITERIA USED BY GOVERNMENT TO ACCORD FALLEN DISTINGUISHED PERSONS STATE OR OFFICIAL BURIAL

4.17
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, on Wednesday, 20 November 2019 on the Floor of Parliament, hon. Jacquiline Amongin raised concern over what is perceived as the selective criteria by Government to accord fallen distinguished persons state and official burials and the need for an eligibility criterion for state and official burials. 

The Ministry of Public Service was directed to report to the House in that regard. We undertook to present to the House a schedule of specified officers who qualify for state and official burials on Tuesday, 17 December 2019.

The Ministry of Public Service is responsible for the management of state and official burials through existing Government institutions. The current management of state and official burials is premised on the following statutory instruments:

    i) The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995; 
    ii) The Emoluments and Benefits of the President, Vice President and Prime Minister Act, 2010;
    iii) The Parliament (Remuneration of Members’) Act, Cap. 259; 
    iv) The Public Service Standing Orders, 2010 for civil servants and other public officers outside the purview of the above legislation; 
    v) The Circular Standing Instruction No.1 of 2005 on Guidelines for handling of political leaders and other dignitaries after demise.

According to the draft National Burial Policy,  state and official burials ensure that we observe and adhere to the strict rules of protocol, to honour people of national significance and commemorate the memory of former Heads of State, senior public officers and other prominent Ugandans, in line with the above regulation.

Madam Speaker, the current provisions of the state and official burial has come under scrutiny and has had implementation challenges ranging from selection criteria, benefits/funeral package that are provided for those accorded, as well as the required finances. 

It is in the above regard that the issue of selective criteria by Government to accord fallen distinguished persons state and official burials and the need for an eligibility criterion for state and official burials arises.

I wish to report that the Ministry of Public Service has embarked on the development of a comprehensive National Burial Policy to address the challenges of the current provisions. The main objectives of the proposed policy are as follows:

    1) To harmonise the policy and regulatory framework for the management and holding of state and official funerals, days of mourning and burial ceremonies in Uganda; and 

    2) To guide Government in the planning, organising, conducting and attending various state and official funeral ceremonies.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I would like to inform you that the draft National Burial Policy is in place. It is awaiting approval by Cabinet and the House will be informed accordingly when it has been approved. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: So, it is work in progress. 

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Last week, a question was raised in respect to the vacant position of the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda. You directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to make a statement today. When I scanned through the Order Paper, I did not see it anywhere.

Are we proceeding right when the item on which you gave a directive is not appearing on the Order Paper? Is it procedurally right for us to move on when the whole country wants to know the status of the position of the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know why the Clerk did not reflect it on the Order Paper but it should be scheduled for Tuesday. Let us go to the next item. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE STATUS OF ESTABLISHMENT OF AREA LICENSING BOARD UNDER THE ENGULI ACT AND MODALITIES FOR THE REGULATIONS OF THE MANUFACTURE OF JAGGERY

4.23
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, on 18 February, a colleague raised an issue of national concern regarding the status of the existing regulatory framework for the alcoholic drinks sector specifically the Enguli Act, Cap 86. 
The issue in question related to who is the licensing authority for the establishment of the alcohol manufacturing industry and whether one can be given a licence to manufacture enguli. 

The Enguli Act, Cap 86 of 1966 is one of the Acts to regulate the manufacture, distribution and trading in alcoholic drinks. The Act defines enguli as any spirit manufactured in Uganda but does not include refined spirit. It is actually crude waragi, spirit of poor quality and its direct consumption was prohibited by the Act. 

The law provided that all enguli produced was to be purchased exclusively by a licenced buyer and then supplied to the East Africa Distillery to undergo further process of refining it into a final product called Uganda Waragi, which is of good quality for direct consumption.

The Enguli Act generally regulates the manufacture, sale, possession and other dealings in enguli and the apparatus used for its manufacture. Specifically, it prohibits consumption and exportation of enguli. Section 2 of the Act prohibits the manufacture and sale of or otherwise dealing in enguli or having in one’s possession or under one’s management or control the apparatus used or intended to be used for the manufacture of enguli without a licence.

The licencing regulations were done by a central licencing board located at Kampala City and area licencing boards located at the districts, supervised by the district commissioners at the time. 
The other Act in place, from the colonial time, to regulate the alcohol industry is the Liquor Act, Cap 93. The Act makes provision for regulating the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquor. Liquor means any spirits including wine, ale, beer, porter, perry, hop beer or any drink containing more than 2 per cent, by weight, of absolute alcohol but does not include enguli or native liquor.

To date, the alcohol industry has changed in very many aspects such as many players involved in the manufacture, distribution, marketing and retail trade. In addition, the local communities in villages use appropriate technologies to add value to the locally grown agricultural products like cassava, bananas, millets and fruits by producing enguli out of them.

Produced alcoholic drinks such as local beer - the Enguli Act did not allow anybody not licenced to produce enguli even in their homes. 

The alcohol industry has greatly expanded over the years and the industry has faced several challenges ranging from poor quality of drinks, bad promotional practices, selling of alcohol packaged in sachets and unregulated drinking leading to alcohol abuse. The list goes on and on.

Madam Speaker, these Acts are obsolete. They do not comprehensively address the licencing, manufacturing, packaging, sale and distribution of alcoholic drinks. They have been overtaken by new requirements attributed to technological development in the manufacture, packaging, trade and environmental consideration. 

Currently, the ministry, in consultation with other key stakeholders from key ministries, departments, agencies, private sector, the civil societies and academia has developed principles for the new National Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill, which will provide a comprehensive legal framework for regulating the alcohol industry. 

The draft principles were presented to Cabinet for their input. Cabinet, through Cabinet Minute 382, deferred the discussion of the principles of the National Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill pending wider consultations with the stakeholders. 

As the ministry reviews the existing regulatory framework for Alcohol Industry and Industrial Development Bill, the licencing of the alcohol industry has not been stopped but under reform. 
The existing legal framework for licencing three industries include the Investment Code Act, 2019, which provides for investment licencing of business in alcoholic products for both local and foreign investors; the Uganda Bureau of Standards Act, to ensure the quality of the product is maintained and the Trade Licencing (Amendment) Act, which provides guidance relating to the trading of the products. 

The local district administration is to ensure the local alcoholic product or spirit is of good quality and safe for direct consumption through by-laws. 

The enguli produced under the Enguli Act was not meant for direct consumption but to undergo further processing and refining process into portable spirit called Uganda Waragi. 

Alcohol produced in today’s world has many other uses including direct consumption, as raw materials to pharmaceutical industry to make medicine, perfume, disinfectants and other medical uses, hence the need to review the existing alcohol Acts. 
The production process of crude waragi today can produce a spirit that can be directly consumed. There is no need to stop anyone from adding value to their agricultural products like cassava, maize, fruits and bananas to make alcoholic drinks. 

My ministry will fast-track the development and finalisation of the two Bills namely: the Industrial Development Bill and the National Alcoholic Drinks Control Bill to sustainably promote and regulate the industry. 

I thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues for listening to me.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, thank you very much. However, the question was raised particularly in relation to jaggery because under the Enguli Act, unless one has a licence, you cannot manufacture jaggery. You must get a licence for it and report to the minister on how much you have produced etcetera. 

Therefore, in view of the developments in the sugarcane industry, the question is, are they still bound under this Enguli Act? Are people allowed to manufacture jaggery?

MS KYAMBADDE: The jaggeries are still allowed to process their products.

THE SPEAKER: Are they still required to get a licence from the minister because that is what the Enguli Act says?

MS KYAMBADDE: Can I consult briefly, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Check section 13 (1).

4.33
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am raising under rule 77 of the Rules of Procedure and I would like to find out from the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives that since we discussed the issue of sugarcane, which is also used for the manufacture of enguli and so on, what action has Government taken to save the sugarcane farmers? 

We have been following in the media and some farmers have contacted some of us personally on phone to find out what Parliament can do for them. Some of them have decided to burn the sugarcanes because they cannot stay on the garden for more than seven or eight months. Many farmers cannot even send their children to school. Therefore, while we are talking about enguli and so on, can we be advised?

The Prime Minister is here; can the minister through the Prime Minister tell us what has happened to rescue the sugarcane farmers? They have tried to take their sugarcane across the borders and it has been difficult and nobody is coming to help them. Right now, they are stranded with children at home without school fees and nobody is coming up to rescue the children.

Can Parliament come up before we discuss about enguli, which makes people drunk about what we can do to help these sugar farmers to take their children to school? Can we be informed about the actions Government has so far taken? I thank you.

4.35
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, the issue of sugarcane raised by our sister hon. Cecilia Ogwal is important. Government has been following up this matter. His Excellency the President, Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives and others are to look for solutions.

I would propose that we get a more definitive position on the latest information we have and how far we have reached as a nation in responding and sorting out this matter from the minister responsible for trade. Let us give her about a week to come and make a statement on the matter in this House.

MR MAWANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On mostly the response that was given by the minister, she has stated that they are preparing Bills in respect to solving the problem of the value chain in this sector. Most of our people have various activities that can be carried out in respect to adding value from the sugarcane products.

I would like the Rt hon. Prime Minister to tell us in what timeframe they can be able to bring these Bills so that we can go and inform our people who are involved in this activity and have even borrowed money but cannot involve themselves in this business because of the licencing regime. If he can tell us, we can also prepare ourselves and we comfort our people. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, indeed, that is why I asked a question on 20 January 2020 because I wanted to know what the arrangements are for value addition in the sugarcane industry in particular; whether Ugandans can now manufacture jaggery without getting a licence from the minister. That is what the law says.

I wondered whether we still have to regulate in a liberalised economy. Those were my questions but they have not been answered.

4.37
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Madam Speaker, we had moved and got a comprehensive law to do with the sugar industry. That law had taken care of all these concerns. Therefore, we may need to know how far the Sugar Bill has gone because it had all these issues well covered and it would not be creating all these gaps that we are seeing today. Therefore, we need to know the status of the Sugar Bill such that we can now move forward as a country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, after the electoral reforms and the city vote, we shall go to the Sugar Bill.

MR BIRAAHWA: Just one important clarification from the Prime Minister. The Enguli Act was against Buy Uganda Build Uganda (BUBU) and local content. Whoever distilled had to supply the monopoly of foreign owned East African distilleries.

In Bunyoro region, we have a case of our own when the factories- actually mzee Kajura who has struggled with that law to put up factories and now even attempting sugar. Therefore, if we do not deliberately move to protect our own - and even the Sugar Bill as we cautioned earlier - if we do not provide for local content and shares as it was, we are going to end up with a sugar industry against citizens, land owners and out-growers. 

Rt hon. Prime Minister, can we bring a pro citizens, land owners and communities Bill so that when we are talking of this industrialisation process, it is not for them against us. We the land owners should even have equity and I thought Prime Minister that this point in Bunyoro right now is a very big issue and it is even a border national dialogue debate.

We need to urgently discuss industrialisation with BUBU and local content. Otherwise, the sugar sector will face a challenge with citizens.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, on the issue of the Sugar Bill -(Interjections)- the jaggery is allowed to operate because it is a by-product. It is under the sugar policy and they do not have to get a licence. Therefore, if you have any challenges, please, tell us. You can go ahead and operate.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, some sugarcane farmers have been arrested and tried for breaching the Enguli Act because of manufacturing jaggery. I know that because I have met them and they have told me. That is why I am asking about the jaggery.

MS KYAMBADDE:  Madam Speaker, can I have more information? The ministry will intervene.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister does not have the facts. Maybe what the honourable minister would have asked for is to be given some time so that she goes and comes back next week with a concrete statement than her trying to say. She was not here when the Prime Minister was giving those directives. That way, you will be able to give us a very substantial answer. Going by the way she is proceeding, I think she will not give us a better answer.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, can you come back? It is a serious issue.

Ms kyambadde: Madam Speaker, I have just consulted with experts but still I could request for a week or a few days so that I bring a comprehensive report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you. The Sugar Bill will be on the Order Paper as soon as we finish the elections Bills and that of the cities.  

Mr okupa: Madam Speaker, since last week, I had a question, which was on the Order Paper but I do not see it today. This is a question that concerns a matter I have been raising here of the non-payment of the people who were appointed as Presidential Advisors. They have not been paid for the last three years. These are responsible senior Ugandans. 

Even some who finally made it up to this House have not been paid what was due to them. For example, hon. Okori-Moe was a Presidential advisor but she has never been paid.
 
I put up that question and it was on the Order Paper. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Minister for Presidency were supposed to come here and respond –(Interjections)- I am on a point of procedure. You are my senior, so, you know these rules.

I have been raising this matter. There are elders and seniors. I can give an example of Prof. Kagonyera, he is one of them, the retired Arch Bishop and others.

You directed that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes. When will the ministers come and tell these senior colleagues who have been appointed presidential advisors and have not benefited? 

Is it procedurally right for us to proceed when this matter has been in the House and on the Order Paper but the minister has not responded?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, last week, I indicated to you that this week would be dedicated mainly to the completion of:

    i) The Administration of the Judiciary Bill
    ii) The Presidential Elections Bill
    iii) The Parliamentary Elections Bill
    iv) The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, and;
    v)  The Political Parties and Organisations Bill. 

When we finish these, we will do all the cities and the other business. I am sorry this week is for that work. 

Ms ruth Nankabirwa: I have a point of procedure. Madam Speaker, you always endeavour to produce the Order Paper in good time for us to look at so that if there is anybody who feels that his or her matter has not been included, they would go to the Clerk. 

Instead of raising such procedural matters or complaining about matters, which have not appeared on the Order Paper when the session is in progress, can’t we use that chance when the Order Paper comes out early enough to read and go to your office and request for amendments such that when we begin the session we do so without interruption?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Order Paper comes out at about 7.00 p.m. the night before. I would like you to know, in case you are not aware. 

If you have issues, you can go before 10.00 p.m. and check with the Clerk. 

QUESTIONS FOR ORAL ANSWER

QUESTION 88/04/10

4.46
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): “On 20 September 1991, the Sudanese Government carried out an air raid in the Uganda Air Space causing loss of lives and property in Nacara village Ojapi Parish of Tara sub-county in Maracha District.

A letter asking for compensation for victims of the raid was filed with State House, Kampala on 11 October 2014. The letter was responded to on 12 July 2016 and the matter referred to the Solicitor-General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for further management.

    i) Why has the Solicitor-General failed to act on this formal request from State House regarding the compensation claim by victims of the 1991 Ojapi Air Raid?

    ii) When will the victims of the infamous Air Raid be compensated?

    iii) How do you intend to ensure that such cases are expeditiously handled to avoid injustice in future?”

4.46
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu):  Madam Speaker, I am making a statement in respect to the questions raised by hon. James Acidri.

On Tuesday, 11 February 2020, the House was informed that on 20 September 1991, the Sudanese Government carried out an air raid in the Uganda Airspace causing loss of life and property in Nacara village Ojapi Parish of Tara sub-county in Maracha District.

Further, that a letter asking for compensation for victims of the raid was filed with State House, Kampala on 11 October 2014. The letter was responded to on 12 July 2016 and the matter referred to the Solicitor-General, Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for further management.

The questions that were raised were:

    i) Why has the Solicitor-General failed to act on this formal request from State House regarding the compensation claim by victims of the 1991 Ojapi Air Raid?
    ii) When will the victims of the infamous Air Raid be compensated?
    iii) How do you intend to ensure that such cases are expeditiously handled to avoid injustice in the future?

Madam Speaker, as you can see from these questions, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is working jointly with the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs. 

As I address this House, a special team has been established by the Ministry of Defence and Veterans Affairs to handle this matter expeditiously and have a detailed report availed to the House in due course.

As of now, the team has started the process of identifying the victims, the affected persons and the property that was destroyed. Once this verification exercise is complete, I shall inform this House accordingly. 

I, therefore, request to be granted three months. This date has been reached in consultation with the team, which is verifying these victims. At that time, they will be able to have completed the verification exercise and I can respond to this matter fully to this House.

I beg to report. Thank you 

THE SPEAKER: Any supplementary question, hon. Acidri?

4.50
Mr james acidri (NRM, Maracha County East, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs for the actions so far taken. I hope it will eventually bear fruit. We are no longer worried about our safety since Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir has been confined in a small room somewhere. 

We are more concerned about the compensation and I hope the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs will act swiftly in ensuring that these victims get justice as he has stated.

I would like him to avail me with official documents, particularly the report he has read so that I also have a copy and we engage in this process in a very formal manner. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. We await your update after the stated period.

QUESTION 90/04/10 

4.51
Mr Mbwatekamwa Gaffa (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): “Under the present legal framework, the National Drug Authority is mandated to regulate drugs in the country while the Uganda Bureau of Standards regulates food safety and quality.  This has created poor coordination in the administration of food and drug safety given the correlation between the two.
		
When will the minister present a Food and Drug Bill to Parliament for first reading to streamline the food control system by transforming the National Drug Authority into a modern and effective National Food and Drug Authority?
	
THE SPEAKER: Is the Minister of Health here? You are hiding behind the backbenchers.
 
4.51
The Minister of Health (Ms Ruth Aceng): Madam Speaker, on the 6th of January, I received three questions from hon. Mbwatekamwa regarding the National Food and Drug Authority Bill. They included:  

    1. When will the minister present the National Food and Drug Authority Bill to Parliament for First Reading? 

    2. Is the minister aware of the inordinate delay in presenting this Bill and the consequences on the lives of Ugandans? 

    3. Would the minister consider allowing the Member asking the questions to introduce a private Member’s Bill if after one month, Government has still not presented it to Parliament for First Reading? 

Madam Speaker, the National Food and Drug Authority Bill, which has undergone extensive stakeholder consultation, is now ready to be presented to Cabinet. Subsequently, it will be laid on the Table in Parliament for First Reading. 

I am aware of the delay in presenting this Bill. The principal aim of the Bill is to address the gaps related to regulation and control of the safety and quality of food, medical and veterinary devices, cosmetics and chemicals for public health use. 

Until this Bill is enacted into law, the regulatory gaps will continue to pose risks to food safety, public health, the environment, as well as have serious consequences to trading in these products. 

The inordinate delay to presenting this Bill to Parliament has been occasioned by a prolonged delay in achieving consensus by some stakeholders on some of the provisions of the Bill. I will highlight a few. 

The process of developing the Bill started in 2009, when the Ministry of Health consulted all key stakeholder ministries on the draft memorandum for transformation of the National Drug Authority into a national food and drug authority. However, during presentation of the Cabinet memorandum to Cabinet in September 2009, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries objected to the Ministry of Health as the lead ministry for food safety in Uganda. 

Cabinet then directed the National Planning Authority to coordinate all stakeholders involved and come up with a way forward. The National Planning Authority carried out research and benchmarking and in 2012 presented its final report to Cabinet with recommendations. It was until then that the Ministry of Health presented the revised Cabinet memo, based on recommendations from the National Planning Authority Report, to Cabinet and obtained Cabinet approval and instructions to draft the National Food and Drug Authority Bill. This alone caused a delay to the Bill’s drafting process for about three years. 

Between 2012 and 2017, progress was made in drafting of the Bill, which was informed by several stakeholder consultations. The final draft Bill was developed in September 2017 and was ready for presentation. However, in November 2017, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries again raised concerns to Cabinet about the regulation of the veterinary medical products, biological chemicals and devices. Since the products under question were part of the National Food and Drug Authority Bill, the Bill could then not be presented until issues raised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries were resolved. 

A Cabinet subcommittee, under the leadership of the Office of the Prime Minister, was put in place to harmonise positions of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, the Ministry of Health and other key stakeholders. A report of that subcommittee was presented to Cabinet. 

As per the foregoing, my ministry has lost valuable time in the process of harmonising different positions of key stakeholders. However, it was important for us to achieve consensus by stakeholders to enable the Bill drafting process to proceed smoothly.

Madam Speaker, I have highlighted some of the regulatory gaps and the impact that this has had on the lives of Ugandans. However, because it is long, I will request that I skip it and I go to the last part of the question, as I request the honourable members to take note of the impact that it has had. 

Based on the above extensive consultations made on the Bill and Government resources that have already been spent with respect to this assignment, it is not necessary at this time to introduce a private Member’s Bill on the matter, which is already under consideration by Government. It is pertinent to leverage ongoing Government efforts by supporting the progression of the National Food and Drug Authority Bill to Parliament and finally enactment into law. 

In conclusion, allow me to reiterate the commitment of the Ministry of Health in safeguarding public health by putting in place supporting policies and a regulatory framework that will ensure effective regulation of food, medicines and healthcare products. My ministry is committed to progress the Bill and calls for fast-tracking of the enactment of this Bill into law in order to safeguard the lives of Ugandans.

Lastly, I welcome the honourable Member of Parliament, hon. Gaffa Mbwatekamwa, to join efforts with us and harness the ongoing work so that the Bill can be speedily enacted into law.  I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: Do you have a supplementary question? 

4.58
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In good faith, I wish to thank the minister because she has tried to bring out a comprehensive report. Thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, considering a Cabinet extract, Minute No. 273 (CT of 2012), when this Bill was supposed to commence and be brought to Parliament, it has been long overdue. Honourable minister, I appreciate. However, considering the consequences that you have not read here because of time, can you tell this Parliament the timeframe? In case you do not fulfil this particular timeframe, hon. Mbwatekamwa is ready – 

I have actually drafted the Bill. I have my personal private Member’s Bill. Can you help me give this Parliament the timeframe? If you cannot meet that timeframe, then I will be granted that chance to bring a private Member’s Bill, because this matter is very pertinent for this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, do you have a timeframe? 

DR ACENG: Madam Speaker, the First Parliamentary Counsel is concluding the inputs of the subcommittee. I want to believe that by March, Cabinet will have concluded and perhaps in April, it will be laid on the Table. I beg to submit.

THE SPEAKER: That is a Government assurance that the Bill will be here by April. Let it be recorded by the Clerk. 

Minister of Public Service, I do not know whether you are ready to respond to the issues we raised about assignments and secondments of public servants. We had issues raised here yesterday, for which we needed your technical advice from the ministry. I do not know if you are ready. We are on the Administration of the Judiciary Bill.

5.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Madam Speaker, we need further consultations on those issues that were given to us because there are some issues, which touch the Pensions Act. We gave them to the technical officers but we need further consultation on those issues because some of them may contravene what is in the Pensions Act.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. I think we can deal with other areas. Let us go to the committee stage.

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE JUDICIARY BILL, 2018

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question- 

5.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Chairperson, in clause 2, paragraph (c), we seek to substitute the words “Judiciary Advisory Committee” with the words “Judiciary Council”. That is the only amendment there.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the proposed amendment in clause 4. We stood over this because we needed to first agree. We are referring to clause 4 which establishes a Judiciary advisory committee initially. However, from the beginning, we are saying this should be a Judiciary council.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that -

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before we deal with clause 2, we need to deal with clause 4 because clause 2 is referring to clause 4. The chairman has talked about the advisory council but it is the one we are referring to in clause 4. If you recall, we left before sorting out the issue of clause 4. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we are on clause 2.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes, Madam Chairperson. Clause 2(c) is talking about a Judiciary advisory committee, which is in clause 4 and 5.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable, we are trying to change it to “council” in clause 2 so that when we get to 4, we are dealing with the council and not a committee. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, for those of you who may not have the Bill, - I have been taking it for granted that everyone has the Bill – clause 2 is about the object of the Bill and (c) reads “to establish the Judiciary Advisory Committee to advise the Chief Justice in the administration of the Judiciary and justice.”

The amendment we are proposing is to take away the words, “Judiciary Advisory Committee” and replace them with “Judiciary Council.” That would not really necessarily mean that - In fact, if we get to clause 4, it would be consequential from clause 2 that we made earlier.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Do you have an objection to the change?

MR JOHNATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, there was a debate and there were proposals by some Members of this House who were against the creation of that judicial council or advisory committee. Their argument was that we have another organ. That is why it is very important that we first resolve whether actually clause 4 stands. Whichever name we give it, we first need, in principle, to agree whether that should be there and then we go back. That was the argument.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Odur, which other body is competing with this committee?

MR JOHNATHAN ODUR: It was a proposal by some Members, hon. Mawanda being one of them, that the Judicial Service Commission performs some functions that –(Interjection)– He is here and he is going to clarify. He made that submission here.

MR MAWANDA: Madam Chairperson, when they substitute the advisory committee with the council and they leave the functions of the committee the same, it is a duplication of the responsibilities of other organs. This is why we are saying that this committee -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you read the provisions in the Judicial Service Commission Act?

MR NIWAGABA: The information I would like to give hon. Mawanda is that when you look at the functions that will be given to this body, whichever name we call it, they have nothing to do with the functions of the Judicial Service Commission established under the Constitution. Therefore, the only dispute I see with Members is just the name. If you are not comfortable with the name that the committee is proposing, the best thing would be to give us a name you think would substitute. 

Otherwise, I believe that, that particular council created and the functions given to it are totally different from the functions of the Judicial Service Commission and the two are different.

MR TWINAMASIKO: Madam Chairperson, in yesterday’s debate, we talked about this matter and I remember arguing that this council is composed of the Chief Justice as its chairperson and deputised by the Deputy Chief Justice and has other judges from the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal and High Court. The council will not be independent because they are the same people on the council and in the offices. The council is totally irrelevant and unnecessary.

MR NIWAGABA: When you look at this particular Bill, it is trying to operationalise the provisions of Article 133 of the Constitution. Article 133 is closely linked to the provisions of Article 126 up to Article 128. Some of the key ingredients in those Articles are the participation of the people in the administration of justice in addition to the powers of the Chief Justice. Therefore, the Chief Justice cannot work in isolation.  The essence of this particular council is not only to assist the Chief Justice but also to help the people, particularly those who are not even in the judicial mainstream, to participate in the administration of justice.

Therefore, Articles 126 to 133 read together with this particular Bill will help us to operationalise the provisions of Article 133. 

I would like to beg the House to allow us proceed maybe to clause 4, pass it with amendments, if any, and if you need a different name, you can suggest it. Otherwise, if we are to really operationalise Article 133, we will need clauses 4 and 5.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, clause 4 is on the establishment of the Judiciary Advisory Committee. Our proposal is that we replace it with the following: 

“4. 	Establishment of the Judiciary Council 

(1) 	There is established within the Judiciary, a Judiciary Council consisting of-
(a) 	the Chief Justice; 
(b) 	the Deputy Chief Justice;
(c) 	the Principal Judge; 
(d) 	the Attorney-General; 
(e) 	the Director of Public Prosecutions;
(f) 	one justice representing the superior courts; 
(g) 	one judicial officer representing the lower bench;
(h) 	the Solicitor-General; 
(i) 	the Chief Registrar; 
(j) 	the Secretary to the Judiciary;
(k) 	the Secretary to the Treasury;
(l) 	A representative of the Justice Law and Order Sector institutions, other than the ministry responsible for justice; (m) the President of the Uganda Law Society; 
(n) 	The Chairperson of the Law Council; and 
(o) 	Two members of the public - male and female - of high moral character, proven integrity and competence nominated by the Chief Justice. 

(2) 	The Chief Justice shall be the chairperson of the council and shall preside at the meetings of the Council, and in his or her absence, the Deputy Chief Justice shall preside.

(3) 	The Chief Justice or the Council may invite any person or representative of any organisation or department of Government to attend the meetings of the Council.

(4) 	The Council shall meet at least once in every three months at a place and time determined by the Chief Justice.

(5) 	Subject to this Act, the Council shall determine its own procedure or any other matter relating to the meetings of the Council.

(6) 	The Chief Registrar shall be the secretary to the Council.”

The justifications are: 

    1. To reflect the true nature of the established body since it will perform many other functions other than advising the Chief Justice as prescribed in clause 5; and 

    2. To be consistent with international best practices as far as the establishment of similar bodies in countries like Zambia, Kenya and many other commonwealth countries is concerned.

Madam Chairperson, when this matter came up for debate, the hon. Cecilia Ogwal indicated to the House that she would make some proposal on the two representatives from the public. Probably, I would like to listen to her.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, although I have my reservations on some of the previous clauses that have already been passed, under (o), I am proposing an amendment. The amendment says that the two members of the public be nominated by the Judicial Service Commission, not the Chief Justice, and that they should be male and female persons of high moral character, proven integrity and competent, and that one of them should be a person with disabilities. 

The justification is that we are all aware of our strategic development plan, which requires that everybody should be included in whatever we do in our policies. I think it is unfortunate and it was an oversight to leave out people with disabilities from this particular representation.

Secondly, it would not be right for two members of this council, which is going to be chaired by the Chief Justice, to be nominated by the same Chief Justice who operationalises all these policies we are making. It would be wrong for the Chief Justice to be the one also to nominate the two persons. Therefore, I feel that in the spirit of corporate governance, these two people be nominated by the Judicial Service Commission. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, on that amendment to do with the Judicial Service Commission, I would like to know whether the Judicial Service Commission will go outside the legal circles, to the Private Sector Foundation or Uganda Manufacturers Association to get somebody. Will the Judicial Service Commission go into the public or nominate from the judicial circles? 

I think the intention was to get people who are outside the judicial fraternity. So, will the Judicial Service Commission be able to go beyond the judicial circles and get someone from the public? That is what I would like to know. If you want the Judicial Service Commission to do this, are they nominating from the ordinary people or from the legal fraternity?

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to agree with you. If the spirit is inclusion and participation of the non-legal gurus, we should also state that they should be found outside the Justice, Law and Order Sector (JLOS) fraternity.

MR NIWAGABA: When you look at the Article that establishes the Judicial Service Commission, particularly Article 146(2)(e), among its composition are two members of the public who shall not be lawyers. Therefore, the Judicial Service Commission already has representation of non-lawyers and I am sure when they are nominating, they look at the quality in terms of integrity and high moral character.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, they are there because the law says they should be there. I think we should make it clear; do we want people from the public? It was extended to include people from the public.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, let us look at the proposal as in the Bill and as proposed in the amendment. The amendment proposes two members of the public. Look at the earlier composition, the legal fraternity is already represented by the Uganda Law Society. 

We all know that lawyers can never be members of the public when it is a matter of law like this - the legal profession. However, you can be a member of the public when they are dealing with medical issues. On legal issues, Madam Chairperson, unless you guide that it will be strictly two members who are non-lawyers -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the spirit behind this provision was to tap from the public because all the lawyers are here. Therefore, let us be specific. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, not to cause unnecessary debate, the intention of this amendment, and I believe the original intention of the committee, is to appoint persons from the public not from the legal fraternity. That is why I would concede to an amendment which says “non-lawyers” or whatever word you may want to use for that. Therefore, these two must come from outside the legal circles. Thank you.

MS NAKIWALA KIYINGI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I concur with the honourable member who consents that it should be from the general public and from the non-legal profession. However, I would like to add onto the earlier assertion that it should be the Chief Justice to nominate. Borrowing from other councils, ministers or heads of political units or ministries are given the mandate to fill the two positions on councils and boards. Are we setting a new precedent that now it could be either way or we follow the old rule that for any board or council, there are two ex officio members that are appointed by the minister or head of unit. Thank you.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I think the paralegals and some of us who do not even have any legal knowledge need to be represented. In the medical field, for example, when you are looking for a committee, clients must be there. Honestly, they should come from the public; that is when we shall get fair justice. Thank you. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I do not know why people are trying to emasculate the Chief Justice. Why do you want to take away every little power that he has? 

MR OTHIENO: I need clarification from the chair of the committee. In the report of the committee, they recommended that the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice should be removed from this council. They have their own argument - I am not a lawyer but I am just getting it from their own argument here – (Interjections)- I am reading the committee report, Chair. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are you reading the amendments? 

MR OTHIENO: No. This report was submitted under Rule 128 and it is the basis that is informing our participation at the committee stage. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can you look at the amendment? 

MR OTHIENO: Madam Chair, I am being buttressed by the argument the committee had which they presented to the House before they came up with that amendment. They had a very valid argument in their deliberations in the committee and they signed this. Rule 128 is what they based upon to bring this report to the House and it is the basis on which we are proceeding. 

They have very strong arguments because they are even citing constitutional matters. They are saying that some of these will infringe on the Constitution and they will be challenged. This is according to them, in their deliberations, and they even submitted to us minutes of their deliberations. 

I wanted clarification from the chair; would it not be unconstitutional, as you argued in your report and in your deliberations, to include the Chief Justice and Deputy Chief Justice? You even have very clear legal justifications that you used –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, when we gave the report, it generated a lot of debate. The presiding officer, who was the Deputy Speaker then, directed that we should go and have some harmonisation. I have talked about that here over and over again. 

What the honourable member is referring to, our argument in the committee was against the Judiciary Advisory Committee. We said that you cannot sit in a committee which is going to advise you and chair the same. We rightly said that - The compromise came when we said that we should change the name. It cannot be a judiciary advisory committee; it can only be something else and we agreed on the council. 

The mandate of the council under the proposed Bill is not only to advise; they are looking at policies and the semblance of what I said yesterday, like in Parliament. The Chief Justice, apart from presiding over the Supreme Court, has no other place where he can sit and get information and ideas. This is the basis upon which we harmonised and we conceded. We said we should have something for where the Chief Justice –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Chair, the chairman of the committee is labouring for nothing, because you cannot just change the name. The important thing is to change the functions. We looked at the functions and we realised that the Chief Justice as the head of the institution needed to be part and parcel of the planning processes and the decision-making processes. Therefore, it was crucial for him to be the chair of this council. 

So it was not just a question of changing names; it is the functions that this council is supposed to be doing. That is why I conceded to that idea and I decided that maybe we just clean up the administrative aspect but make it remain for planning and policy-making. However, the Chief Justice must be part and parcel of those processes. 

MS SANTA ALUM: Thank you very much, Madam Chair. I agree with the Members that the two members of the advisory committee should come from the public. However, Madam Chair, as we read the functions of this committee, for example (b) which is about ethics and integrity within the Judiciary and (c) which is about means of securing adequate financing for the Judiciary, these are very key responsibilities.  

I was of the view that the Chief Justice, who is the chair, should do this in consultation with the Public Service Commission because they are entitled to look at the integrity and expertise, so that they advise the Chief Justice as the chair of this committee. Alternatively, the council should come from Public Service because we are dealing with members of the public. We are getting expertise from the public. That is my submission. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I think that the intention of including the public was to tap from outside the formal structures. Now, if you include the Public Service Commission, that would mean civil servants going to that body. Why don’t you allow the Chief Justice to do this? He is the head of that institution. Why are you trying to take away his powers?

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chair, I would like to ask the chair of the committee to clarify. I had suggested that I would make proposals to (f) and (g). 

There is a proposal in (f) to have one justice from the superior court. I find it hanging. Even in (g), the proposal is to have one judicial officer from the lower bench. So, who will nominate, because we have many justices at the superior court and we also have many at the lower bench. That is a lacuna. How are we going to get them nominated? 

Secondly, we have created this office of the Chief Inspectorate of Court. Looking at the functions, the chief inspector should actually also be sitting in this council. 

Finally, the total number proposed comes to 16. I am not sure whether at some point they will have to take a decision on some matters, but in case they have to, if there is a split of eight against eight, what happens? Wouldn’t it be better to have an odd number of members so that valid resolutions can be passed?

MR KATUNTU: Madam Chairperson, this is not the first time that the Judiciary has representatives in other institutions. In the Judiciary Service Commission, for example, there is a representative of the Judiciary. The Judiciary has a system within itself of nominating one of them to be on those institutions. 

That notwithstanding, when we are legislating, we start with the principles; the nitty-gritty is always covered under the regulations. Under this law, regulations are going to be made and those are the ones that will now spell out what can be done or how some of these things can be done. Not everything is going to be covered within this law. Therefore, the minister, Chief Justice or whoever we agree to be responsible for making the regulations should be able to spell out how the institution will go through the process of nominating or electing the representatives. 

Having heard the second point about the Chief Inspector of Courts, I think the committee chairperson should think of conceding to that point – to have the Chief Inspector of Courts on that council.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the reason we could not have put the Chief Inspector of Courts was because the committee had killed that office. In view of that, and I must appreciate hon. Jonathan Odur for thinking it through, we will concede to getting the number that you want and we also have the Chief Inspector of Courts as one of the members.

Madam Chairperson, we had moved to the point where we had an amendment proposed by hon. Cecilia Ogwal modified a little to include these members of the public to be non-lawyers. The question was supposed to be put to that so that we could proceed. However, the issue was about who nominates them. Hon. Ogwal proposed the Judicial Service Commission. So, we would have the Chief Justice who will not nominate anybody and the Judicial Service Commission that nominates for the council. 

We can strike a balance. This is purely a council. You can find people who can help this council to operate. In fact, the argument that the Judicial Service Commission should nominate could only suffice when this was still an advisory committee. We are talking about nominating two people, one of whom should be a person with disability, from members of the public. “Members of the public” does not mean vendors; it could be an engineer, an accountant or an economist, so that you give the prerogative –

MR KATUNTU: Committee chairperson, I think that that point has been well made. When administering justice, we do not have to be legalistic all the time. We need the public component and that is when we get non-lawyers to say, “look here, those are your sections, articles and subsections but the public thinks this is the way justice should be administered”. Therefore, it is the public component in the administration of justice. 

We need to be specific – two members from the public who shall be non-lawyers - and then you will have that component of people who are not looking at the dots and commas of the law but at the public.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Hon. Katuntu, I would like you to help me. In clause 36, we made the minister responsible for the regulations. When we made the minister responsible for the regulations, we said the minister is the one in charge of this law. Now, why do you bring the Judicial Service Commission to nominate the two people, yet we have allowed the minister to make the regulations?

Madam Chairperson, first of all, hon. Jonathan Odur brought the issue of the Chief Inspector of Courts, which is good. Why shouldn’t it be that instead of the Judicial Service Commission, we allow the minister to be in charge of the nomination of those two people since the law belongs to the minister?

MR KATUNTU: He was seeking clarification from me –(Interjection)- I wish I had the authority. 

My chairman, I would advise you to seriously think of conceding to hon. Nandala-Mafabi’s proposal. You know, it is even easier for the minister to look out for these members of the public than getting the technical people in the Judicial Service Commission, because those are very good at looking – (Interjection) - I would not have a problem with having the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I still think that we should respect the doctrine of separation of powers. The Chief Justice is the head of that branch and I think we should give him the opportunity to nominate those people. Why do you want the minister to do this small thing?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to partly concede to the proposal made by my senior colleague, Mama Cecilia, that one of the nominees should be a person with disability. I, however, wish to maintain that the nomination should be done by the Chief Justice because I believe we would be overly disempowering the Chief Justice, yet the intention of this particular clause is to operationalise Article 133 of the Constitution.

MS NAUWAT: Madam Chairperson, subclause (3) says that the Chief Justice or the council may invite any person to attend the council meeting. However, when you look at subclause (2), we are told that the Chief Justice shall be the chairperson, meaning that he represents the council in all the things that the council does, including inviting persons to attend the council meetings. 

I do not know whether it is necessary for us to give options for the invitation of people to these council meetings. Besides that, Madam Chairperson, are the people being invited to these meetings going to have voting rights? If not, I think we need to capture something about that.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I think the point made by my colleague may be pertinent. Invitation to attend a meeting does not mean you are a member of that council. You would have been invited for purposes of consultation and that does not give you any right to start participating and making decisions. The decision-making is for members of the council since they are the members.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I would like to reassure hon. Nauwat. Under subclause (3), if there is something that requires special evidence or a witness, for example when they are discussing the review of the law on something, then they can say, “let us call a professor of geography to come and address us on this issue” but he or she would not participate as a voter.

MR KARUBANGA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The other day, before you adjourned, I had given the roles of the Judicial Service Commission and I had requested to include a member.

The reason is that constitutionally, the Judicial Service Commission is responsible for the terms and conditions of all the employees. So, you would need guidance on that. Even on issues of ethics and integrity, they carry out an inspectorate role. So, if you do not include any member, for example a chairperson, you will be completely working without any support from the Judicial Service Commission. Therefore, I propose that you include a member on that council, to provide that kind of guidance.

THE CHAIRPERSON: A member of the Judicial Service Commission -

MR OBOTH: Madam Chair, when you look at the hierarchy here, the truth is that this council would be concerned about human resource and other things. The human resource arm of the Judiciary will be the Judicial Service Commission. Reluctantly, we would admit one but probably amend (f) and remove one justice representing the superior courts. If the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice are already there, then we could replace -
 
THE CHAIRPERSON: The Principle Judge, the Chief Justice and the Deputy Chief Justice are the top people. What about the interests of the ordinary judges? There might be things the ordinary judges – Do not throw them away.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, the ordinary judges are covered because we have a representative of the upper and the lower bench. However, this issue of bringing – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: The lower bench is the magistrates. 

MR NIWAGABA: Yes, it is the magistrates. It is defined in clause 1 - the interpretation clause.

Bringing in the Judicial Service Commission in this council, which sits largely to recruit and discipline, in my view would bring conflict of interest. What if the Chief Inspector of Courts in this particular council meeting brings a report about a particular judicial officer and deliberations are made, and subsequently, that officer appears before the Judicial Service Commission where one of the members sat in this council? We would end up having a terrible conflict.

I would pray that we leave out the Judicial Service Commission from this council. It should retain its constitutional role not only on recruitment but also disciplinary control.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that a new clause be introduced.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Chief Inspector of Courts be included among the members of the council.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 4 (1) (o) be amended as proposed by hon. Ogwal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Clause 5 is on functions of the committee. We propose to replace the word “Committee” with the word “Council” wherever it appears in the clause.

The justification is that it is a consequential amendment arising from the amendment of clause 4 of the Bill, which we have just done.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not objecting to what the chair is saying. However, if you read through, the clause says, “The Committee shall be responsible for advising the Chief Justice…” I propose that that be deleted. You cannot be a chairperson of a council that will advise you. So, it should be “The functions of the council shall be…” and then we deal with (a) up to (g).

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I think you are taking things a bit too far. When you join Cabinet, you swear to give advice to the President as a minister and the President chairs that Cabinet. He has appointed you but he is the chair. It is part of the oath. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, the Cabinet ministers are not presidential advisers. The presidential advisers are clear -

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, you have never been in the Cabinet.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: They are not even paid. 

MS EVELYN ANITE: Madam Chairperson, you are very right. Since I have been appointed as a minister and hon. Nandala-Mafabi is yet to be appointed, with my experience, it is exactly what you have said. We take oath to give advice to the President as and when. Most times, he chairs Cabinet but he does not get conflicted, even given the fact that he appoints all of us. It is our duty and we give him advice. I, therefore, think it is in order that the Chief Justice appoints the council as proposed by the chair.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I am not a minister - Being a chairperson, when the council makes a decision, you go by it. Therefore, it cannot be said here explicitly that the council shall be responsible for advising the Chief Justice.

Madam Chairperson, even these Cabinet ministers bring their collective views in a meeting, which the leader takes. Saying that “we are sitting today to advise the Chief Justice…” –(Interruption)

MR OPOLOT: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. Chair of the committee will help after I have sought my clarification.

I would like to request hon. Nandala-Mafabi to clarify in what context he appreciates the word, “advise” or the role “to advise”.  Madam Chairperson, I would imagine that as the Speaker who chairs the Parliamentary Commission, there are cases when the Commission would guide you or give you information on how to proceed with the administration of this Parliament. 

Being a chairperson does not stop one from taking advice on the best ideas to deal with. The clarification I would like to seek is how hon. Nandala-Mafabi appreciates the reference “to advise”.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I think the chairperson of the committee should have helped us. What this particular section is talking about is summarised in (g) - the council is responsible for advising the Chief Justice in the administration and operationalisation of the Judiciary. That is the specific; in a straitjacket but the way you frame it matters. The fact is, it is this council that is going to guide the Chief Justice in the general administration and operational issues of the Judiciary. That is how I understand it. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the amendment is just one; to change the word “committee” to “council”. I do not know why we are taking so much time.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, the whole thing goes back to the situation of Bank of Uganda where we have the Governor and the Deputy Governor sitting on the Board and then you do not know what is happening where.

The whole issue is about the division. Why did we have to amalgamate the two issues? Advisory should have stayed as it is and policy as policy. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Chairperson. I need to help here about Bank of Uganda and our proposals. My committee then took a lot of time to study the relationship between the Board and management. 

What happens is that the Board is supposed to supervise management and in this case, it is different; nobody is supervising the other. For example, on that committee we even have the Attorney-General.

What they are saying is, in the administration of this institution, does the head have a right to consult other people to help him or her make a decision? I think that is the essence of this council. In addition, who are those he is consulting? It even includes his juniors. It is like the Speaker would invite any member of this House and say, “There is this issue. How do you think we should handle it”? That happens.

The Speaker can easily invite hon. Waluswaka and say, “I am going to consider this highly technical motion. What is your advice?” 

MR KAFUUZI: Thank you very much, my senior colleague. Like we have said, the intention of the council is to advise or to operationalise Article 133 of the Constitution. I would like you to allow me read Article 133(1)(b). It says: “The Chief Justice may issue orders and directions to the courts necessary for the proper and efficient administration of justice.” 

A Chief Justice cannot be self-contained, he cannot be a know-it-all. That is why he needs this council to advise him in issuance of such orders in the administration of justice in the courts.

MR KATUNTU: Well, if he conceded then we go ahead.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 5 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.)

Clause 6

MR OBOTH: We are moving to seek for the replacement of clause 6 as follows: “Establishment of committees within the Judiciary.

(i) 	The Chief Justice may establish committees within the Judiciary to perform functions and duties as may be prescribed by the Chief Justice.
(ii) 	A committee established under this section shall determine its own procedure.”

The justification is to give the Chief Justice broad powers to establish committees within the Judiciary as the need arises and this is partly what hon. Nandala-Mafabi yesterday was speaking about. This is well provided for here and I believe he is getting up to support this.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. What I wanted to state here is, it will not be good to limit it that the Chief Justice “may” make a decision. There are some committees, which should be there and those should be prescribed in the law.

First of all, we have talked about policies for planning and development. There must be a sub-committee to deal with resources.

Madam Chairperson, I agree with (i) and (ii) but we should not stop there. I would like these ones, which are already in the Bill and which were provided for – They look like very good committees that should be maintained.

For example, “(a) There will be a committee for planning, development and the judicial resources.” Of course we need a sub-committee. 

The same applies to human resource and gender streamlining, ICT, audit committees and others. The justification is, the Chief Justice “may”. He might decide not to. Therefore, to avoid a situation where he sits without doing it, let us have some, which should be there to help - You are saying that you want an advisory committee but you will need a resources committee and a planning committee.

I would like to implore the chairperson of the committee that we maintain (a), (b) and (c). In (d) I wanted to add “the audit committee” as per the Public Finance Management Act, 2015. If we have created the one for “Chief Inspector of Courts” we should also have a committee to track performance of judicial officers. In (f)-

THE CHAIRPERSON: Can that go under (d) “any other sub-committee required for the administration of the Judiciary”?

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Okay, that is fine. I would like to say that we maintain (a) with amendment; instead of saying “judiciary resources” we add “planning, development and finance.”  This is because we have human resources down there.

We should be specific that there will be a committee of planning, development and we delete “judiciary resources” and put “finance”. The next one is okay, the third one is okay.

Then we have the “audit committee” as per the Public Finance Management Act and any other committees required for the administration of the Judiciary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: May I ask, what was the rationale of the committee to do away with all these?

MR OBOTH: We thought that listing them would narrow and restrict the powers. We thought about these with just examples. Even when the Bill tried to list in (g), they had to say, “…any other matter relating to the administration or operation of the Judiciary.”

We were giving a broader power other than limiting; we cannot know what will be necessary tomorrow. We can only establish a few now but we cannot be very exhaustive. That was the humble opinion and spirit upon which we did this.

We appreciated this very well but we thought we would not be as exhaustive. When you start stating them, you would rather state them all, which would be a bit difficult. Even in the committees of Parliament, we get into having more committees created. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, the difference is that in the proposed Bill, the Chief Justice was obliged to establish committees. In your amendment, you are giving him an option to or not to do that. There is a difference. You are saying he “may” establish but again that if he does not, it is okay.  

MR OBOTH: I think that is a very brilliant observation from the Chair. Knowing the Chief Justice as number four in Uganda, I think we were being polite and that really reflects the personality - When I am trying to admit a mistake, you should also be polite to me. (Laughter)           

Madam Chairperson, I think the word “shall” would be more plausible. Thank you.

MR MAJEGERE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I am looking at clause 6 (c) on information, communication technology and documentation sub-committee. I would suggest we have one on facilitation of a timely process and availability of records of court proceedings. I would like to give justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: As a subcommittee?

MR MAJEGERE: It is under (c) of the original Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Which sub-clause are you looking at?

MR MAJEGERE: I am proposing that we put it under sub-clause (c) or we have a separate or standing clause on its own. Madam Chairperson, I would like to give justification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you want the committee to do? 

MR MAJEGERE: I want a sub-committee on facilitation of a timely process and availability of records of court proceedings. Give me chance to justify. I have been on the Committee on Human Rights and we have moved to very many prisons. The biggest cry there is the delay of these records of court proceedings. 

When these prisoners are convicted, they have a right to appeal to the next appellate court. However, what is happening is that it is a very big problem for these prisoners to access records of court proceedings; it is a big cry. This is the only chance now to capture it here. Let us capture it here so that the Judiciary can be able to help people in this situation.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, my honourable colleague needs to be afforded technical support because he has a valid point. What we need is the technical bench to help him to frame it well, so that the problem that has been identified is cured. It is a matter that he has already captured from the affected people direct, being a representative of the people.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, I think we are departing from the principle. The principle of the proposed amendment is that we do not name any committee but we empower the Chief Justice to create as many committees as possible. Hon. Majegere has just given evidence of being frustrated to get court records. I believe the record has captured that and those are probably things that the Chief Justice can consider.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I would like to support hon. Majegere, in the interest of consumer protection. In other jurisdictions, you use “consumer protection”. I would like to thank the Speaker for ably supporting the public who are non-legal gurus, in as far as this is concerned.

We all know that access to information is constitutional right and that the public – on Monday morning, I had a problem in accessing court rulings made two years ago. So, the people cannot be assisted because the information remains at court. When hon. Majegere raises the case of those in court and those who are - even some of us can have problems to access the court ruling to use it, for example, for other enforcement. There are people who cannot be paid because somebody used a wrong title and up to now, that court ruling has not come out.

I think we should listen to him in the spirit of consumer protection. For the victims, justice delayed is justice denied. So, if there was a court ruling and it cannot translate into the other adjudication, then it is a problem. I can take information from the other advisor to the Speaker –(Interruption) 

MR WALUSWAKA: Thank you. Madam Chairperson, that matter was of international concern and that is why we raised it. The information I would like to give to the senior member of national dialogue – (Laughter) – is that we have a school, for which the President pledged, in 2011, to build a classroom block. However, money came in the last term of the 9th Parliament and they could not use it because the court ruling had not been released. I had to use one of our voters, the former DPP, to look for the court ruling.

In court, proceedings and records are there but they cannot be accessed. When you are in court, you cannot even ask judges. You cannot switch on your phone. Therefore, Madam Chairperson, it is very critical that we put it here and make it mandatory for court records to be availed to those who need them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, please distinguish between “administration of justice” and “administration of Judiciary”. This Bill is dealing with Judiciary, not with justice. The issue he is raising about late judgements is an issue of justice; it is not for this law.

MR MUKITALE: Madam Chairperson, I was only saying that without going into the drafting details and possibly looking at what may be provided for in the regulations, the spirit should be that we must be seen to protect the weak and those who badly need the Judiciary service.

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Madam Chairperson, we are dealing with administration of the Judiciary. What the honourable member is raising means we have to amend the Civil Procedure Act. On the issues to do with court records and how one receives them after a number of days, is catered for in the Magistrates Court Act and the Civil Procedure Act.

So, if the intention was to address that matter, maybe they should seek leave to come back and amend that law in order to deal with it. Otherwise, there is nowhere you can house it in this Bill because if we open it, we are going to open it to many other things.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am moving an amendment on clause 6 (b) –(Interruption) 

MR MAJEGERE: Commissioner, what is wrong? We have not finished this matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members –

MR MAJEGERE: Madam Chairperson, we have not finished – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Majegere, the issue you are raising is an issue of justice, not of the Judiciary. This is administering the Judiciary as a whole, not justice.

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, then if that is the case, we request that you give us an opportunity to bring it at the right time in the right way, not under this law.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, no, no! I have no problem; bring your motion. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Let me help. Madam Chairperson, we have put the “Chief Inspector of Courts”. The job of the Chief Inspector of Courts is to inspect courts and how they are working. One of the things to inspect are: the judicial officers working and producing rulings.

I think this is an opportunity. We have created an office. If anybody has an issue with one of the things to take to court, he or she takes it to the Chief Inspector of Courts.

So, I do not think, Madam Chairperson, we are really worried. One thing we have corrected is to say, “The Chief Justice shall establish the following”. I think we go one by one and then anybody who wants to add or subtract can do so. It is because if we go here, I will also bring one to be in charge of circumcision. It will then be a very complicated matter. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question you are putting is my question. You allow hon. Nalule to bring her amendment.

MS SAFIA NALULE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I feel clause 6(b) was brought in to operationalise Article 32(1) and (5) of the Constitution. For us to be most effective, I would like to submit this amendment that reads, “Human Capital Development, Gender and Equity Mainstreaming Sub-committee” as the spirit is in the Public Finance Management Act. 

MR AOGON: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. For me, I am still on the issue of the committees. I, first of all, would like to thank the chairperson for accepting to reinstate “shall” to make it mandatory. However, I also still insist that the committees should be mentioned. You can only give a provision for any of them that may be deemed necessary as and when the need comes. 

I am sorry I will still come back to the comparison with us here. It is possible the Speaker would also be able to determine which committees are necessary or not but still the Rules of Procedure specify which committees we should have. 

Therefore, I would think that the need for a committee can arise outside those that are already specified but a provision has to be put there to enable the Chief Justice to put up those committees as mandatory. 

So, I would think we should still state it. I do not know what the Chairperson is trying to satisfy. At least, I am sure you are not yet the Chief Justice. (Laughter) So, you cannot fail to concede to my request because in any case, it does not offend you as the chairperson of the committee. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable chairperson, do you really strongly feel that we should not name this committee? 

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, we do not have any strong objection to naming the committee. That should not really take a lot of our time. We just thought that naming would be – and I gave the other side. We can go with what is in the Bill and we continue. That is not really – we can concede reluctantly.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that Clause 6(b) be amended as proposed by the committee. That was an amendment by hon. Safia Nalule. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE CHAIRPERSON: I now put the question –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I made amendments also. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: I am doing them one by one.  You did not want to use the words, “judicial officials”. You wanted to –

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to put the first one that “Planning, Development and Finance Subcommittee” –(Interjections)– It is okay. If you are to take it there – That is why we are saying “resources” because human resource is a resource. We want to be specific that this is for finance.

Then, the other one, Madam Chairperson, is to –

THE CHAIRPERSON: That would be finance and not resources. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Yes. 

MR KATUNTU: You see, Madam Chairperson, when somebody has been given a responsibility to head an institution, there are challenges, which he or she must act on depending on the circumstances. Even if you name this committee - Let me give some example. You may find that there is a challenge about the dress code of the people in the Judiciary and the Chief Justice must address that. 

So, if we start limiting this by saying you must have a committee on finance and others, it is very different from what my colleague was saying about the parliamentary committees. Here, we are talking about departments of the institution; human resource and planning. These are really like departments of human resource or inspectorate, which deals with ethics and so on.

We do not need to be all that restrictive. I take the information.

MR NIWAGABA: Madam Chairperson, why the committee had decided to use the wording in the amendment as proposed is to avoid also going into clause 7. If you now start establishing sub-committees here in clause 6, then you are also going to start mentioning functions under clause 7 and the rest can be exhaustive. 

So, honourable members, I beg you to retain the amendment of the committee to establish the principle of the Chief Justice and sub-committees, which will be named at the time of the – 

Subsequently, each sub-committee, once created will be given terms of reference in terms of functions. Other than that, honourable members, if we go into clause 6 and pass it, then we must go into clause 7. Then, we will be limiting the discretionary powers. I beg you, honourable members, that we retain the amendment of the committee. I beg to move. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, if you look at the laws we have made, we have put committees in the law. However, we also do not limit the committees. That is why we say, “…any other as may be required”. 

I do not see any reason why my colleagues are getting worried. We have a clause for the Chief Justice to make as many committees as he can under clause 6(d) but what we are trying to put up is that as much as he or she can make as many committees, we want to make sure that there are those he or she cannot avoid. 

We are saying, there will be something – if you look at the functions of the council, the first one is on policies for planning and development of Judiciary. Surely, even in Parliament here, you cannot just bring anything. That is why we have the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. When a Bill comes here about legal matters, we say to the committee, “Go and look at it and you bring it back to us”. 

That is why we are trying to say – hon. Katuntu, I would like you to get a copy of the Bill because you do not have it. Sub-clause (d) –

MR KATUNTU: I am sure you did not mean that. The difference between you and me is that you still carry a ream of paper in Parliament. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I have conceded. I am not ICT compliant; I am paper compliant. So, Madam Chairperson, I wanted to plead that we leave and add committees if we can and the rest – 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I just want to draw your attention to clause 7 (4), which states, “Chief Justice shall, on the advice of the committee, determine the functions of any other sub-committees established under section 6(1) (b)”.  So, there is no problem. 

MR AOGON: Madam Chairperson, that is why we should leave it the way the chairman and the committee have proposed.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No.

MS OGWAL: Madam Chairperson, I was of the view that we should use the common terminology. Chairperson of the committee, I was proposing that clause 6(1)(b) should be “human resource development” rather than “human capital development”. Well I think human resource sounds a bit neater.

Secondly, Madam Chairperson, these committees we are talking about, I appreciate the audit. It was important that we single out audit because that guides the way the finances are being controlled. However, we can leave the rest to the council to determine how many committees they need. I thank you, Madam Chairperson.

MR OBOTH: I had already said that I can reluctantly concede. Reasons given by the committee and hon. Niwagaba, whom I know he never begs and he tried to beg members - now the issue of “human capital development” and “human resources” is a question of semantics. One is modern and another is-

Now, we have shifted from “human resource development” to “human capital development”. If you take it that human “resource” is actually “capital” so you will have to adopt this. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 6, as amended do stand part of the Bill?

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

THE CHAIRPERSON: We had finished with clause 8 yesterday and we reinstated the courts inspectorate. However, our other area under 21, 23 and 24; our minister had said that he is not yet ready. Hon. Karubanga, the ones on which we needed advice as Ministry of Public Service. He said he was not ready therefore we cannot complete the Bill now.

At the third reading, did we not finish 21? Is it the one which requires - honourable members, yesterday, we had asked he Minister of Public Service to advice on clauses 21, 23 and 24 and he said that he requires time. He said earlier that he is not quite ready with the advice on this issue. We will invite the minister to move the House to resume.

MR OBOTH: Madam Chairperson, the procedural issue here is that interacting with the two ministers, the Minister of Public Service appears that he did not get the directives clearly in advance and it is embarrassing but very true. That he came for other issues.

The Deputy Attorney-General is here and my anticipation and anticipation of all Ugandans would have been that we should have finished this matter. What you are saying is very strange to the minister and he was just being very diplomatic, and I am doing this just as a Jopadhola because I am losing the patience.

May you, Madam Chairperson, give fresh instructions to the Minister of Public Service so that they can harmonise? This is a matter that we really depend on the expertise. Benefits -

THE CHAIRPERSON: It arose out of your proposals -

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Chairperson, we had a harmonisation meeting earlier in the morning -

THE CHAIRPERSON: With whom?

MR KAFUUZI: With my senior colleague and the Chief Justice. However, we failed to get someone from the Public Service. All attempts were made but we did not get response. I only got to brief him when we met here.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, honourable Minister of Public Service, the areas we would like you to assist us with is the proposal under clause 20 that where a judicial officer or a person in the judicial service is appointed, seconded or assigned to an institution outside the Judiciary, the appointing authority shall appoint another judicial officer or person of the judiciary service to replace the person appointed, seconded or assigned.

That is the area where we needed your assistance because “assigning”, “secondment” and “appointment” have different implications. That is why we wanted your help.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr David Karubanga): Thank you, Madam Chairperson. As a ministry, we had consultations with the committee before and gave our guidance on the entire Bill. However, there are other new issues which have come up. For example, I received this and some of the contents -(Interjection)- it was some of the proposals in clause 20 and I have to consult because we have a senior officer who is a commissioner on the issues of pension, gratuity and the terms of service. Therefore, I am requesting-

 THE CHAIRPERSON:  Please, why don’t you allow the minister who is our expert on this area advise?

MR KARUBANGA: I am requesting that by Tuesday, we will be ready with those clauses. Thank you.

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Maybe to add on honourable minister is that during the debate, we realised that if we say you “resign” it will affect their terminal benefits. If you say you can only “go out for one year” there are a lot of implications. These are the areas we want you to look at.

MR KARUBANGA: It is true as per the Pensions Act, if you say you have resigned, you go even if you are remaining with one day; you do not get benefits. However, what we normally do as public service, we advise them to either go for early retirement that is if you qualify with the continuous years in service or you forfeit. Once you say you have “resigned” you go. Therefore, we do not want to give what is inconsistent with the Pensions Act.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Will you be ready on Tuesday?

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, I would also like the minister when you are going, if a judge went away - I want to understand –(Interjections)- okay not a judge, what happens if somebody gets another appointment? He goes somewhere and when he has gone, do you maintain where he has left because he has said that I have gone for one or two years and we leave the place there waiting for him. What is your standing order on people who go for visits?

THE CHAIRPERSON:  I would like to ask the minister to read yesterday’s Hansard because we had a lot of fragments over that issue. That is how we came to the decision that you should advise us. Read the Hansard and do your research from your ministry and give us answers on Tuesday.

Mr katuntu: Madam Chairperson, can I request for one thing? The minister should exactly get to know what we want. What we want is that some judicial officers have left the Judiciary and gone to hold other constitutional offices for a long time yet the offices they have been holding in the Judiciary have remained vacant but they cannot be filled. We do not want to have generalities here.

The chairperson: Honourable minister, for instance, the Inspector General of Government (IGG) is still a judge of the High Court but she has spent eight years out. The chairman of the Electoral Commission is still a judge but he is likely to spend a minimum of seven years out. Justice Ssebutinde is somewhere but she is still a judge. These are the issues we are talking about.

Mr ruhunda: Madam Chairperson, I see it like we are trying to encourage the breaking of the law. What does the law say? The minister made it clear here that when you leave that position, you will have gone and must resign.

The chairperson: That is why we asked; what is the impact of assignments outside, secondments and appointments? It is not resigning. Please go and read the Hansard. 

You have also heard what hon. Katuntu said. I have also given you examples of the things that were in our minds yesterday. What do we do when a judge is out for 10 years? Do you replace them or does he or she remain a judge? Must he go? Can he come back? Those are the issues we want to know.

Ms joy atim: Madam Chairperson, I would like to add to what you have just said. If only the Minister of Public Service could listen to this; yesterday, we were trying to say that if a judge or a Justice goes for more than a year, he or she should be replaced. We were worried of the pension and maybe the gratuity if such a person is replaced - the distortion. We needed advice from you, as a minister.

The chairperson: Honourable minister, just read the Hansard of yesterday. It had a lot of interaction on those issues. There are things we need to resolve before we can complete this Bill.

Motion for the House to resume

6.33
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

The chairperson: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

Report from the committee of the whole house

6.34
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Administration of the Judiciary Bill, 2018 and passed the following clauses: 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7. I beg to report.

Motion for the adoption of the report from the Committee of the Whole House

6.35
The minister of justice and constitutional affairs (Prof Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

The speaker: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

6.36
Mr waira kyewalabye (Independent, Bunya County East, Mayuge): Madam Speaker, I would like to recommit two items.

The Speaker: Honourable member, recommital is at the third reading. Would you like to recommit the issue of justice? You can move a separate motion to amend the Criminal Procedure Act. It is not for this law.

Mr waira: Madam Speaker, if we look at clause 9, we feel our item can be well accommodated therein. 

The Speaker: Honourable member, I think I am very knowledgeable in these issues. I have advised you; this is not a matter of administration of justice. It is the “Administration of Judiciary”. That is what the Bill is about. Let us move to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

The Speaker: Can’t you listen to a debate? Can’t you generally talk? It is a very small Bill. The report was made. At least, let us have the debate today then we can do Committee Stage on Tuesday.

6.37
the chairperson, committee on legal and parliamentary AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, all the five Bills, except the Bill on Political Parties and Organisations, are consequential amendments. It never attracted any divergence of opinion. 

If it is in the wisdom of the members, these are some of the Bills that would not take much longer time to either debate or pass.

In my opinion and opinion of the committee –

The Speaker: It is us who should say whether they are very short or not because you gave us your report. 

Mr oboth: Madam Speaker, I know that when people start saying what they said off the record - I cannot say it here - it would mean that we should devise means also in this House to expeditiously move certain Bills, which are not contentious like these ones. For the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill and Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, the matter, which was contentious regarding - I can say it off hand – the Independents. The committee found that it was unconstitutional. Unless the Government side is contesting those provisions, we can be ready to debate without compromise. 

Mr nandala-mafabi: Madam Speaker, first of all, something may look small but very complicated. I will give an example - of course, I have submitted my proposals for consideration – I will give an example in the Presidential –

The Speaker: Have you started the debate?

Mr nandala-mafabi: I would like to give an example of something so that people can – 

The speaker: Let us agree. Are we starting the debate or are we postponing it? 

Honourable members: We postpone the debate.

The speaker: Okay, let us postpone the consideration of the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill to Tuesday. It is small but still, you should get ready. In that case, we shall not even go to the other items. If they are not ready for the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill then they cannot be ready for Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill or the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. 

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank you for your ruling because these are very important Bills, which address the hierarchy of leadership in this country. It even involves us, parliamentarians. 

Now that we do not have enough members – 

THE SPEAKER: We have enough members to listen. You do not need 100 members to debate a Bill, when they are listening. 

MS ALUM: Madam Speaker, the point that I am trying to make is that I read the Bills and most of them are addressing similar issues. Now that you have granted us Tuesday to start the debate, I think that we should handle all these issues together since they are similar and are coordinated. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want us to speak on the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill and the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill during the same debate? 

MS ALUM: Yes, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: No, we shall do the committee stage one by one but what the member is saying is that the principles are basically the same. Can we speak to them at the same time? When we go to the committee stage, we can handle Bill by Bill. 

MR OBOTH: I have realised that hon. Santa has read the report and the Bill. That is even the method we used in the committee. When you are handling the Presidential Elections (Amendment) Bill, you will realise that the same principles are in the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill. Those two go together with the Local Governments (Amendment) Bill. 

The only difference is when it comes to the Electoral Commission (Amendment) Bill where it has some similarities but they are quite different. Therefore, the three can be debated together. When we come down to committee stage to process them, we can process one by one. Hon. Santa, thank you for demonstrating that you have read. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you for the work done today. The House is adjourned to Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 6.43 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 25 February 2020 at 2.00 p.m.) 
