

Wednesday, 14 February 2018

Parliament met at 2.52 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. Join me in welcoming the Bagungu Community who are in the public gallery. They are here to witness the proceedings and are represented by hon. Stephen Mukitale, hon. Norah Nyendwoha and hon. David Karubanga. You are welcome. (Applause)

Also, the Parliament will hold the “Health Week” from Tuesday, 20th of February to Friday, 23rd of February on the ground level of the South Wing parking lot. It will commence with a health walk on Tuesday, starting at 7.00 a.m. on the theme: “My health, my right”. Various medical providers, including health insurance companies, will showcase their products. 

There will also be free services such as general body check-up, Hepatitis B testing, breast and cervical cancer screening and blood donation, which as you recall we discussed last week. You are encouraged to come and bring your families and some of your constituents to benefit from this activity. The general public is welcome.

Thirdly, I have received many requests for membership of committees and we have undertaken a status review of them. This is where we are. There are three standing committees which are oversubscribed by two members; they have 37 instead of 35 members. These are:

    a) The Committee on Public Accounts
    b) Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises and; 
    c) The Committee on Local Government Accounts. 
Each of them is in excess by two members. 

The Business Committee is short of two Independent Members of Parliament. Therefore, I will ask the Independents’ Chief Whip to deal with that situation so that the Independents are represented on the Business Committee.

The Committee on Science and Technology has just 15 members but the Chief Opposition Whip has not yet designated Opposition members to that committee. The Whip for the UPDF has not designated its members to that committee as well - I hope they still have members to distribute. 

A number of sectoral committees are oversubscribed while others are undersubscribed. The Committee on Health is oversubscribed by one member, the Committee on ICT is not fully constituted; it has 12 members, less than the required minimum of 15. Therefore, I would like to ask that there should be a remedy so that the committees are not rendered illegal. 

There are Members who are not designated to any standing committee. They are:
    1. Hon. Joseph Andrew Koluo
    2. Hon. Ismail Orot
    3. Hon. Mary Babirye Kabanda 
    4. Hon. Oguzu Lee Denis
    5. Hon. Katusabe Atkins 
    6. Hon. Abacacon Angiro Charles Gutomoi

We also have hon. Moses Mugabe Kahima who has not yet been designated to any standing or sectoral committee. 

Interestingly, we have members who are on more than one or two standing or sectoral committees, contrary to rule 154. They are eight members. Therefore, I would like that the following members should be rationalised:
    1. Hon. Etuka Isaac Joakino is on the committee on ICT and also the Committee on Education and Sports.
    2. Hon. Zaake Francis, the Member of Parliament for Mityana Municipality is a member of the Committee on Equal Opportunities as well as Committee on Government Assurances.
    3. Hon. Mukula Francis is a member of the Committee on Equal Opportunities and also Committee on Local Government Accounts.
    4. Hon. Stephen Kisa is on both the Committee on Public Accounts and that of Committee on Government Assurances.
    5. Hon. Kaahwa Tophace Byagira is on COSASE as well as Committee on Equal opportunities.
    6. Hon. Nakasirye Robinah Ssentongo is both on Local Government Accounts and Committee on HIV/AIDS and Related Diseases.
    7. Hon. Twinamatsiko Onesmus is both on Committee on Public Accounts and Committee on Government Assurances.

Therefore, I would like to urge the Whips to take off time and resolve this issue before we make any appointments of the members. Make sure that all members belong somewhere, at least on one standing and one sectoral committee.

In the public gallery, we also have a delegation from Nakifuma Constituency represented by hon. Kafeero Ssekitoleko and hon. Peace Kusasira. They are welcome. (Applause)

Honourable members, there were a few members who had a number of issues. They are actually many; so we shall divide the issues between today and tomorrow. Some will present today. However, I have seen issues that are already in the pipeline. Hon. Akampurira Mbabazi, on the lack of release of results; there is a pending response from the ministry regarding that. 

The hon. Jennifer Kyomuhendo, the issue of refugees from Congo into our country is already in the pipeline for response. Therefore, I will now ask hon. Okupa to - he is not yet here.

3.00
MR FRANCO CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a matter related to the Ministry of Education and Sports in relation to Kasese Youth Polytechnic which competed successfully and bid to be included on the programme of Uganda Skills Development Project attached to Uganda Technical College - Bushenyi. 

After bidding, the ministry wrote to the Principal on 25 October 2017 and the Permanent Secretary, Alex Kakooza, is the one who awarded the youth polytechnic that started in 2011, a letter - a copy of which I have - allowing it to partner with Uganda Technical College - Bushenyi in the Skills Development Project. 

On the 29 January 2018, without any prior notice, the same Permanent Secretary wrote to the polytechnic withdrawing the award to network with Uganda Technical College – Bushenyi. On the same day he re-awarded Lake Katwe Technical Institute with the same letter after withdrawing Kasese Youth Polytechnic, which had favourably competed with Lake Katwe. 

Lake Katwe did not even meet the requirements because the polytechnics which had been assessed to qualify were Kasese Youth Polytechnic, Kalera Technical Institute in Sheema and Nyamitanga Technical Institute in Mbarara. 

Out of the three, the funding for Kasese Youth Polytechnic, which is the only government technical institution that we have in the municipality, is being taken away to another college called Lake Katwe Technical Institute that apparently did not meet the requirements when it also bid for the same funding from World Bank.

I would like to interest this Parliament, especially the Minister of Education and Sports, whom I actually wrote to on 5 February 2018 complaining about removing Kasese Polytechnic from the project and awarding it to Lake Katwe. I even moved to the ministry, sought audience with the Permanent Secretary thrice which he denied me. 

I wrote to them on 5 February 2018 but on 8 February 2018 they went ahead and signed an MOU with Lake Katwe Polytechnic. I do not know if there was a procedure. This funding was advertised to all government-aided polytechnics and we bid and qualified. Why then should the minister and the Permanent Secretary withdraw the funding from the said polytechnic? I also know that there is an assistant commissioner from the ministry called Loy –

THE SPEAKER: I think you have made your point. We shall want the education ministry to explain the circumstances under which the funding was removed from a qualified and eligible college to another one.

3.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakkabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable member for raising this issue. Indeed, I recall meeting you in the corridor and you told me you were going to meet the PS - I do not know if you met. This is a serious issue and good enough, we have a top management meeting tomorrow. I am going to raise it and return with an answer for you.

3.05
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a matter of national importance concerning wild animals which destroy crops in Burundo Sub-county in Bundibugyo District. Burundo Sub-county is bordering River Semuliki and Semuliki National Park. 

The residents of Burundo always have their planting season around this time when the rains haven’t started, due to the flooding of River Semuliki and the nature of soils in that particular area. For quite some time, they have faced a problem of wild animals destroying and eating all their crops at night, especially the maize, which was planted this season. They have made a lot of losses. One resident called Mugume has lost five acres of maize. Even when they report to the authorities - the game wardens - nothing has been done. 

My prayer is that Government intervenes and saves the situation. Otherwise they have reached an extent of calling us to go and fence off those areas which is practically impossible. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the struggle between the population and the national parks has been ongoing for a long time around the country. We really need a solution. The Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities and the Ministry of Finance - the economy of those people is being damaged by the animals yet we also need them.

3.07
MR ABBAS AGABA (NRM, Kitagwenda County, Kamwenge): Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The economy of the people surrounding the parks is affected. In my constituency in Kyakabengo Village, we lost a person to an elephant. It attacked in the day; the wardens followed it and almost caught it but did not. In the night, the wardens went to sleep and the elephant went into the population. It mauled a person and killed him. We were there recently for the burial. Unfortunately, UWA says that their intervention under such circumstances is not compensation but compassion. They come in to help as they can. The bigger picture is to amend the UWA Act so that Government takes care of its people as it takes care of the animals. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to come and address us on what is happening in Semuliki.

3.08
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I know most Members could have read in the newspapers last week, the issue surrounding the misappropriation of the refugee funds in the Office of the Prime Minister. Uganda has been shining, being the best host country for refugees. So it was disheartening to learn and read from the press that the resources have been mismanaged. I think, as a country, we need to protect that good name. 

We have been waiting to hear from the Government what steps they are taking to address this matter. I think Parliament deserves a response from Government so that we are able to explain or understand the gravity of this matter. 

We are only reading that some commissioners have been interdicted or suspended from the Office of the Prime Minister in the disaster preparedness ministry.

Still within the same ministry, it looks like we are getting a repeat of the scandals we had previously; the land issues - the Shs 8 billion in Mbale - again in the Office of the Prime Minister. I think this House deserves an explanation of what happened. To some extent, some colleagues in this House are being named. We want to know whether it is true.

We have also heard some issues in the same ministry where, as Ugandans, we are concerned. We have been reading in the newspapers for the last two years that the Uganda Government has entered into an agreement with the Government of Israel to host the deportees from Israel. Is that true or is it hearsay? We want to know because we have read in the press that the refugees are brought here, they are placed – that they are being trafficked to another country. 

So I think, as Parliament and as a country, we deserve to have the answers because as we move, we are asked questions about the refugees. We have built a good name, which is commendable –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA WAMAI: Thank you very much, hon. Okupa, for giving way. Madam Speaker, the issue of refugees is a very touchy one. It is under the UN Convention. What is of interest is that we in Uganda are refugees in our own country. We are very fortunate or unfortunate that we live on the slopes of Mt Elgon and landslides have often affected us when the rains come. The Bagisu were transferred to Kiryandongo last time and because they were not used to living in such – (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, my concern is the international refugees that we are hosting. I think he is talking about internally-displaced Ugandans –(Laughter)– which I think should be handled in another way. 

On this one here, my concern is about the name that Uganda had built over time. We would like to clean our house. If these things have happened, they must be dealt with. I remember yesterday, hon. Fungaroo hinted on the issues related to that but of course the issue is wider than that. It involves allegations that some refugees have been kidnapped from this country and taken to other countries. We are reading that there is a safe house where they keep these refugees in Kamwokya here. I think we need to have answers from the Government. 

I would request that the Office of the Prime Minister makes a statement to this effect and we are able to understand what is going on and what steps are being taken on those who have misappropriated the resources – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the issue of the deportation of the Eritreans, South Sudanese – and I don’t know which other ones – is extremely serious. I was in Israel with the Speaker of Rwanda and that of Tanzania in November and we were attacked very badly about that issue. In fact, there was a case going on by the civil society in Israel to stop the Government from deporting people to this country. I came back and asked the President: “Are we receiving deportees?” He said, “No.” I said, “But it is Uganda and Rwanda which are being mentioned in the courts there.” I had hoped that the Government would come out and tell us what is happening. It is serious.

On the issue of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), I think we need answers from the Government because UNHCR is Government but also the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Therefore, there must be something going on even within the UNHCR. Who has the data for the refugees? Who decides how many they are? Who registers them? There is a very serious issue and we really want answers.

3.15
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The issue of refugees and host communities and problems associated with the Office of the Prime Minister need external intervention – external to the Office of the Prime Minister. These requests we make from here that we should get a statement from the Office of the Prime Minister will not work. As Members of Parliament from West Nile, we tried to seek audience with the Minister of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees. Meetings were organised but we failed. 

I am imploring you, Madam Speaker, to use this House to break into that house of the Prime Minister and stop these people from operating. Instead of even transferring people, let us transfer the programme of caring for refugees to another ministry so that we can investigate them as and when they are in their places. The problem may be in the place. You transfer a person, you leave the wrong place; bring another person in and he gets infected by the same germs in the Office of the Prime Minister. Therefore, transfer the programme of care of refugees to another place. Maybe you bring it to Parliament here or take it to another department and investigate everybody. There is a racket of corruption. 

When we tried to talk to them they brushed us aside. Can you imagine even the minister organising a meeting in West Nile when the chairpersons of all the districts were not involved. Members of Parliament were given information in a matter of hours. We went there but were chased away from the meeting. We gave you the information when you came to West Nile. You talked here but they have not responded. Let us use our powers as Parliament to transfer that programme out of the Office of the Prime Minister, create a commission of inquiry, and investigate everybody including even people in the districts because we have seen that bribes have gone even to district councils. Offices of chief administrative officers and sub-counties control a lot of money. The office of the Prime Minister is like Uganda Revenue Authority.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Fungaroo, I think you better bring a motion which we shall debate and work out a way forward.

MR FUNGAROO: Yes, Madam Speaker, I will bring the motion.

3.17
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. In 2016/2017, this country went through a lot of drought. In eastern Uganda, we suffered food shortages that made our people eat many different things, including termites. 

Madam Speaker, in Tororo, to be specific, most of our people eat cassava. But because of the challenges that cassava has been having through cassava mosaic disease, the ministry came up with a programme to eradicate our cassava species specially Magana that we had been used to and introduced new species of cassava namely NaROCAS 1 and NaSE 14. Unfortunately, we were asked to advise our communities to erase by destroying the Magana cassava species that we have been relying on in order to adopt the new cassava species. We were given cassava cuttings totalling to about 5,000 bags where groups and communities, including the Church, planted in very many acres. 

Unfortunately, Madam Speaker, today as the cassava is starting to mature, we have only discovered that all the root tubers are rotten. Remember that we had asked the communities to start destroying the Magana cassava that they were used to. This has put us in a lot of panic and we do not know what to tell the people. A loss has been caused. Ploughing and managing one acre of cassava costs up to about Shs 500,000. Therefore, we have lost a lot of money. 

Many other institutions that were subjected to planting this cassava in large acreages for purposes of distributing the stems have lost a lot of money. We are here in a situation of panic. The community is getting scared. They have destroyed the Magana breed and this one is rotten. Even for the NaROCAS 1 that we were assured was okay, it turns out that the suppliers instead gave us NaSE 14 which is prone to diseases and has put us in this situation. The loss by the various institutions and people who planted this cassava for purposes of multiplication stands at about Shs 1.3 billion. 

Remember, Madam Speaker, we had also tried to encourage the community to plant a lot of potatoes, which potatoes were also attacked by weevils and unknown diseases and today we do not know how we are going to survive in terms of planting materials and what our people will continue eating.

We want to request the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries through NAADS to supply us with the correct seedlings – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall ask the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to address the issue in Tororo, especially the question of the disease. We shall also ask the Prime Minister to come and inform us whether we are allowing Israel to deport people to this country forcefully. We shall also want an answer about the scandal concerning the UNHCR. The other Members will ask tomorrow. 

3.21
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This would have been a procedural matter but allow me to raise it again as a matter of national importance. Last year in April, I raised the issue of unsolicited visa fee collections at various entry points. Indeed, you directed the minister - and in fact the Prime Minister also directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a report in one month. Since then, we haven’t seen any report about that.

Madam Speaker, tourism is one of the promising avenues of getting revenue. Indeed, we get almost 600,000 tourists annually at a cost of $50, per tourist.

At various entry points in this country, especially in Entebbe, when tourists come, the way money is taken from them is not systematic as we do when we go to other countries. In those countries, the moment you enter and you are found without a visa, immediately you go fill the form and banking slip; and then you pay. However, in Uganda, paying a visa fee and getting a receipt is optional. You pay the $50 and you move away without anything that shows that the money has been received by Government yet this money can assist in improving service delivery to our people.

I would like to request once again that since this was raised last year – we are losing tourists. From 600,000 tourists or even more than that –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, when Government is looking for resources to sponsor the budget, I think Parliament should come out to control these leakages. All those agencies that do not submit non-taxable revenue to the Consolidated Fund – I think there is a leakage. They should not be given money. 

I was in Lake Mburo and I found some tourists there. They asked me –(Interjections)- I had some visitors there. They were questioned how they entered through a border entry with a stamp showing that they already paid money but without a receipt. When I asked the gentleman who heads Mugingo Hotel, he said in a year, he receives 4,000 tourists. If you multiply that by $50, it is around $200,000. That is quite a lot of money. If you look at the estimate of tourists who come to Uganda, it is about 600,000 to one million; you are talking of $30 million, which is equivalent to Shs 800 billion, which can go to the revenue and be allocated. Why isn’t Government interested in that? It is a big collection for the country.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, yesterday, Government wanted to domestically borrow Shs 700 billion. However, that would have been got if properly used from this visa fee collection.

Madam Speaker, I would like to request that you direct either the Prime Minister or the Minister of Internal Affairs to come up with a report as far as visa fee collection is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is very interesting that in a poor country, Government is reluctant to harness this money. We have told you that there is haemorrhage and no one is interested in stopping it. Minister of Internal Affairs and my friend, hon. Kania, we need answers on this.

3.25	
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): I would like to thank my colleagues for raising this matter. I recall this matter was raised last year. The delay must have been because we presented a statement in the committee and it must have taken us - however, within a week, we shall come here with a detailed report on our current status of visa fee collection, the various resources that we have raised and the income that we have generated. Thank you very much.

3.26
MR HASSAN FUNGAROO (FDC, Obongi County, Moyo): Madam Speaker, I rise on a matter of urgent national importance. It is about my life and the lives of Members of Parliament.
		
Madam Speaker, I am receiving anonymous threats in form of calls, and people following me, especially the other day when I was driving from Parliament to my home in Matugga. But because I have some small knowledge of security, I was able to detect that there was a problem.

When I consulted the police – we have Parliament police who are very useful to us and I got some guidance from them. My question is: Given the history of this country, and the recent publication of people killed in different places, including prominent people such as Members of Parliament, businessmen in hotels – you recall what happened in Sheraton Hotel. What is the policy and legal framework for protection of Very Important People (VIPs) in Uganda?

Right now, I found some Members of Parliament complaining about their security. Some of them have been given police escorts and others have police at home. Some Members have the ordinary police and others come from the professional police and we know, some police officers are from the Counter-Terrorism Police Unit and some are protected by UPDF and Special Forces Command (SFC), who also protect the President. Others are protected by Air Force –(Laughter)– SFCs’ are a combination – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR FUNGAROO: SFC is made up of commandos, marines and air force. If you see a Member of Parliament being protected by SFC – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think the information should be from the Government. The Government should tell us -

MR FUNGAROO: For those of us who have these kinds of problems, where should we go for protection? Under what policy - you are aware of West Nile –(Interjections)- I will tell you briefly. I do not want you to speak positive things about me when my body will be lying in state here. Talk about me when I am still alive.

We have the issue of the Balaalo; that is where my problem seems to be coming from. When we investigated, those people seem to be coming all the way from western Uganda because they have network points in West Nile.

We tried the police since the army supported the Balaalo - when I need protection from the police - the police and the army are also protecting the Balaalo. Where should I get protection from?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we shall ask the Prime Minister to come here tomorrow and address this House on the level of security for Members of Parliament and what we are entitled to and how to get it. Thank you. 

PRESENTATION OF A PETITION MOVED UNDER RULE 30 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE BY THE MEMBERS OF THE BUGUNGU COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Odonga Otto, you seem to be having a burning issue.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a procedural matter. I would like to thank you, for giving time to hon. Kakooza James and hon. Sebaggala, to persistently raise the issue of visa fee collection at the entry points. The procedural matter I am raising is: Before the Committee on Budget, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development - hon. Bahati, will bear me witness and so he can help you to guide the House.

Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) told the committee that they are meeting stiff resistance from the Minister of Internal Affairs that wanted to take over the collection of the revenue. He said they receive threats from security personnel from the Ministry of Internal Affairs, who are interested in collecting this money. This was said in the presence of the minister.

Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance, especially where two government ministries are fighting for visa fee collection. URA is more streamlined and transparent because their payments are done in the bank. However, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is not willing to let go of the revenue collection because some people are using the money to build in Kololo, Muyenga and they see it as loss of income.

In such circumstances, what do we do when two government ministries seem to be clashing for the same money that Parliament has identified? I was in the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Let me ask the minister in charge of money to tell us what to do. (Laughter)

3.32
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, on the issue regarding non-tax revenue, particularly the visas and others, we now have a new policy, beginning with financial year 2018/2019 to allow Uganda Revenue Authority administer the collection of this money.

Beginning in July, non-tax revenue collection will be a responsibility of Uganda Revenue Authority because they have the capacity, the infrastructure and other administrative issues. The few quarrels hon. Otto is talking about have been sorted out. I think we do not have to bring them to the House at this time.

3.33
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE (Independent, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The people of Bugungu and Bunyoro kingdom appreciated the auspice of your good office when you received them and they presented their humble petition before you.

They also appreciate the earlier interventions by Parliament when they were about to be deprived, disenfranchised and alienated of their land rights in the Eighth Parliament. You put in place a select committee on the herdsmen who were armed then and if that report came, it could solve some of the problems seen to be emerging. I am presenting the humble petition on behalf of the Bagungu Community Association. 

“The Humble Petition of an indigenous community, that have a voluntary, non-partisan association for social and economic participation of Bugungu. The subject matter of the petition regards the unfair and meagre compensation by the oil companies in the intended land acquisition for the central processing facility for the pipeline, the oil well and other related infrastructure.

The Bagungu community, due to historical injustices for having resisted British imperialism with the great king, Omukama Kabalega of the current Bunyoro-Kitara kingdom, were marginalised and excluded from the Uganda development programmes during the colonial period. 

We are surprised that to date, the injustice continues post-independence, whereby 90 per cent of the Bugungu land community was gazetted into national parks and forests. Now, the land pressure is on the remaining 10 percent and is increasingly coming in.

Failure to involve the host community in the engagement on the oil and gas programme has resulted into the well–to-do, private individuals taking advantage – 

THE SPEAKER: I think you are supposed to read the heading and the prayers.

MR MUKITALE: Okay. Madam Speaker, let me summarise so that I go to the prayers. 

“This arises because at the end of the year, there was a standoff between the community and the industry. When Shs 2.1 million was being offered for compulsory acquisition, the community resisted. 

At one time, they were told that the army and police could be deployed so that the exercise goes on without their consent, yet this community has cooperated with the industry for 12 years without a single payment. However, trying to use force was unfair for the community which has been so hospitable.

Also, in the last two months, there are court rulings against the community using fraudulent land titles which the Ministry revoked and rescinded way back last year. They are wondering why court rulings are still against the community. Last week, there were evictions using armed forces in the pipeline area around Bukyawa barracks, around Runga and Waki, yet we were assured by Ministry of Lands that land has now reverted back to the people. So, these are concerns. In the interest of time, I will go straight to the prayers.

THEREFORE, your humble petitioners the Bugungu host community, request that:

    1. Government Comes up with a systematic demarcation of land by using land titles and also provides communal land titles, prior to compulsory land acquisition. 

    2. Government reviews the permanent compulsory land acquisition to enable land owners repossess their land after oil exploration projects are completed through the leasehold. They prefer leasehold instead of permanent acquisition, if it is in line with the public trust doctrine to take care of the cross generational equity when oil is over.

    3. Government comes up with a robust environment protection programme with an environmental fund to protect wetlands and promote tree planting in line with the Tree Planting Act, 2003 and that the fisheries conservation and replenishing is taken into consideration. 

As we speak, the Butiaba factory closed. We no longer have the Nile Perch which is the native species of Lake Albert. Instead, we have secondary fishing of mukene which is actually supposed to be a feed of the Nile Perch. 

If you remember, in the Eighth Parliament, I brought a petition here where Minister Mukisa had actually stopped those bad practices. Unfortunately, we did not implement. The humble petitioners are pleading for an environmental fund and an aggressive environmental protection programme within the Albertine Graben.

    4. Government prevails on oil companies to disclose all the negative socio-economic and environmental effects for preparedness. To date, we are getting the good story. They have not yet been told what dangers are there when this oil is going to be produced. They should also respect and protect the Bugungu cultural heritage without renaming villages to names like Tilenga, Kasemene, Taitai, Ngiri, Mpyo, Kasurubano and Ngara. 

When a village is named an industrial park like Tilenga which is billions of dollars, it will cease to be known as a county or a village. You have renamed a community and the Bagungu community is urging Government to stop immediately renaming our community, villages and rivers, so that we remain with our identity. We cannot afford to lose an identity because of oil.

    5. Government regulates the influx and transhumance of immigrants to reduce pressure on the forests. The forests and fisheries have been depleted. People are settling in the wetlands and even the social services, including schools and hospitals, are under pressure. Whereas those who have registered refugee camps are talking of the numbers and the corruption, we have aliens who are not registered – 

THE SPEAKER: But honourable member, now you are going into the evidence.

MR MUKITALE: Okay. Madam Speaker, the challenge of aliens is a big problem because they have no refugee camps; they are depleting forests and are causing land pressure and social services. 

    6. Government comes up with a comprehensive integrated development planning alternative livelihood for communities to ensure diversification. This will help in post-oil long lasting improvement in the standard of living. The host community prefers resettlement and not cash compensation as it was in Hoima. You know the women and children were abandoned by men who got cash and disappeared in the refinery land of Hoima.

    7. Madam Speaker, the seventh prayer is that Government comes up with a strategy for inclusion and participation of the Bugungu host community in positions of leadership as affirmative action to address marginalisation and considering them in appointment for boards, embassies and even RDC positions. That would be important.

    8. Madam Speaker, the community requests Government to honour its pledge for a technical business vocational college as a remedy to having missed out on State House scholarships and all Government trainings. Buliisa, Bugungu Community has so far not benefitted from any single oil and gas training whereas we are the host of about 70 per cent of the activities. We think this injustice should be addressed.

    9. The ninth prayer, Madam Speaker, is that Government implements the revocation and rescinding of all fraudulent land titles issued by Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development in January last year in accordance with the earlier Presidential Moratorium, 2010 on titling land in Buliisa. 

Madam Speaker, as I have said, it is unfortunate that even up to now, court is still ruling in favour of those fraudulent land titles which Government said it already revoked. This injustice is causing a lot of pain to the community.

THE SPEAKER: And finally -

MR BIRAAHWA-MUKITALE: The tenth prayer involves the community members and the representatives like religious, political, cultural and youth opinion leaders as well as technocrats among others that should be involved at each and every stage of project implementation.

    11. The second last, Madam Speaker, is that Government should reinstitute and reverse the colonial injustice and land grabbing which took away 90 per cent of the Bugungu land as Budongo Forest and Murchison Falls as the reparation and restitution. 

	The Bugungu community request Government in line with Article 178 of the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2005 that Government operationalises the regional tier government as the only way to address the imbalances and the equalisation programme including affirmative action.

    12. Finally, Madam Speaker, the Bugungu community urges Government to implement the Albertine Social Planning Area where Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development using World Bank Financing did physical planning for over eight towns including Biiso, Butiaba and Wanseko to avoid people settling outside these centres. Unfortunately, the Ministry of Local Government to date has failed to get the start-up fund and the wage Bill from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to implement the much needed physical planning of the town councils.

And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.”

Madam Speaker, those are the prayers. I would like to lay on Table the copy of the petition and the original background document with signatures of elders. The community members appended their signatures. I would like to lay on Table.

Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Bugungu who I represent in Parliament and the Bunyoro kingdom, we would like to appreciate the attention and audience you have given us. I thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the petition is sent to the Committee on Natural Resources to be supported by the Committee on Physical Infrastructures.

LAYING OF PAPERS

THE NATIONAL PLANNING AUTHORITY ANNUAL PERFORMANCE REPORT FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2016/2017

3.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay the annual performance report for the National Planning Authority for the financial year 2016/2017 as required by the law.

Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.


BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES BILL, 2017

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and we have been looking at the Bill. We are very sure we have not signed it. Again, as an interested person, we had agreed with the minister that if the Bill is going to be withdrawn -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, please sit down. Let the minister move and then we shall know what to do because I do not know what she is going to say.

MS ASAMO: Okay. I wanted to know whether they had brought the other one.

THE SPEAKER: You allow the minister. This is her Bill.

3.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS) (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Madam Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity given to me to make a statement on the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014.

Colleagues, you may recall that in 2014, the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014 was tabled before this House. Thereafter, the Bill was referred to the parliamentary Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development for consideration. 

The committee undertook considerations, Madam Speaker, with various stakeholders and generated proposals, which were communicated to the ministry. On the 3rd of June 2017, the ministry held discussions with the parliamentary committee on this proposal which majorly included the merger of the three laws on disabilities namely; the Uganda Foundation for the Blinds Act, 1954, the National Council for Disabilities Act, 2003 and the Persons with the Disabilities Act, 2006. 

The ministry sought guidance and was given a go ahead on the proposals made by the Office of the Solicitor General. The ministry then drafted the additional principals to amend the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006 and submitted them to Cabinet for approval.

Madam Speaker, Cabinet, under minutes extract 467 c.c. 2017 approved the following:

    1. Withdrawal of the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014 from Parliament;
    2. Additional principals to amend the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2006 and; 
    3. Consolidation of the related aforementioned laws.

Madam Speaker, I have already communicated to your office in this regard and would therefore, request this august House to grant permission to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to withdraw the Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014 so as to pave way for the introduction of Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2017 which is currently being drafted by the First Parliamentary Council.

I beg to submit and lay on Table a copy of the letter to your office. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the proposal is that the Bill be withdrawn; any comments? 

3.51
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Madam Speaker, thank you. I would like to thank the minister for the statement. In principle, we had agreed that as she is withdrawing, we have a replacement. Now, we are being told that the replacement is still being drafted. You know the process might go on forever. People with disabilities are waiting out there and we had been promised this Bill was going to come. That is what was in our minutes. Therefore, I wanted to ask the minister what the timeframe is when the Bill will come to the House. Thank you.

3.51
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Madam Speaker, our rules prohibit anticipation and that is what the minister has actually come to do. A Bill was properly tabled before this House and as hon. Asamo is saying, it would not be fatally defective in any way for the minister to bring the other Bill, the one which she alleges is being drafted by the First Parliamentary Council and substitute for the one she is withdrawing. I have been talking to some of my colleagues and they have been waiting for so long.

Madam Speaker, my submission is that as a former chairman of Government Assurances Committee, we have problems chasing commitments from ministers. At times they are even changed from that position before they can complete the work they promise to do. 

Therefore, wouldn’t it be proper for the minister to bring the other Bill and replace this in good faith? Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister owns the Bill and I don’t know how we can force her to leave it here. However, I have been receiving correspondences from the senior minister that she wants to bring a different Bill. May you tell when that will be, honourable minister?

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, in a period of one month, the Bill will be ready for presentation. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister that is an assurance. Okay, I put the question that the Bill be withdrawn?

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE ON THE INQUIRY INTO MANDATORY INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, yesterday we received the main and minority reports and hon. Sabiiti was due to say something about this issue. We shall give you ten minutes.

3.54
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, the majority and minority reports on motor vehicle inspection were presented to the House and I requested because I did not participate due to conflict of interest in that investigation. I requested so that I can probably bring out some points which I saw are very relevant and may not be factual in the said report.

When we go to pages 29 and 30 of the main report, the report is referring to the Daily Monitor article, the administrative review carried out by PPDA, and Ferdinand Bitanihirwe. All these are areas where I was indicted. However, I have a ruling from the high court of miscellaneous Application No.36/2011 which was engineer Denis Sabiiti Applicant versus Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Authority before honourable Justice Elidad Mwangusya; quashing the said reports. I beg to lay at the Table or can I read some parts?

THE SPEAKER: What reports are being quashed?

MR SABIITI: Okay. It was quashing the cited reports on page 29 and 30 of the main report. 

THE SPEAKER: What date is that Judgement? What date is that ruling?

MR SABIITI: The ruling is application no. 30 of 2011. It is not dated but it is signed by Justice Elidad Mwangusya.

THE SPEAKER: When the judge has delivered that ruling, they will say on this day in the presence of so and so, the applicant was present, the respondent was absent, and the lawyer was present.

MR SABIITI: Okay, I can do it.

THE SPEAKER: Are you saying it is an application for 2011? Is that so? Then if it is 2011, it is not relevant to our work. Okay proceed.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I will definitely go to court and bring the ruling -

THE SPEAKER: Point of order from hon. Otto. There is a point of order.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I raise on a point of order. You have been very lenient and kind and given hon. Denis Sabiiti an opportunity to make a statement. However, he is seeking for free legal advice from the Attorney-General who is the official advisor of Government of Uganda including this Parliament. Is hon. Sabiiti in his disorganised state in order to seek legal advice from the official advisor of the Government of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Those could be brotherly consultations and not legal advice. Make your statement quickly.

MR SABIITI: I apologise. I will bring the right one.  Madam Speaker, the next item is on page 31 and it says “unusual congruence between the prices quoted by SGS and the ministry of works and transport without price.” On the next page, Madam Speaker-

THE SPEAKER: Wait, I am looking for page 31.

MR SABIITI: That is page 32 -

THE SPEAKER: Page 32, what paragraph?

MR SABIITI: On page 32, there is a table. Now below the table, it says, it is evident from the above table that shows Ministry of Works and Transport ceiling and the cost quotation from SGS were unusually the same; this points to a possibility of unethical practice in the procurement process.

Madam Speaker, the ministry of works and transport ceilings were included in the bidding document. These rates were available to every bidder who got the bidding document. Therefore, the statement down here is definitely not correct.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, can I know who you are speaking for here? I thought -

MR SABIITI: I am not speaking for any but I am pointing out some of the misrepresentation.

THE SPEAKER: Oh, point of procedure from hon. Mugoya.

MR MUGOYA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, you know some of us are members of the rules committee. When you are giving a statement of self-explanation, you give a chronology of your performance. What kind of activities did you participate in to the level of execution of this agreement? I expected my brother the former commissioner in the ministry of works to come up with a clean and specific performance statement of what he did in as far as this presentation is concerned. It is not a question of pinpointing issues where they erred.

Secondly, I expected you to come up with issues for presentation, but not jumping from here to there. Your presentation should be very clear and material to the question for determination by this House. Is it procedurally right for the honourable member to meander about presenting irrelevancies to this august House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is why I asked him who he was speaking for on this Floor. He is taking issue with the report in a capacity I do not know. 

What do you want to tell this House about yourself? You should address where they said that you are a consultant - you would say, “I am not a consultant”; you should be addressing the issues they mentioned against you.

MR SABIITI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I joined the Ministry of Works and Transport in 2002, and at that time, I found privatisation of motor vehicles -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, this is not the first time colleagues have made personal statements in defence of allegations against them. You come here with a statement, of which you give a copy to the Speaker. I do not know whether he has given a copy of his statement to the Speaker - and the colleagues should also have copies.

You should state one after the other and not the way our colleague is doing it. That is the procedural way of making a personal statement; you defend yourself with evidence.

The way the honourable colleague is preceding seems to be lacking. We should not lower the standard that we set regarding personal statements in defence of Members.

It is further disturbing because yesterday, he is one of those who were named. I also see Mr Amanyire; I do not know whether he should be seated behind you. He should be up in the gallery because he is one of those who went to South Africa without the permission of the minister of works.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether you are safe with such characters in this House. Are the suspects procedurally right to behave that way?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you must come to this House with a chronological statement about your role in this. When did you become a commissioner, what was your responsibility and how did you start this process? That is what we would like to hear. Do not take issues with calculations and so on.

MR SABIITI: Madam Speaker, I apologise - I seek for more time to organise myself and present a report. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay, we shall give you time to organise yourself. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can understand why he would like to make a statement. He was quoting page 29; he has already appeared before the committee. The committee processed the submission he made and he prepared a report for Parliament. Not everybody we are mentioning will come here to make a statement.

I fear that we are setting a very difficult precedent that people who are mentioned in a report will want to run ahead of the report. The other day, we had the minister of finance wanting to give a statement of personal explanation on a report before Parliament because the opportunity was given to him.

On behalf of Parliament, the committee met him but they still came up with this report; he ran ahead of the report before it was debated, claiming it was wrong in the listed instances. I need your guidance there, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: This is an unusual situation; I will reflect on it and give my ruling later. Honourable members, you are free to debate because we had listened to the main and minority report. We asked you to go and study the report; I do not know whether you are ready - 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order under rule 234. Right behind you are distinguished Government officials who come into Parliament to help advise ministers on technical matters within Parliament. However, we have one individual, Mr Amanyire, seated behind you, who has been extensively cited in this report, having participated in a fully funded trip by SGS to South Africa. Are you safe chairing the House under such circumstances?

Secondly, from the point of freedom of Members of Parliament, because the accused is looking at us, people are not free to debate. Last time, you had security protecting you from fellow Members of Parliament. 

Can we proceed peacefully when one of the people extensively mentioned in the report is comfortably seated behind you without calling the Sergeant-at-Arms to excuse him from the House for the purpose of this particular debate; are we in order to sit with strangers and very dangerous people who compromised the interests of the Government of Uganda?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know who is sitting behind me but the House is from here up to there, so he is not in the House. He cannot be a stranger because he is not sitting in the chamber; that side is not part of the chamber, so he is not in the House. Those are technical benches; I do not know him and do not know whether he is here -

MS ALUM: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are seated directly toward Mr Amanyire and he is looking at us with very bad eyes. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, those benches are reserved for the staff who accompany ministers. (Laughter) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, unless the minister confirms to us that the suspect is accompanying him and that he is his advisor -yesterday, hon. Othieno Okoth laid on the Table a dossier – which was pinning the minister and talks a lot about the gentleman. Therefore, there cannot be a way that he is here accompanying the minister, to advise him. 

We should have expected the permanent secretary – although before the report was remitted, he was defending SGS –(Interjections)- last Friday. The PS had issued a statement in the newspapers. Therefore, could the minister who had issued that dossier tell us whether the gentleman called Amanyire, who defied the leadership of the ministry, is accompanying him?

4.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Madam Speaker, I am ordering the officer to exit the room. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Can Mr Amanyire exit the chambers please so that we can proceed? You can listen from the lobby or somewhere else. 

(Whereupon Mr Amanyire exited the Chamber.)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, I thank you for having exercised that prudence. However, I need more guidance from you. Once we start allowing people - every day, we discuss about public servants in this Chamber - if we are going to have every accused person coming to listen in, I think that we shall be setting a wrong precedent.

I do not know whether it would not be right for you to make a pronouncement that it is not right, unless you are accompanying a minister for official duty - to just come and listen in because you are an accused person yet you are a civil servant. It intimidates the Members - today, Uganda is full of things - you can go out and find people waiting for you at your gate. These are the kind of people who can plot trouble. Therefore, I am wondering whether we are safe having these kinds of people coming to listen in.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, my difficulty is that I do not know which technical person is sitting there because I just walk in and sit. I do not know who is behind me. However, let us examine it and we shall give a ruling since this is new. Or are you saying that we should register whoever comes here every day? (Interjections) Okay, we shall examine that. Thank you for the proposal and we need to secure the lives of the Members and the staff.

4.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Mr Aggrey Bagiire): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First and foremost, I would like to thank the committee for the good job that it did to scrutinise the entire process that led SGS to be awarded a contract. We recognise, as a sector, that the process had issues. As a ministry and the ministers in charge of the sector, we appeared before the committee, gave our views, submitted all the documents that were required of us and the committee did its work.

However, some of the decisions and recommendations that the committee came up with are really good but some of them can have a far-reaching effect on the entire Government. Therefore, as a ministry, when we got the report yesterday - (Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Madam Speaker, it is very unfortunate that the minister who is concerned, one of the people pointed at, is trying to subject the decisions of this House to anticipation by trying to bias the House.

Why would a minister propose that the decisions of the House have far-reaching effects? Indeed, they should have if we are to make this House better. Is he in order to pre-empt the thoughts of this House even before we debate, yet he is one of the accused?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we only received the main and minority reports but the Members have not expressed their views. Whatever is there is raw material. Therefore, I do not know what you want us to do, since it is still raw. Wait to hear the views of the Members.

MR BAGIIRE: Madam Speaker, I think your guidance is accepted. Let us allow it.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable members -(Mr Acidri rose_) - Members of the committee will not debate. Hon. Acidri, what are you clarifying? Whom do you want to give information? There is nobody on the Floor. It was you, the members of the committee, who brought the report. Allow other members to discuss what you brought - it is your report; so you cannot add anything to it.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I should also seek guidance on how we are going to debate this report. I think, it should be a lesson to us as Parliament - the Permanent Secretary (PS) for the Ministry of Works and Transport wrote in the papers, restraining Members of Parliament from debating this report, and you warned us; it is on record.

I seek your guidance on whether civil servants - (Interjections)- yes, he wrote saying that debating the SGS report has far-reaching implications - I would like to seek the guidance from the minister because the way he was presenting shows that Parliament is going to waste a lot of time on something, which is going to be recommended by the House. 

This arm of Government helps the Executive to perform its roles, because as we are carrying out our oversight function, it is not in bad faith. However, we are saying that the system should be improving. We are helping to check you, because you appropriate money. 

Therefore, the PS should not hold a press conference to say that Members of Parliament should not debate such a matter when we are helping them as another arm of Government. That is why the resolutions we recommend here are not taken seriously. They should tell us what we should do and the ministry of works should clarify such that we know that the decision we are going to take is invalid because as he was presenting, he said that it has far-reaching implications even before we debated it. May be the Executive is not interested.

THE SPEAKER: No, whether the Executive is interested or not, we are doing our work. We have the reports; let us debate and take a decision.

4.22
MR GORDON ARINDA (NRM, Bushenyi, Ishaka Municipality, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for coming up with this minority report, which is very instrumental because it has given us the details of what actually took place in awarding the contract to SGS.

As Members of Parliament, we have seen so many inconsistences that were conducted by the Ministry of Works and Transport in awarding this tender to SGS. I think we need to come out clearly and say that the recommendations of the minority report are key in this matter. This contract should be terminated and we move on. I beg to submit. 

4.23
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember by the time I came up with this matter on the Floor of Parliament, there was a very big outcry from many Ugandans. That is why I would like to appeal to my colleagues to take this matter very seriously, as they have done. 

I would like to thank the authors of the minority report for coming out very clearly on all the issues as I raised them. Coming out here to say that 90 per cent of accidents are caused by motor vehicle conditions is not true. The main report was confusing, claiming that police is always giving wrong information. Last week, I visited seven police stations quietly, and I discovered that most of the vehicles that have caused accidents are new. This verifies the fact that it is not mechanical conditions that cause accidents but human error, as it is clearly stated by police.

When you consider the poor methods or techniques of motor vehicle inspection used by SGS - I tried Kawanda and Nabbingo and I can tell you that this is an organization that cannot do any good for Ugandans as the main report clearly states. Therefore, I strongly agree with the recommendations of the minority report. 

When you look at the two reports, you will discover that the minority report has more Members than the so called majority report, which is totally fake; you cannot call something “majority” when it has less than the minority. Can I then stand here to say that what you call the minority report is actually the majority report? That is the report which we should take seriously as we discuss here. 

My prayer, Madam Speaker, is that SGS should be compelled to compensate Uganda because in the first place, they never fulfilled any of their terms as stated in the agreement. Also, all the technical officials involved should be taken to court and be charged with corruption of the highest level. -(Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: Let us allow him more time because he was the mover.

MR MUYANJA SENYONGA: Thank you so much. At the end of the day, when they delayed to implement the project, the Permanent Secretary extended their term. That means there was connivance at the highest level. 

Ugandans are looking at us as their liberators. Many people are suffering. Let us not only talk about reducing the cost of inspection; was it done using the right channels and were all the staff involved? I attended a meeting where the minister was saying that he was not involved. Why would the solicitor not draft the agreement but just endorse it? Is that the right procedure? Why don’t we cancel this agreement and we leave this to the police to handle, like it used to be in early –(Member timed out) 

4.27
MR PETER OGWANG (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the minority committee, which to me has the majority members. I am going to address myself to issues raised in the minority report.

If you look at page 4, with due respect, I do not know what we are going to do about our colleagues who have worked in Government before and then end up in this august House. A case in point is our own honourable engineer Sabiiti. It is an embarrassment considering what the minority report is saying about engineer Sabiiti. From what I read and what I listened to yesterday, he seemed to have turned himself into the Attorney-General of the Republic of Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, it is true that we have immunity in this august House, but I think that to some extent, the cases of engineer Sabiiti and others should help us show this country that yes, he is innocent –(Interruption)

MS KAMATEKA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry to raise a point of order against my commissioner. Is the commissioner in order to generalise people who have worked in Government and end up in this House? (Laughter) He says they end up being a problem. The honourable member may have a problem with certain individuals, but is he in order to generalise about people who have worked in Government and label them as a problem when they end up in the House?

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ogwang, can you substantiate about that statement?

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, even the Hansard can bear me witness because whatever we say is recorded. I said “some”, and particularly I made reference to engineer Sabiiti. I have no kind words for a person of that calibre. With due respect, if you have read this report, he has a case to answer. It is not me who authored the report; it was authored by a committee. 

Therefore, for that purpose, what was the issue that I was raising? Madam Speaker, we Members of Parliament are regarded with high esteem in the public, but when one of us is mentioned in such a report, I expect us to be free and open to point out areas where we feel we must improve as a Parliament and as individuals. We must account. Even if I read for you from page 29, engineer Sabiiti appeared before the committee –(Interruption)  

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, hon. Ogwang. What hon. Ogwang is telling this House is valid because I think he was focusing on the conduct of some Members who were at one time fired from their offices and some of them are here. The honourable member was fired from State House. Was the honourable member in order to stand up and say this and that? Why was she fired? -(Interruptions)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, hon. Kamateeka worked in the civil service and grew up through the ranks from the level of assistant secretary to the level of permanent secretary and retired honourably. Is hon. Nzoghu – the tall man – in order to allege that Kamateeka was fired from State House? 

Can he substantiate, because this may end up in court? Can he actually apologise? He cannot tarnish the name of the honourable member for Mitooma District. Can hon. Nzoghu substantiate or withdraw his statement?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, unfortunately I had not read all the records of the Members and so I do not know the sequence. However, you substantiate because you are the one who has made the allegation. (Laughter)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Just give me 48 hours. I will come and explain on the Floor of this Parliament. (Laughter) I will come and substantiate, with evidence.

THE SPEAKER: You have 48 hours. Tomorrow, you must bring the substantiation.

MR NZOGHU: Yes, you give me 48 hours. (Laughter)

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to quote page 29 of the main report where it says that engineer Sabiiti, while appearing before the committee during the inquiry, admitted that he received an email from a one Ferdinand. However, when he received this email, he said that his email had been hacked into. The question I would pose is: did he report to police the case of how his email was hacked into? Did the committee try to find out if there was evidence that – (Interruption)

MS AMONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In regard to what hon. Ogwang is asking - whether he reported the case to police – when you read page 11, it says, “On 2 March 2015, Eng. Sabiiti perused the contract before forwarding it to the Solicitor-General for clearance in total disregard to the need for negotiations as recommended by the evaluation team and approved by the contracts committee.” That clearly shows conflict of interest. It shows that he had an interest in the contract.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, please join me in welcoming, in the public gallery, a delegation of doctors and nurses from the Uganda Heart Institute. You remember we gave them autonomy in the Ninth Parliament and they have been doing a good job. We have Dr John Omagino, Dr William Manyilirah, Dr Lameck Ssemogerere, Ms Ann Oketayot, Prof. Omaswa, Dr Jane Francis Munduru, Mr John Obwin, Mr Katabira, Mr John Keba, Mr Dennis Juuko, Ms Dorothy Nkusi, Mr Patrick Jaka and Ms Jesca Namuyanja. (Applause) As you know, they have done the first successful coronary bypass surgery in Uganda and today we are going to honour and commend them. You are welcome. (Applause)

MR OGWANG: Madam Speaker, I would like to conclude by saying that on page 29 of the same report, the committee still noted that engineer Sabiiti’s response to the committee was in sharp contrast to his 22 November response to the same allegations to the Permanent Secretary Ministry of Works and Transport. That time he categorically stated that he did not know a one Mr Ferdinand. 

What I am trying to say here is that the conduct of our colleague is really questionable. We know that he did this when he was not a Member of Parliament, but I do not know how we normally treat such matters. I would implore the right organs of Government to investigate our own colleague because this is not good for the image of Members of Parliament and the country.

THE SPEAKER: As hon. Onzima comes, I would like you to join me in welcoming His Grace Emmanuel Obbo, the Archbishop of Tororo Diocese. You are welcome. (Applause) We also have Fr Philip Balikuddembe, Fr Philip Odii, Fr John Richard Owor, Fr Godfrey Okello, Deacon Lino Sinyekwa, Deacon Patrick Ochieng, Sister Josephine Nangira, Sister Florence Ndaru and Ssalongo Robert Kamiza. They are here to observe the proceedings of parliament and probably celebrate Ash Wednesday. You are very welcome. (Applause)

4.38
MR GODFREY ONZIMA (NRM, Aringa North County, Yumbe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee. My submission is going to be based on the majority report, which was presented as the minority report. (Laughter)

From the presentation of the committee, although SGS was given the mandate to inspect vehicles, they lacked standards. Ideally, if vehicles are supposed to be inspected, then the engineers from the manufacturers must be responsible. However, you will realise that much as the manufacturers were supposed to carry on with the service of these vehicles for some period of time, the contract prevented them from doing so. My question in this case is: what was the standard they were using since they were not the manufacturers of these vehicles? 

The second issue I would like to talk about is the role of the Inspectorate of Vehicles (IOV). If you have a problem related to accidents, you go to courts and you will be required to come with an IOV report. In this particular situation, if the IOV is rendered useless, how will the report from SGS apply? I think we should empower IOV to continue with their work.

Thirdly, there were irregularities cited in the costs of inspection. Here they were saying the cost of a motorcycle is Shs 57,000 whereas a bus that makes more money is Shs 700 –(Interjection)- Maybe I quoted it wrongly but you will find that there is an irregularity in this.

Madam Speaker, when you look at the role of the Government and police in the contract as it was stated, they said the role of the police and Government was to ensure that vehicles must be inspected to realise commercial viability. Therefore, in this particular situation, this SGS affair was not an issue to do with control of accidents but it was looked at as a means of raising funds. That is my opinion. How would they say that it was to ensure commercial viability?

Madam Speaker, I am beginning to realise that having a vehicle in Uganda means that you will have to pay a lot of money. First, the cost of purchase of a vehicle is very expensive –(Member timed out.)

4.41
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative): Madam Speaker, I think I was the first person to bring up this issue here as a matter of national concern when the adverts started running.  I remember at that time the minister tried to come with a statement, which was not satisfactory, and he had promised to come back.

Madam Speaker, SGS is something that came with a lot of speed. We were told that within six months, if one did not take their vehicles for inspection, they would pay a fine. However, at that time, inspection was only being done at Kawanda and the other places were still being constructed.

In this country, we do not think about our people; we only care about foreigners. I have gone to many countries and these people give priority to their citizens before giving an opportunity to foreigners. The prices that were given - I went to SGS office in Mbale, I was given payment forms and they told me to pay at Centenary Bank. However, I informed them that we usually pay money to URA, including nomination fees that I usually pay during elections. Therefore, I wondered where this money was going to go.

I would like to support the minority report. The people who are responsible should be dealt with as individuals, not the entire ministry; the individuals should be investigated and be answerable. I am aware that this happened sometime back; there is a former minister of lands who is paying debts for some land titles as an individual – (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: The reason the minority report is holding the ministry responsible is because of its failure to take action against individuals like  Mr Amanyire, who even went on the invitation of SGS to South Africa but came back without the knowledge of the ministry yet no action has been taken up today. It is on that basis that the committee is concerned, because the ministry should have taken disciplinary action. There are means of dealing with such errant officers in the ministry. Thank you.

MS ASAMO: Thank you. I think we should not handle this wholesome. We have been informed that the gentleman travelled without permission from the permanent secretary. 

I would like to say that the agreement that was drawn by a commissioner on behalf of the Government of Uganda was a breach of the law. Whereas hon. Sabiiti would like to explain, I feel that he is the centre of concern regarding this matter and he should therefore wait until the investigations are concluded. Thereafter, he can be able to come and explain. Maybe the Inspectorate of Government should handle this case. Thank you.

4.45	
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  As I was coming here, I was wondering why the burden of those who have failed in other Government offices should be brought to your hands, Madam Speaker. 

We have the Auditor-General’s reports and the IGG’s reports. I have read all of them extensively. There are many people mentioned including hon. Sabiiti, honourable Sodium, - there is a whole page in the IGG’s report on him - hon. Byandala and hon. Yiga Anthony. When hon. Yiga Anthony was a Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), he removed the engine of a Government vehicle and put it in his vehicle. (Laughter). This is all covered in the Auditor-General’s report of 2002. 

These people were offloaded and brought to a woman called Rt Hon. Rebeca Kadaga, with all their history. I think it is about time that we amend Article 83 of the Constitution. If one has been stealing money from somewhere else, Parliament should not be a dumping ground for such people. (Laughter) That is why we are having this kind of problem. 

Madam Speaker, three years ago, under your chair, some people brought a proposal to privatise the fire brigade services. This Parliament refused and said if we privatise the role of fire fighting, who will create the fires? Because those private entities will have to get fires to fight, they will start torching people’s houses so that they can present bills to the people whose houses would have allegedly been saved from the fires. In the same vein, inspection of Government vehicles cannot be privatised. It has to be a function of Government - a function of Ministry of Works and Transport in conjunction with Uganda Police Force.

Honourable minister, we are Members of Parliament. If you do not listen to Parliament, we shall mobilise our people; I know they are watching us on TV. No one should even waste their time to go to SGS since there are a lot of irregularities there. We shall mobilise our people not to report to those centres because you cannot privatise –(Interruption) 

MR NAGWOMU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Odonga Otto is talking about giving responsibility to Government entities to inspect vehicles. I worked with URA before I came here and the truth of the matter is that all these systems –(Interjections)– Of course, I left honourably; I retried voluntarily. Systems have been put in place. We have three entities that are authorised to license vehicles; one of them is URA, the second is the Chief Engineer, Ministry of Works and Transport, and the third one is the Transport Officer, Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. I do not see why we should also have SGS.

Secondly, we have Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS). We also have the Japan Export Vehicle Inspection Center (JEVIC), a company that inspects vehicles from the country of export before they come to Uganda, in this case Japan. Also, before URA issues a number plate, they first inspect the vehicle and verify it. If the vehicle was involved in an accident, the Inspector of Vehicles (IOV) does the job. Thank you.

MR ODONGO OTTO: Thank you for that useful information. The chairperson of the committee must be subjected to disciplinary proceedings. She covered many things to the extent that the minority report is more detailed than the majority report.

The bar the senior female Members of Parliament have set in this House, including the Speaker of Parliament - the standards are very high. (Laughter) As an institution of Parliament, we are not going to accept, when the entire country is running to us for remedies on such an important issue like SGS, to have the minority report as the one that is helping us. Madam Speaker, I support your ruling of yesterday that the chairperson of the committee be taken to the disciplinary committee and declare her interests in this particular matter.

Lastly, as an advocate, if I go to Europe and buy a vehicle, they will give me warranties and guarantees. Some of these companies state that they will attend to the vehicle for some number of years, before someone else can tamper with it. Occasionally, they will put seals on certain parts. Imagine, I have imported my vehicle and you subject me to a company that does not even know what was manufactured. This is actually breach of international intellectual property. What you are trying to do is void ab initio.

In the circumstances, Madam Speaker, on behalf of the people of Aruu, ours is simple, we shall mobilise our people; if we see your car in the SGS camp, it will have problems. (Laughter) That is the level of mobilisation. Thank you so much. 

4.52
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. First of all, I would like to thank the committee for both the minority and majority reports. I would like to focus my submission on the terms of reference, specifically the one regarding the investigation of the procurement of the contract and the one examining the conditions under which SGS was operating.

When you read both reports, it is clear that there were some unethical practices on the side of Ministry of Works and Transport staff and SGS staff. The committee has come up with findings, but the majority report is silent on actions to be taken on the people who were involved; the minority report is very clear on this issue.

On page 34 of the majority report, it talks about compliance with Article 119 (4) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. The committee reports that they interfaced with the Solicitor-General on 9 August 2017 and that he informed the committee that his office was not involved in drawing the contract. However, again there is a one Kyomuhendo who is reported to have cleared the draft contract that was submitted by the now hon. Sabiiti. I would like to know from the committee, in which capacity was this Kyomuhendo working? I find it contradictory because they are saying the Solicitor-General was not involved and then Kyomuhendo comes and clears a contract, which was submitted by engineer Sabiiti. 

Madam Speaker, still under compliance, the main report recommends that the contract be declared null and void but at the same time it talks about maintaining the contract. I would like the committee to tell Parliament what we should go with, because the report recommends that.

When you read both reports, it is clear that they do not deviate much in terms of findings. However, when it comes to recommendations, it is the minority report that has clear recommendations that we can go with as Parliament. Specifically, the minority report talks about capacity issues concerning SGS. Yesterday, we were told that SGS does not have the capacity to inspect vehicles manufactured before 1975 and after 2015. There are also issues to do with the staff; they do not have enough staff. 

Therefore, I would go with the minority report and support the argument of cancelling the contract and opening this up to others to create more jobs and also save Ugandans against exorbitant prices set by SGS. Thank you very much.

4.56
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Members who signed the minority report – (Interjection) - majority report; thank you for that correction.

Madam Speaker, I would like to start by saying that this Parliament must be helped if the public out there is to respect us. When we have a committee report which was supposed to be the majority report, but it turns out to be the minority report, which is not being supported by most of the Members, I think as a Parliament we have very serious issues that we must address.

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the majority’s report by saying that the contract for SGS must be terminated because they were the first ones to breach the terms laid down therein. On page 13, it says, “Section 7.5.3 of the contract provides that the contract is automatically terminated if the provider gives offers, promises of any loan, fee, reward, or advantage of any kind to any employee…” This is exactly what SGS did to Mr Amanyire, who was meanly looking at us here, and even our colleague, hon. Sabiiti. They were the first people to breach the contract and I see no point as to why we cannot terminate this contract.

First of all, the objective of SGS was to help in the reduction of accidents and to improve, according to them, air pollution. However, I do not see any results to that effect that are benefitting the country. Therefore, on that note, I really support the majority report that this contract be terminated. (Interruption)

MS AMONG: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, I agree with my honourable sister when she says there was a breach. When you look at the timeline for payment of concession fees, it says SGS breached by up to eight months. Clause 4.1 of the conditions of the contract provides that the service provider shall pay 10 per cent within the 15 days. There was a breach by SGS and that amounts to termination of its contract. Thank you.

MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable colleague. The committee mentions the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General right from page 14. Indeed, these are the officers mandated by the Constitution to help this country. However, when the Attorney-General, instead of perusing through the documents and really doing due diligence, just clears and now the country is supposed to pay, we have to get a way, as Parliament, to do something. We have to make sure that these people in the name of the office of Attorney-General are also penalized. This is because in all the corruption scandals, which come before this Parliament, you will always find that the Attorney-General did not do due diligence – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable. Madam Speaker, the information I wish to give is that when it came to payments, SGS had not paid at all. They only played a trick on us by banking that same day they were coming to appear before the committee. Otherwise, they had not paid. 

Secondly, there was connivance between SGS and Ministry of Works and Transport to return the security guarantee before even assessing whether SGS had performed and even before getting the recommendation from the Attorney-General. Therefore, there was total connivance within the entire deal.

MS ALUM: Thank you, honourable colleague. You can see there is a cobweb of connivance amongst the different Government ministries and MDAs. This thing has been going on and on for a very long time and I feel it is the right time for Parliament to help this country. As people’s representatives, we are gathered here on behalf of our people from all corners of this country. If the technocrats have turned out to be – for lack of a better word - hyenas or vultures consuming the money that is supposed to help all – (Interruption)

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I am worried because we have not moved any motion to change the minority report into the majority report yet we are referring to the minority report as the majority report. 

Madam Speaker, the minority report remains a minority report, however good it may be. Therefore, are we proceeding well to continue referring to the minority report as if it were the majority report? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course from the responses of yesterday, it appeared as if the minority report is very popular, but it is still a minority report. Therefore, let us deal with the main and the minority reports. That is the law.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to raise a procedural question. If this report which the chairperson signed is supposed to be the majority report, can’t the chairperson become part of the minority? I am raising this because the report, which the chairperson signed, has fewer signatures than the minority report. Therefore, which one is the majority report? Is it where the chairperson signed or the other one? 

MS NAKATE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The majority report that was presented by the members yesterday has 14 signatures and the minority report has nine signatures. Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to say that the majority report has fewer signatures? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, leave out the semantics. The majority report has 14 signatures and the other one has eight signatures. Let us stick to the nomenclature. The minority report was departing from the majority report; therefore, it stays as the majority report and the other one is the minority report. Leave the issue of signatures and numbers and just focus on the content.

5.05
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Madam Speaker, it is very embarrassing to put up a defence against common sense. It is very clear that this report we call the minority is the substantive report and it is the popular one. I rise to support the Members who stood against all odds to produce this minority report, especially the chairperson who yesterday really submitted and won our hearts in terms of the real core issues that emerged from the report –(Interjections)– I meant the chairperson of the members who authored the minority report. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, this report gives us a lesson in this country, that we are putting a lot of energy in testing vehicles instead of putting energy in testing diseases like HIV/AIDS and so on. If you read this, you will also see an emerging trend of financial engineering, which in the concept of fighting corruption is still very new in this country. However, I can now see that we have financial engineers in this Parliament as opposed to civil and mechanical engineers. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, if you read this report, you would also find out that there is logic which is being driven by the intent for money only. Most of the vehicles in this country are saloon cars; we have a few buses and lorries. Now, they have put the testing charges for buses at Shs 40,000 and saloon cars at Shs 80,000. It is because they know that there are many saloon cars in this country. Therefore, this is an economic agenda for some of these people. 

At the end of the day, I believe accident carnage in this country has not been caused mainly by lack of vehicle inspectors to –(Interruption)

MR MWIJUKYE: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. If you look at the charges per unit and the classification, you find that for a motorcycle, the fee is supposed to be Shs 46,000 but a bus is set at Shs 800. It is because the motorcycles are many, so the fee is Shs 46,000. For small cars, one is supposed to pay Shs 93,000 because they are many. For an omnibus, one pays Shs 50,000. 

Therefore, from this, you see that SGS is for profit making. They are charging more for the vehicles that are many and less for the ones that are few. That is the information I want to give you.

MR KOMAKECH: Madam Speaker, with these glaring statistics, I think it is in order to just cancel this contract without wasting energy. The Attorney-General is here. We were told yesterday that there were contractual problems; I do not think so. The only thing we need to move as this House is that SGS should even be put in prison and the chairperson should be relieved of her duties in the committee. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, we need to put in more effort in understanding why there are many road accidents in this country. When the British came here and built roads, they built them based on the psychology of the British Islands. However, here at least we have enough land; why is it that up to now, roads have not been widened? 

There is nowhere in this country where we drive on wide lanes. We drive on two narrow lanes. This is where we need to put our efforts; it is common sense. There is no way SGS can come here and say that because they are not there, that is why accidents happen in this country.

I rest my case, but I vehemently insist that the chairperson must be relieved of her duties. Secondly, the committee members who committed all this fraud should also abandon that committee or be subjected to the disciplinary committee. 

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let me ask the members of the committee not to even give information. You sit as we talk. They are smuggling through information.

5.10
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am glad the Attorney-General is in the House. I feel so bad. I worked in Government but by that time, we did not have all this fraud going on in the civil service. You can see that the whole system has collapsed. The whole system is rotten, from ministries to Government departments, and it is only about stealing. 

When you read this minority report, it is clearly indicated that SGS was bribing everybody. They have bribed even the people at the Ministry of Works and Transport - civil servants who should have been clean people. Therefore, when you look at this report, you will see that the system is rotten. These people came here to cheat Ugandans. 

Madam Speaker, I went to Namboole to find out if my vehicle could be inspected. I thank God I did not give in my vehicle. Do you know what they told me? They had put up another small carwash company there and they said before a vehicle got onto the machines, the tyres had to be washed. Can you imagine! You actually pay for that, because it was not free of charge. This money was not paid through a Government department or revenue office. They had private companies. 

All this is done because of our own in ministries stealing and cheating, and these are Government departments. Therefore, IGG should step in instead of bringing all these people. There are people here, and I agree with my colleague, hon. Ogwang. You remember there was an issue that came up one time in this House about the golden handshake and some of those implicated were in this House. People who worked in Government departments are now in this House.

Therefore, these people who have been implicated should be taken to the disciplinary committee. You can see the role played by engineer Sabiiti. These people should be investigated. It is very clear here, honourable members; the report is very clear. These are the people who stole –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it seems there is a delegation from Kamuli or Buyende. They forgot to inform me until I recognized one of my voters in that gallery. (Laughter) You are welcome. Tusangaire okubabona! (Laughter) There also some from Buyende. I also know them – Even Namwendwa? Okay, you are all welcome. 

I am sorry we were not informed that you are here but you are very welcome. Enjoy your stay in Parliament. They are represented by the current Members of Parliament of Kamuli and Buyende districts.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have got our doctors waiting and everybody is speaking in favour of this minority report. Therefore, I beg that you put the question for us to approve the minority report to terminate the contract of SGS.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that many Members want to contribute. However, there is an area of the law, which no one has touched on and which I still want to wait for. I propose that we deal with the motion for 40 minutes and come back to our debate. We can be here until 8.00 p.m. Is that okay? Let us do that so that the doctors can go back and do more surgery. Can the movers come? We use 40 minutes to debate the motion on the Uganda Heart Institute and after that, we shall come back to the SGS matter.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO A TEAM OF MEDICAL EXPERTS OF UGANDA HEART INSTITUTE FOR SUCCESSFULLY PERFORMING THE FIRST EVER CORONARY BYPASS SURGERY IN UGANDA

5.15
MR THOMAS TAYEBWA (NRM, Ruhinda North County, Mitooma): Thank you Madam Speaker. The motion reads as follows: 

“WHEREAS the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda provides in paragraph XIV of the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy that the State shall endeavour to fulfil the fundamental right of all Ugandans to social and economic development and shall, in particular, ensure that all Ugandans enjoy rights and opportunities and access to education, health services, clean and safe water, among others;

AND WHEREAS paragraph XX of the same National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy of the Constitution provides that the State shall take all practical measures to ensure the provision of basic medical services;

AND WHEREAS the Uganda Heart Institute is an example of a success story that owes its achievements to partnership between skilled and patriotic professionals, civil society and the Government, and can be replicated in many other national efforts; was first launched and registered in Uganda in 1988 as a non-profit company without share capital as a partnership between the Ministry of Health and Mulago Hospital that together provided physical space, while Makerere University provided key staff and the Uganda Heart Foundation mobilised resources;

AWARE THAT in 200l, the institute was first registered as a company limited by guarantee of its founding bodies, namely Mulago Hospital, Ministry of Health, Makerere University and Uganda Heart Foundation, purposely to fasten its growth and development by enabling it to solicit for funds and manage its resources, thus commencing its operations as a semi-autonomous unit under Mulago Hospital;

FURTHER AWARE THAT in 2016, in an effort to increase the competitiveness of the health sector as defined in the National Development Plan II (NDP II), Parliament enacted the Uganda Heart Institute Act, which established the institute as an autonomous Government agency with the mandate to, among others, offer medical and surgical treatment as well as rehabilitation of persons affected by heart diseases and other related conditions;

NOTING THAT the Uganda Heart Institute has striven to attain the technical capacity to offer a complete range of cardiac care services comparable to any centre of excellence in the world and is now able to handle all aspects of diagnostic, non-invasive care in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) and Critical Care Unit (CCU), invasive/cardiac catheterization interventions and open-heart surgery for both children and adults;

DELIGHTED THAT the institute has, for the first time, successfully performed a coronary by-pass surgery, which has been the missing link for all this time, and which achievement we now celebrate with the rest of the nation, and this was made possible with funding from the Government of Uganda in support to the Ministry of Health;

COGNISANT THAT the services provided at the institute require a special mind-set that calls for the highest standards of dedication as errors are costly and must be avoided by cultivating and institutionalising a work culture that pursues excellence at all times, guided by the principles of professionalism and social accountability to the country, transparent and accountable governance, zero tolerance for corruption, respect for each other and appreciating and respecting the justifiable needs of all staff;

CONCERNED THAT if the ongoing transition to autonomy as a Government agency is not well managed, it may pose a threat to the consolidation of the current successes at the institute, thus the need to harness both the manpower and financial resource base;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this parliament that:
1. Parliament collectively conveys its gratitude to Prof. Francis Omaswa, the founder of the institute; Dr Omagino John, the institute’s Executive Director; the lead surgeons, Dr Manyilirah William and Dr Mwambu Tom; Dr Mijumbi Cephas and Dr Ejoku,  the anaesthesiologists; the intensivist, Dr Ssemogerere Lameck; the lead theatre nurse, Ms Munduru Gertrude; the lead ICU nurse, Ms Ann Oketayot; and the perfusionist, Ms Muraa Pascaline all of the Uganda Heart Institute, for successfully performing the first ever coronary by-pass surgery in Uganda.

2. Parliament makes an annual allocation of an equivalent of a sum of Shs 10 billion to the Uganda Heart Institute successively for the next five years, commencing from financial year 2018/2019, to cater the improvement of the services at the Institute.” I beg to move.


THE SPEAKER: Okay. It has been seconded by several Members. Can you justify?

MR TAYEBWA: Madam Speaker, the Uganda Heart Institute has registered a milestone, which is a triple bypass heart surgery, known as a coronary artery bypass grafting, carried out by our very own Ugandan doctors. It was the first of its kind in the entire country. 

This surgery involves creating a diversion route for blood to parts of the heart whose supplying vessel has been blocked by a clot or thrombus. 

The Uganda Heart Institute has been performing cardiovascular interventions since 2007 and these include closed and open-heart surgeries for children born with heart defects; adults and children with valve heart diseases; adults requiring interventions in the cath laboratory pacemakers, coronary, geography and stenting. This has steadily reduced the percentage of patients referred abroad to about 20 per cent. 

The coronary artery bypass grafting was the only remaining surgery that had not been done by the Uganda Heart Institute team without external support. That is why this development is such a great milestone for the country.
With this surgery now going to be routinely performed, the percentage of people being referred abroad will reduce to less than five per cent.

While the present capacity of the Uganda Heart Institute is to operate 1,000 cases both in the catheterisation laboratory and operating theatre, only 50 per cent capacity is being utilised due to the inadequate funding. This leaves 50 per cent capacity redundant while the institute has a backlog of over 500 patients awaiting surgery and the booking for the elective cases is at one year.

We do have technical capacity, and this is for our own people traveling from the villages. We have the technical capacity but because they do not have equipment, they send away around 50 per cent of the people they are supposed to be operating and these people go back to die. For the Government officials, we find money for them to go abroad but when it comes to people from the village, we send them away to go and die because of the little money that is needed by the Uganda Heart Institute. 

When I approached the people at the Uganda Heart Institute, they said that the only way Parliament and the Government can honour them is not by giving them medals but by granting them the little money that they need to save the people they send away to die because they do not have the equipment. Madam Speaker, in effect, the institute can comprehensively handle 95 per cent of the adult cases, including valve and coronary bypass surgery and 85 per cent of the cases in children.

If the necessary operational funds are available in addition to this technical capacity, the institute can ably train super specialists in the cardiac super specialty, conduct high calibre research to ensure quality care, and generate the necessary data to guide policy.

The unit cost for comprehensive care, which includes diagnostic interventions in the catheterisation laboratory and operating theatre and subsequent care in the intensive care unit or coronary care unit at the Uganda Heart Institute, is at an average of US$ 5,000. When you compare this cost with referring patients abroad at an average of US$ 30,000 before air ticketing, accommodation and meals, it is very low.

The cumulative number of operations performed at the Uganda Heart Institute in the last six and a half years is 2,950 at a cost of US$ 14.75 million compared to US$ 59 million if they had been referred abroad. That is saving US$ 44.25 million. It is estimated that Uganda spends around US$ 150 million treating people abroad. Most of these are Government officials spending all this money. When they operate on these patients –(Interruption)-

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, it is very important to give credit where it is due. I was once the Minister of State for Primary Healthcare and Parliament ordered Government to pay US$ 4.5 million. Whatever you see there was done by the Ninth Parliament in 2009. If we assert ourselves, as Parliament we can do better and allow the proposal of the Shs 10 billion, which can achieve more milestones.

MR TAYEBWA: Thank you, colleague. When they operate these patients at home, there are obvious benefits like capacity building, teaching, training, research, saving foreign currency, treating patients in their native environment or culture and national pride. There is also the potential of generating foreign currency through referrals from neighbouring countries. Recently, we referred our own minister to Kenya. What can Kenya do that Uganda cannot?

On top of the Shs 10 billion, the institute is seeking a standalone home to increase capacity to 5,000 operations per year in order to address the ever increasing national demand, which is estimated at 8,000 babies and 2,000 adults. The estimated cost of the home is US$ 65 million, and we shall have to look into this as a Government and Parliament. This is an opportunity for Uganda. We should be celebrating as a country especially after the debate on SGS that has been going on here. This brings a smile to the face of Ugandans. 

The ladies and gentlemen you see in the gallery, like Prof. Omaswa, are the people we should be celebrating as a country. I am glad we are receiving bipartisan support here. I urge that we come up with a resolution and we do not wait to tell Government to allocate this money. Let us call upon our own budget committee - We have the power here; why give it to someone else? We can re-allocate. Every year, over Shs 100 billion is spent on entertainment by Government; we only need Shs 10 billion.

We might not legislate for the next five years but the moment we pass it here, then every year we shall be reminding ourselves that we needed this money. I beg to submit.

5.31
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Madam Speaker, I stand here to second the motion moved by my honourable colleague, hon. Thomas Tayebwa, that Parliament collectively conveys gratitude and pays tribute to the team from the Uganda Heart Institute for having been able to successfully conduct the first coronary bypass surgery at the Uganda Heart Institute.

Indeed, when he read the names of the people that have been involved in this pioneering surgery, there are a number of names that bring a lot of joy in my heart. Without sounding sectarian, I am glad that three of the names truly represent the people of Teso - Prof. Omaswa, Dr Omagino and Dr Ejoku. Together with your colleagues, you have done us proud.

What happened at the Uganda Heart Institute is a sign of selfless sharing of knowledge and pioneering. We did not have this kind of facility before, but we have people such as Prof. Omaswa who pioneered the heart institute. Together with his colleagues, they have been able to train and transfer knowledge to the others. This is the reason why Dr Omagino and the rest of the technical people have been able to seamlessly - even as Prof. Omaswa rose up to the rank of Director General of Health Services - drive the Uganda Heart Institute to date. 

In Soroti where I have been the Member of Parliament for the last one and a half years, I have so far received requests from about 13 different parents for contributions to enable them fly their children to India and other places for such heart surgery. These parents present a bill of between Shs 90 to Shs 180 million each. A Member of Parliament cannot find this kind of money. 

However, in a situation where our own heart institute is able to find a solution - According to Dr William Manyilirah, one of the lead consultants, the operation only cost Shs 18 million. Now even when somebody has to contribute or a family has to look for this money, at least there is the hope of getting it. You cannot think about Shs 180 million, which is sometimes a rumour to most of the people in our country.

We also know that medicine and surgery is about experiential building. Many of these procedures can be done by our medical personnel. Unfortunately, due to lack of facilities and equipment, they do not perform it as an everyday thing. Therefore, at the end of the day, when you do not practice a procedure, then you probably do not build expertise. 

As Parliament and as a country, if we equip the Uganda Heart Institute and other medical facilities and provide a framework for these procedures for our medical personnel, then they become more experienced. It is just like the way you wake up and drive a car. It would not be complicated for us to look at heart surgery as a matter of life and death.

Madam Speaker, quoting from a report on the outcomes of patients undergoing open heart surgery at the Uganda Heart Institute of December 2014, it says, “lack of direct funding for open heart surgery programmes is a major hindrance and obstacle limiting the number of children that are operated upon by our local teams since there are only very few families that can pay for surgery abroad”. The report further says, “Government and charities should direct funding to the Uganda Heart Institute as opposed to referral abroad.” 

Indeed, this report gives us confidence that we - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute to conclude.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me conclude in one minute. I would like to raise two things quickly. 

The first is about the idea of continuous professional development and training programmes for our experts. There are various hospitals abroad that may be doing these surgeries. Can we find a mechanism and funding so that our medical personnel can have continuous training programmes?

Secondly, the pay of medical personnel is very critical. We lose doctors to other countries like Swaziland and South Africa where they are paid well and yet we train them to be able to perform these procedures here. It is said, according to a job evaluation, that the outcome of the medical practice is one of the most critical because of the mental commitment, level of risk factor as well as the significance of the results of what they do. As we think on how to better the pay of other sectors, we must look at the critical nature of our medical personnel. 

Therefore, I pray that, one, Members support that we pay tribute and express gratitude to the team; and most importantly, Parliament makes an annual budget allocation of Shs 10 billion to the Uganda Heart Institute to successfully be able to build its capacity. After all, the whole afternoon we have been talking about the amounts of money that we lose through contracts like the one entered into with SGS. What would be more important other than putting this money where we shall be able to build and save lives of the people of this country? I beg to second. Thank you very much.

5.39
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleagues for addressing critical matters that are affecting the health sector in this country. 

I would like to begin by reading a verse from the Bible. Revelation 22:12 says, “Behold, I am coming quickly, and my reward is with me, to render to every man according to what he has done.” If God has promised a reward to whoever listens and obeys Him, including our Speaker of Parliament, how about the Parliament of Uganda? This team has done a wonderful job. They went to school and performed very well. In fact, this is a miracle team and that is why we should remember them at this critical period and support them. 

Incidentally, Prof. Omaswa is a very important man; he is my elder and mentor whom I have known for several years. When he was in Ngora Hospital, he did a very wonderful job; he even brought the airfield. When he came here, he also did a very wonderful job by establishing the Uganda Heart Institute. Those people have been saved because of his efforts. Dr Omagino has also done a wonderful job. 

Members of Parliament from eastern Uganda must thank God because majority of these doctors come from there. According to the Bible, the wise men come from the East. The issue of the heart is very difficult and according to the Bible, it is only God who understands the heart of man. In Uganda, these are the only people who can understand the heart of man. That is why we should not ignore them. 

Secondly, not to say “thank you” in Uganda is almost next to impossible. When someone has done something good, people rarely say, “thank you”. I would like to suggest that Parliament declares these our heroes – (Interjections) – Honourable colleague, if I had time, I would give way. Kindly bear with me. 

There is an African proverb which says that if a man does not eat at home, he may never give his wife enough money for food. He may not even give his wife money on Valentine’s Day. That is why all along we have been budgeting for people to go to India for treatment, forgetting that there are very many Ugandans who need support. That is why this proverb may apply to Ugandans who are seeking medical help elsewhere. That is why we should, at this time, be serious in saying these people must be supported. 

The entire Africa is spending about US$6 billion on treating politicians outside their countries. This money is only for treating politicians. The ordinary citizens are not included in this figure. That is why I am making a simple appeal at this stage. For the last four years, we have spent Shs 10.08 billion in Uganda to treat Government employees and politicians and out of these, 13 had problems with the heart. If we had equipped and supported the heart institute here in Uganda, these colossal sums of money would not have been misused. I will call it misusing because other people are donating to some people not our own. 

I would propose that we should not even talk about Shs 10 billion but Shs 50 billion to properly equip the heart institute, because there is a lot of money being wasted in MDAs like UNRA and others. They are talking about Shs 300 million for only refreshments. Last year, they spent more than Shs 190 billion on refreshments and massages. (Laughter). If we put this money in that area, I am sure we could have saved the lives of Ugandans. 

I would like to pray that the wonderful God blesses that team perfectly and continues to guide and help them to save Ugandans. Thank you. May God bless you.

5.45
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you once again, Madam Speaker. I do not know if this amounts to conflict of interest because I have been a beneficiary of the heart institute courtesy of Dr John Omagino and the Speaker of Parliament. 

I was evacuated from some part of the world with hon. Elijah Okupa and flown to the heart institute. I was admitted there and given specialised attention. I was taken to the intensive care ward where we were five. Only two of us survived that night. Therefore, this is more of a testimony from me about the healing hands of Ugandans. I am a strong person now and there should be no worry as it is history. 

Madam Speaker, I have three issues to raise. The first is to thank the team that has visited us in Parliament today. Secondly, as the honourable colleague said, we pass budgets for several Government departments but the finance ministry releases it selectively. We approve Shs 10 billion for them and tomorrow, the finance ministry will say that they have only raised Shs 3 billion because URA is still raising money. 

I think under the leadership of the Speaker, we need to put a cap on monies going to such sensitive entities, so that the moment we pronounce ourselves as Parliament, it must be released 100 per cent and on time. I am glad the chairperson of the finance committee is here.  This is a question of life and death. If I was to be flown around the world, I would probably not be here talking. It is these very children of Uganda who put their healing hands on me. 

I would like to propose an amendment to your prayers, that whatever amount of money released by this Parliament should be ring fenced. These things of the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and cutting here and there, or saying URA has not collected funds should not be tolerated, especially for the heart institute, the cancer institute and the Uganda Blood Transfusion Services. We should tell the finance minister that these are no go areas.

The cost of an operation by this technical team visiting us today is between Shs 12 million to Shs 14 million per infant. This is a little expensive for our ordinary Ugandan. Not because they are charging expensively, but because they are importing most of the gadgets and equipment like the cannulas and catheters. I am just a lawyer and do not know the technical names although Dr Chris Baryomunsi would know them better. I have just been advised that he is a gynaecologist and we are talking about the heart so he may have some difficulties. (Laughter) 

Therefore, since the cost of Shs 12 million to Shs 14 million cannot be afforded by Ugandans – every day you see adverts in newspapers requesting the public to send money to a certain mobile number – my understanding is we should budget Shs 10 billion for this year, then it increases the following year. It is not Shs 10 billion every year, if I understood you well. That means the allocation in the next financial year would be more than Shs 10 billion. 

This money would be used to help subsidise the high cost of the operations. The moment we give this money, then the cost of operations would come down to Shs 4 million or Shs 5 million, which becomes a little more affordable for our people. 

Madam Speaker, I really want to thank you for the initiative and as the head of this institution, we pledge to stand with you on this matter. I would like to warn the people at the Ministry of Finance; this time if we say such money is going to the heart institute, the blood bank and the cancer institute and it is not released or is diverted to other things like – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as hon. Mbwatekamwa comes up, I would like to inform the House that the Ministry of Finance was still holding onto the money for the Uganda Cancer Institute for the last the financial year and yet we had given them autonomy.

5.50
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the mover of this motion because we need to pay tribute to these people before they die and we only bring their coffins here to lay wreaths on them and we say how they have worked for this country. So, thank you very much. 

On a sad note, we are discussing this important motion but we do not have any minister from that docket here. That is why for me the other time when we were saying we need to increase the number of ministers – (Interjections) – Yes, even the finance minister. Where is the Minister of Finance? 

We are talking about money and how we need to increase the budget but where is the Minister of Finance? Have you also delegated him? He has walked away although the ministers of SGS are around, I think. (Laughter)

We need to be very serious. I sit on the health committee but it is a pity that our budget has been shrinking and has even gone down this year. (Interruption)

MR BASEKE: The information I would to give to this House, because I also sit on the health committee, is that when the people of the Uganda Heart Institute came before our committee, one of the priorities they had was to improve the services of the cath lab. The other was making sure that they get specialised supplies to continue doing those surgeries. 

They indicated that they had a funding gap of Shs 3.5 billion this coming financial year and that if we give them that money, it can save this country about US$10.5 million. That is the information I wanted to give.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much. We recently travelled to Namibia only to find out that the doctor heading the Department Of Pathology, and earning a lot of money, comes from Uganda. If we do not pay these people very well, I am scared. Now, they are being known and they are going to be targeted and they are going to move away from Uganda.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, when it comes to the health budget, let us be together. We should not be told about “roads, roads, “roads” because you can only walk on the roads when you are well. Even those who are going to work on our roads must be healthy. I thank you very much.

5.54
MR PATRICK NSAMBA (NRM, Kassanda County North, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to thank my colleague, hon. Tayebwa and the team he has been working with, for ensuring this motion comes to pass. Allow me also to thank Prof. Omaswa and the team. 

I know you are seated up in the gallery and many Members may not have seen you but some of us who were seated on the other side were able to recognise Prof. Omaswa and the team. Thank you very much.

During the doctors’ strike last year, I had a challenge - my father was recommended to go for a heart diagnosis. I went to the Uganda Heart Institute having no hope that I would find anybody there but the heart institute remained functioning even under the circumstances.

I never introduced myself as a Member of Parliament and I usually do not. However, the service that I got - I liked the ethics at the Uganda Heart Institute. They care for whoever turns up for their service. If their work ethics can be replicated in all our health facilities, we can go miles in the way our health services are delivered. Because of that reason, as a member of the Committee on Budget, this is a particular line of money that I would wish to stand up for. I have seen my colleagues here from the Committee on Budget preaching that we must take it as a key priority and exercise our role as Parliament in appropriation of the money.

Madam Speaker, moved by what hon. Tayebwa presented here when he was justifying the motion, across the board we have money for “treatment abroad”. Every other time we are looking at the expenditures. If we can start with the heart institute and make sure that whatever - If we have the technical capacity, can we then look at how we can empower them by having the equipment? 

I will be one of the happiest Members of Parliament if we can stamp our feet and make sure that such critical institutions are supported financially. Thank you.

5.57
MR COSMAS ELOTU (NRM, Dakabela County, Soroti): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice and thank the initiators of this motion paying tribute and support the work of our very senior and qualified citizens supporting us in the health sector. 

I would like to add that I think today is a blessed day for us. It is Ash Wednesday for sure but I think the issue we are handling in the House and the way we are handling it points that indeed it is a blessed day. I am quite sure that later when other issues come on the Floor they will definitely point to what we need undertaken in this country.

The story of Prof. Omaswa is one that can take us days to talk about. It is a story of admiration and success. I would like to share with the House that one time there was an incident to my mother and my uncle called me and said, “Cosmas, I know that most of my colleagues in the medical profession have retired” and he cited Prof. Omaswa. “I want you to take lead. As mummy is coming in an ambulance, please call your friends whom you have been with either at the university or otherwise and ensure that by the time she arrives, she is attended to immediately”.  

I scratched my head and I looked through my phone and all I could see was that all our very good and senior doctors are no longer with us in this country, as they decided to go for greener pastures abroad. This taught me a very good lesson that a very senior doctor like Prof. Omaswa has dedicated all his life to the service of the people of Uganda.

If you follow the story of the Uganda Heart Institute as shared with all of us now, I think it is a story of clear mentorship by Prof. Omaswa. It is why you hear of the success story at the Uganda Heart Institute. 

One evening, after the successful operation, I watched the three doctors sharing their story on television. I have a very naughty young man who normally quarrels with me when we are watching television because we differ in opinion. But this time, he came back and told me “Daddy, why are you so quiet today? What are you listening to?” It was a pure story that was being shared by the three doctors about what happened at the Uganda Heart Institute.

I would like to thank my colleagues once again for bringing this up in the House. I support all the prayers that therein. Again, I would like to thank hon. Odonga Otto for that particular insight into the issue of ensuring that whatever we agree on here, especially from a funding perspective, is adhered to.

Lastly, an engineer also shared with me a good story about Mulago Hospital. The Government is investing a lot of money in the development of infrastructure in this hospital. He told me that on completion, Mulago Hospital is going to be the best in terms of infrastructure in East and Southern Africa –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MS JUDITH ALYEK (NRM, Woman Representative, Kole): Madam Speaker, thank you very much.

I rise to second the motion on the Floor. Can you imagine that for all these years Uganda did not have any success like we are experiencing today, courtesy of the team that has come for us to pay tribute to? 

A successful heart surgery has been a great achievement for this country. I would like to say that there are organisations that have been trying to help people in this country. For example, Action for Disadvantaged People has been struggling hard to refer patients to India. I had two children from Kole District that were recently referred to India. One of the children called Janel Miracle went last month but did not have any success with the operation. The child was taken but the team in India failed to operate on her. Eventually, she was brought back to Uganda. She is still alive and we may still refer her to Mulago National Referral Hospital. The second child had a successful operation in India and she and her mother have not yet come back from India. We hope for the best for these two children.

Much as we talk about strengthening the Uganda Heart Institute, I also second the proposal that we should give Uganda Heart Institute money to do its work. Otherwise, if we do not support this team, we may not celebrate what we are celebrating now.  In addition, this team has done a wonderful job and Uganda is known for giving appreciation to the people who have done wonderful things like this team here. 

In that regard, I would like to propose that this team be given a special reward - (Interjection) - We could name it a “handshake” but it will be a special reward. It should be given immediately and we should not waste time on it –(Interruption)

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Madam Speaker, this country has been printing medals and giving them out every year. People like Prof. Omaswa and his team from Mulago should be the people to get these medals and handshakes. You can see how much money we waste -

I am a member of the Committee on National Economy. We approve loans everyday but the money is stolen. You know that very well.  Why can’t we get these loans for Uganda Heart Institute so that they can do this work? We see children in the papers every day seeking help to go for heart surgery in India and yet this surgery can be done in Mulago. I feel very bad when I see children suffering and Government cannot support them yet we have Uganda Heart Institute. Money should be given to them so that they can help Ugandans who cannot afford to go to India. Thank you.

MS ALYEK: Thank you very much for the information. The operation was very successful and it has saved us. These are the two things I wanted to propose: let us give Uganda Heart Institute money - (Member timed out.)

6.06
MR JAMES ACIDRI (NRM, Maracha East County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to join my colleagues in congratulating this team led by Prof. Francis Omaswa. What they have done is clear evidence that our political leaders must bring back the confidence they had lost in our medical doctors. Over the years, we have heard that some of the reasons why people go to seek medical care abroad, including services such as maternal health care, is because they do not trust doctors in this country.

Our technical team has proven that they can do the job if they are supported. I therefore join the rest of my colleagues in requesting, not only Parliament but other institutions including the Uganda Medical Board, which I am told normally approves these medical tourism trips, to ensure that before they approve of such trips, they first prioritise money that is invested into equipment and ensure that we achieve one of our commitments on Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); the commitment on access to quality health care for all Ugandans.
	
Madam Speaker, we are preaching that we want to be a middle income country but we are not on track as far as some of these international commitments and standards are concerned. This is one of the best opportunities we can utilise to ensure that all Ugandans get quality health care. 

I would like to say that as Parliament, we should be in position to avoid these unnecessary capital flights, some of which come through medical tourism. Our President made a commitment under his 23-point programme in kisanja hakuna mchezo to ensure that we do not allow unnecessary loss of foreign currency. Therefore, we should take this opportunity to persuade whoever is an obstacle in this particular noble cause, to make money available, re-equip Uganda Heart Institute and ensure that all our voters have equal access to quality health care.

Madam Speaker, I thank you for this great opportunity. I am not surprised that Prof. Omaswa has led this effort. I have seen that hon. Ariko has already given him the entire congratulatory message, as a Member of Parliament from Teso. We join you and thank you for having such wonderful people but we also advise you people from the east to ensure that education standards are improved because we may not get another Prof. Omaswa in future.  You are not doing very well in terms of performance in the education sector. Thank you very much.

6.10
MS JOSEPHINE BEBONA (NRM, Woman Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my honourable colleague who has brought this motion and rise to add my voice to thank the medical experts at the Uganda Heart Institute for the successful surgery performed for the first time.

Recently, I was in my constituency and watched the story on TV when they were being appreciated for the successful surgery. I told my people that Uganda has got relief because of the successful surgery. This will save Ugandans from going abroad for the same services, especially those who cannot afford to take their patients abroad.

I therefore congratulate the experts and the Government for that initiative and pray for more experts in other areas; it should not only stop with the Uganda Heart Institute. 

In addition, this time round, we should not keep on lamenting about increasing the budget. I am a member of the Committee on Health and I would like to assure the experts today that the committee will support any health programme, which will need funding. The journey has just started to improve and equip health services in the country and it should be maintained. We are tired of seeing health workers striking all the time because of lack of funds and equipment. If it is kisanja hakuna mchezo, let it be. I know that with steady progress, we shall be there. I thank you so much.

6.12
MS JANEPHER MBABAZI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kagadi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I rise to second the motion and to also thank the mover. As Uganda, we are privileged to have such a great team. When the news came, in late January, that there had been a successful open heart surgery also called coronary artery bypass grafting, which is a type of surgery that improves blood flow to the heart, the whole country said, “Yes, our own has made it.”

This successful surgery now means that Ugandans will no longer have to travel abroad for triple bypass surgery. I would therefore like to applaud the team of 14 Ugandan medics who conducted this miracle. We thank you, our doctors. Good doctors understand responsibility better than privilege and practise accountability better than business. 

My prayer is that we create a more conducive environment for our health workers. We also need to put it more effort in as far as improvement on remuneration is concerned. 

Lastly, I support the request by my colleague that we should reward these people in monetary terms. Thank you.

6.15
MS JOY ATIM (UPC, Woman Representative, Lira): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the motion for Parliament to pay tribute to a team of experts from the Uganda Heart Institute for the successful heart operation. This achievement that the experts have made shows clearly that Uganda has got the knowledge. However, it is unfortunate that we lack equipment to perform some of these very important activities. The reason as to why many of our experts go away is simply because of frustration; they do not have equipment.

Parliament of Uganda should do all it takes to support such experts. I would like to thank this House, particularly the 9th Parliament, that approved the autonomy of the Uganda Heart Institute and I think that is part of the reason we are getting this success. 

I would also like to remind this House that it is upon us to approve funds to help some of these institutions. The pay of our health workers is a challenge. Many of them who are knowledgeable go away for greener pastures and if only this Government could inject money in paying some of these experts, Uganda would go a long way. At least we would achieve greater things than this.

Madam Speaker, there are three areas that Parliament and Government have got to consider: the Uganda Heart Institute, the Uganda Cancer Institute and the kidney transplant section/department. Urology is very expensive and yet people are always sent abroad. I am happy that in the area of cancer treatment, we have achieved something and it was the effort of Parliament to put in money. At least they can now help more than 100 people every month. That is an achievement for this Parliament and Government of Uganda. 

If we can put money in the Uganda Heart Institute and in Urology, I think that our people will not waste so much money and they will not die unnecessarily. When our people are referred to India, people go for car washing campaigns to raise money. They go to their Members of Parliament yet we cannot raise this money ourselves. Some of them resort to going back to the villages and they end up dying. I feel that if we put a lot of money in the Uganda Heart Institute, in Uganda Cancer Institute and in the kidney sector and in the health sector or ministry generally, then - they say health is wealth –(Interruption) 

MR CENTENARY: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I recall when you opened up debate on this matter that you suggested that we debate for 40 minutes. When I listen to the Members, most of us seem to be in agreement that the institute should be given funds. These are doctors who are supposed to be saving lives. I would like to propose, if it is not procedurally right –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, it is not in my character to call my colleagues to order. However, my colleague and son should have known that you have deliberately allowed a long discussion on this matter because it is sensitive. I know what is itching my son –(Laughter)– and that is why I am calling him to order.

If he wants to go for Valentine’s Day celebrations, he can quietly –(Laughter)–walk out of the Chamber and the Speaker will not know. Some of us who have not yet received flowers from your father are patiently sitting here. 

Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member to interrupt such an important debate on such an important matter? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I had indicated that we use 45 minutes but we have used one and a half hours so far. Actually, I was coming to the last three contributions because I need the doctors to go back and do more surgery to a few more Ugandans. 

6.12
MS MARY BABIRYE KABANDA (DP, Woman Representative, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity to contribute to a very important issue. I would like to thank the mover and the doctors and experts in the Uganda Heart Institute. 

In my village of Kyabakuza, we have a 14 year old son who was required to raise Shs 320 million to be taken to India but in Mulago, they have asked us to pay Shs 20 million, which we can afford and we are going to save this boy’s life. Therefore, as we pay tribute to these experts, we must find means to reduce on the brain drain in our country, especially in the medical sector. We are losing a lot. Let us try to improve on the working conditions and salaries of our medics. If not, after sometime, you will find that these people have been taken away.

Therefore, as Members of Parliament, let us devise all the necessary means to ensure that we retain our experts. I thank you.

6.23
MS CECILIA ATIM OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I am very happy that you have given me the opportunity to wrap up. (Laughter) The issue of the Uganda Heart Institute is very important. 

Madam Speaker, you may recall in the budget of Financial Year 2014/2015 that you gave priority to the heart and cancer institutes and this has had a tremendous effect in having the two departments overhauled. I think we need to thank this Parliament for being conscious about the need for such facilities.

I need to congratulate the Members of Parliament who brought this motion. There are many good things, which happen around us but it is very rare that they are brought to the attention of this Parliament and the nation. 

Hon. Ariko said that quite a number of the doctors mentioned are from Teso. I would however like to remind him that Prof. Omaswa is my brother-in-law because he is married to Dr Catherine Omaswa who escorted me when I got married to the Speaker’s brother, Mr Lameck. (Laughter) Therefore, you are not the only one celebrating that big name; I am also celebrating.

Madam Speaker, the issue of the heart institute is very important. In 2015, hon. Dr Baryomunsi, the Minister of State for Health then, and I spent weeks in the heart institute because both our mothers were suffering from heart complications. They died more or less at the same time and they were buried in the same week. Therefore, when we talk about the need to put more funding in that institute, it means a lot to all of us. 

Madam Speaker, what I can say is that if we would like to help the heart institute, we should do it holistically. We have been to Tanzania and we have seen that the indigenous Tanzanians, just like the indigenous Ugandans here like Prof. Omaswa and others, were able to calculatedly and consciously - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have one minute.

MS CECILIA ATIM: Madam Speaker, I am also the commissioner in charge of health. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, the Tanzanians have been able to develop Jakaya Kikwete Heart Institute, which is state of the art in the region. I believe that Uganda can do the same. They told us that the Uganda Heart Institute was ahead and that there is collaboration.

Madam Speaker, I am asking you to direct the Committee on Health to visit Jakaya Kikwete Heart Institute so that we can maybe borrow some ideas from there. 

Secondly, remuneration of our doctors must be taken seriously. There is no way you are going to keep a professor of the calibre of Prof. Omaswa with the salary scale of Shs 2-5 million. I think that is too low. We need to borrow a leaf from other countries and keep our doctors at home so that we can have value for money. 

May God bless you so much, Madam Speaker. 

6.27
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank hon. Tayebwa and other colleagues who brought this motion. I would like to add my voice to the voices of Members of Parliament to thank our doctors in the Uganda Heart Institute for a job well done. 

Like hon. Ogwal said, although she murdered my name, both of us nursed our mothers at the heart institute and we were there day and night. We watched how the health workers there work. They are a dedicated team of health workers and indeed, this motion is in the right place. We should pay tribute to our gallant health workers.

I would also like to thank them for being patriotic and staying to provide services in Uganda. Madam Speaker, recently when we had our fellow Member of Parliament, the Minister of State for Primary Health Care, Dr Joyce Moriku sick - She has since been discharged, for your information. When we took a decision to have her taken to Nairobi, I had a discussion with the anaesthesiologist who was managing her in IHK and he said, “Can you imagine I am referring the minister to my student?” This was a senior doctor referring a patient to his former student in Nairobi. This shows the extent of brain drain. That is why I would like to thank the doctors who are here: Prof. Omaswa and his team, for continuing to work in Uganda.

Government is committed to ensuring that health services improve –(Interruption)– there is no time. I will clarify to you bilaterally.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, in the canteen. (Laughter)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Madam Speaker, Government is committed to ensuring that we improve health care in this country. Those of you who have visited Mulago Hospital have seen that we have invested a lot of resources to refurbish and renovate the hospital. We are creating centres of excellence, especially at the Uganda Heart Institute and that is why you see the kind of services they are providing. We passed the money here in Parliament to make Uganda Cancer Institute a centre of excellence. 

We are also upgrading the renal unit. We have sent health workers to get skills in organ transplant and once the renovation of Mulago Hospital is completed, it is going to be turned into a centre of excellence by supporting satellite hospitals in and around Kampala like Naguru, Kawempe, Kiruddu and Rubaga. This is to decongest Mulago Hospital so that it can concentrate on provision of specialised services.

The intention of Government is indeed to reduce medical referrals that go abroad, especially to India and other countries because it is true that we spend a lot of resources to treat Ugandans outside the country - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have half a minute to conclude.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Some of you are saying that they are trips and so forth but these are emergency cases where a Ugandan cannot be handled in the country and the doctors have to make a decision to refer them abroad where certain services can be provided. 

We have also started construction of private hospitals, which shall provide services similar to those, which are in India and the other countries.

Madam Speaker, this motion is timely because we are considering the budget. Therefore, the proposal that we need to review and enhance the allocation to the heart institute is welcome. As Cabinet, we should work with Parliament to see how we can increase the allocation to the health sector and also particularly, to the heart and cancer institutes. 

As Government, we have taken a decision to raise the pay of health workers. This will be contained in the budget because we are trying to improve the provision of health care in this country.

Finally, I would like to thank Parliament because the Parliament of Uganda has been consistent in supporting health care in this country. When we brought the Bills on the Uganda Heart Institute and the Uganda Cancer Institute, I recall that I was the Minister of Health and I tabled them here. They were fully supported by this Parliament and in addition, Parliament has consistently supported the need to raise the budget for health care.

Therefore, let us work together as the Executive and Parliament to improve the provision of health care in this country. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable, 15 Members have contributed and I see total support without objection. As we said, we have some other issues to handle - Not valentine. I would like to put the question that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do pay tribute to the medical team as proposed in the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the only way we can honour our medical team is to ensure that this constant downgrading of funding of the health sector ends. If we are going to sit here this financial year and agree to reduction, we are going to be letting down these people. 

Thank you very much, let us go back to the SGS. Thank you for coming, you can go and treat other Ugandans. Thank you for the work.

6.33
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The momentum had gone down but we can pick up from where we stopped. 

I would like to address this House to the seven fixed stations, which were supposed to have been established by SGS; four of them in Kampala and three upcountry. In execution, only six stations were established. The rest were mobile and cannot even test shock absorbers and suspensions yet these are key for stability of a vehicle on the road. This means that SGS did not satisfy these conditions because the key components that they are supposed to test: shock absorbers and the suspension are not catered for by the mobile unit.

In addition, SGS did not comply with the terms of the concession and therefore, the observation that termination would have far reaching consequences to the Government of Uganda in terms of compensation is farfetched because in the first place, they breached the terms of the concession. 

I know it is our public duty and if I invoke our Rules of Procedure, we are supposed to legislate in public interest. The fact that the chairperson went ahead to recommit a report with eight members out of 35 members yet the quorum is supposed to be 11 members, leaves a lot to be desired. I am meant to understand that of those eight members, five associated themselves with the minority report and signed it. That means that there was a conflict of interest on the part of the chairperson, which I would like her to declare to this honourable House. If the committee decided that the contract of SGS be terminated, why did she have to recommit the report to recommend for suspension and further review?

Around Christmas, Toyota Uganda offered free vehicle inspection and the said gentleman, Mr Amanyire, ordered them to stop. This did not only amount to conflict of interest but also deprived Ugandans of a free public service to save lives.

The costs do not only accrue to SGS but a person has to fuel his vehicle and spend time to drive to the few stations that SGS has so far established. Therefore, I would like to recommend that since SGS does not have national coverage, Parliament should not only consider the exorbitant fees that SGS levied for vehicle inspection but also look at the other related costs to bringing the vehicles for inspection.

We have structures in this country: UNRA itself has sub-stations where they can establish inspection centres. We have Inspectors of Vehicles (IOV) in the entire country. It is high time we thought about building our capacity instead of hiring these foreign firms to come and do work that can be done by Ugandans –(Interruption)

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Thank you, my colleague, for giving way. The information I have is that Société Générale de Surveillance (SGS), as a company, had its contract rejected in 2013 because of importing goods where they did not have capacity. This is the same company being awarded a contract to inspect vehicles. If the Government has allowed the importation of second hand vehicles, how can it measure a standard? You are not the manufacturer, what standard are you going to put? 

It is contradictory because any person signing this contract should have known that the Government policy is we import used vehicles without standards. Now you go ahead and sign a contract. For what? To inspect second hand vehicles, which Government has allowed?

MR CENTENARY: Thank you for the information. I would like to conclude that if this contract was not even cleared by the Office of the Attorney-General or the Solicitor-General, I think it would be in the interest of Ugandans, since the matter we are discussing affects the lives of Ugandans - (Member timed out.)

6.40
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the minority report of the committee. The argument for termination of the SGS contract is very convincing and I do not want to go into details. I find the crux of this matter on pages 14, 15 and 16 of the minority report, which is to do with noncompliance of Article 119 of the Constitution regarding the role of the Attorney-General in drawing and perusing all agreements and contracts where Government is a party.

Both the majority and minority reports agree to this and there is evidence to the effect that the Attorney-General or his office did not draw or originate this contract. The contract originated from an assistant commissioner in the Ministry of Works and Transport and was only brought to the Attorney-General to append his signature.

What this means, by law, is that this contract is not valid. It is actually a contract that Government entered into by mistake and once we enter into a contract by mistake, it is void. Therefore, whatever follows in regard to this contract with SGS is an illegality.

We are not terminating but cancelling – so, for the rest of the procedures, whether SGS was able to fulfil the conditions of the contract, is not an issue. 

Why did it have to come from a different area and not the Attorney-General who is compelled by the Constitution to originate this – (Member timed out.)

6.43
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to associate myself with the minority report which noted fraud and undue influence; that means that the contract was achieved through manipulation.

If the contract was achieved in that way, then clearly it is void. They also noted that the Attorney-General did not consent meaning that it does not stand.

Madam Speaker, on the payment of concession fee, they are only giving us 10 per cent as a country and 90 per cent goes to the company. How can we rob our fellow Ugandans by considering those few members?

This matter requires investigation; maybe the committee did not have enough time. I request that even those members who are implicated be thoroughly investigated and if Parliament agrees, we can send this matter to either the police or the IGG. Thank you. 

6.44
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the Members who came up with a minority report especially the wise man from the east.

As members of Parliament, we have a lesson to learn from this; so many times mistakes happen and by the time we come up with medicine, the poison has spread everywhere.

When I saw this on TV and in the newspapers, many questions came to mind when my driver told me that we were supposed to take our vehicle for inspection. I asked myself who these people were because it was not the police in charge of this inspection.

Therefore, we must get to the bottom of this matter. Whoever was involved should take personal responsibility of whatever mistakes were made. 

Secondly, we must be very careful about individuals who take up responsibility to offer services which are very sensitive to the public. We have seen instances where members of Parliament and other leaders in this country are trailed by people who end up killing them. If a vehicle that belongs to one of us is taken to suspicious people and anything happens to such a Member - you never know, they may insert a gadget in your car so that they follow you up everywhere. 

We must get serious with such companies which are not even paying taxes to this Government. We have indeed lost a lot of money.

In conclusion, this is a very serious issue and we should not take it very lightly. Let those who were involved in this be brought to book. I thank you. 

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to request that as we contribute on this debate, we look into areas which are very critical in the motor vehicle inspection; particularly the issue of regularising the motor vehicle inspectorate. We are only discussing the legal pitfalls and the faults that have been found with the SGS contract by those who are conversant with the issues; can we come up with some ideas that can give us a method on how to move forward?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, are you going to amend the areas which were not canvassed by the report?

6.48
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the Members for the minority report. I read the main report and they recommend the suspension of SGS for three months. I do not know what they considered to arrive at these three months; maybe the chairperson can enlighten us.

Someone mentioned that there are many financial mechanics and engineers in this country. This course is not offered in this country but many of our people have studied it without going to school.

Sometime back, someone imported a consignment of helmets and the police directed that everybody must wear a helmet. When the consignment was done, the police stopped enforcement. The same happened with speed governors. Someone had a consignment of speed governors and once they were done, the police stopped enforcing the order. For how long shall we surrender our responsibilities as a country to private individuals?

Currently, we have a number of issues in the police. Have we thought about surrendering responsibilities of protecting this country to a private individual since the police have failed? Can I take it that it is the vehicle inspection department that provided information that they need assistance?

Madam Speaker, like we heard mechanical issues are not the highest causes of road accidents. These different centres check breaks, wheel alignment, headlamps, suspension, steering wheel alignment, exhaust smoke and signalling lights.

Suppose we find those who have undergone this inspection and have had accidents resulting from mechanical issues, is there a safeguard that this specific firm which cleared these vehicles can compensate them because clearance is a guarantee that your vehicle is roadworthy. If after a year you get an accident and it is within those same issues that were cleared –(Member timed out.)

6.52
MR KENNETH EITUNGANANE (Independent, Soroti County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Allow me to also thank you for being firm when we took a decision to suspend SGS. You are one of the icons in this country who is very strong in fighting corruption and we shall always stand with you. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I get perturbed by the role of the Attorney-General. There is scandal after scandal in most of the contracts that Government engages in in this country. On all these contracts, the Attorney-General appends his signature. How is that office helping Government to save money and sign contracts that are tangible to benefit Ugandans? 

I think there is need for this House to review some of these issues. I remember when we had issues of your Chair being threatened not to conduct business – and it still came from the Attorney-General’s Office. 

Madam speaker, something must be done because this country is bleeding and the danger we can do is to keep quiet with the problems we have. We must speak so that some action can be taken to correct it. 

Eighty per cent of accidents on our roads are related to the overall standards of drivers. When you look at the contract signed with SGS, there is no attempt whatsoever to handle the issue of behaviour but rather the mechanical condition of vehicles. 

I imported a car during that time when SGS was still active and I registered it within a period of three weeks. It had a JEVIC inspection from Japan - normally you pay between US$200 to US$ 300 to inspect a car before it is accepted into the country. Despite the fact that I had an inspection certificate from Japan, I was compelled to carry out another inspection with SGS. That is a sign that this is just a money-making venture. 

Like my colleagues have submitted, there is a very serious financial drain on Ugandans. They are being targeted; turn around to talk about sugar, fuel, roads et cetera. All these are targeted to impoverish Ugandans. We need to do something about this.

I am also wondering how the chairperson missed out the pertinent issues that the minority report mentioned. I think there is a lot to desire from the chairperson that she needs to explain to the House. I beg to submit.

6.57
MR JOHN BAPTIST NAMBESHE (NRM, Manjiya County, Bududa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me join colleagues to salute the authors of the minority report. I conquer with them in the recommendation to have the contract with SGS terminated. 

The cost of traffic accidents in Uganda is enormous; therefore, any road safety interventions like motor vehicle testing are crucial. However, SGS is doing this at a profit considering the exorbitant inspection fees that are being charged and the monopoly that SGS is enjoying. SGS therefore has reduced the vehicle inspection to a lucrative profit making and commercial venture.

My prayer is that this SGS company should be blacklisted because of influence pedalling, connivance, the fraudulent land transactions and tax evasion. All these are criminal activities that should culminate into blacklisting this company.

Also, the unethical conduct of the officials that are adversely mentioned by the report during procurement, contracting and implementation of the contract with SGS should be punished.

In Kenya, at inception of a similar road safety intervention, there were mafias who, I think hijacked the contracting out –(Member was timed out.)

6.59 
MR GASTER MUGOYA (NRM, Bukooli County North, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Two issues came to mind when I percolated through the two documents – the majority and minority reports. 

The first issue was whether there was a legally binding contract between Government and SGS and secondly, the available remedy. In the interest of time, allow me to take you to page 12 of the minority report. It partially says that in December 2014, Mr Denis Sabiiti, the then Commissioner for Transport Regulation and Chairman of the Contracts Committee approved a team to do due diligence on SGs without terms of reference. 

The report also says that on the 10 February 2015, Mr Sabiiti approved the due diligence report. In a similar fashion, on 2 March 2015, Mr Sabiiti perused the contract before forwarding it to the Solicitor-General for clearance. He also witnessed the signing of the contracts and in a twinkle of an eye, on 17 July 2015, Mr Sabiiti joined SGS as a consultant at a monthly pack of US$ 3,000 per month.

I would like to also buttress that evidence with the evidence given by the minister of state. On page 15, there is a paragraph which says that a confidential brief by the Minister of State for Transport submitted to the committee concedes that Mr Denis Sabiiti, the  then Assistant Commissioner for Safety and Inspection, originated and forwarded the drawn contract to the Attorney–General for clearance without input from ministry of works. 

Allow me to apply those facts to the provisions of the contracts and the law as it stands. Paragraph 75(3) of the contract provides that the contract shall automatically be terminated if the provider gives offers, promises of any loan, reward or advantage of any kind to any employee of the supervising entity provided that there is reliable and invincible information about such offers or promises. 

Madam Speaker, this is an obvious case, which in law we call “res ipsa loquitur”; facts speak for themselves. There is nothing much that we can prove. 

The only thing I wanted to put on record is that there was neither a mistake of fact nor a mistake of law in as far as this contract was concerned. This was something that was originated with the intention of profiteering and fraudulently acquiring resources from the Republic of Uganda. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, there was an issue mentioned in the minority report, which I think I should correct as a practicing advocate and not merely a lawyer. In the famous case of Bank of Uganda v. Banco Arabe Espanol (Supreme Court Appeal No. 1 of 2001), it was clearly decided by the Supreme Court that the Attorney-General can draw a contract and where a contract has been drawn by the parties in a transaction where Government has got an interest, then he has the obligation to peruse and give an opinion. In this matter, the contract was drawn and it originated from the Ministry of Works and Transport –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: One more minute. He is giving credible information.

MR MUGOYA: Thank you very much. What is lacking is the legal opinion and, therefore, this makes the contract illegal ab initio. Thank you very much.

7.07
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank people who were behind the minority report, which, to me, is the majority report. I commend you for the good work. 

Yesterday, one of my friends tried to convince me that I need to support Eng. Sabiiti because he was an ally in the days of “Togikwatako.” (Laughter) I said I will call a spade a spade. 

I think Eng. Sabiiti has a very big case to answer. I cannot even exonerate our chairperson. I have always believed in you but it is a shame when you lead a committee and they make the so-called major report but on the Floor, you are being bashed and nobody is even supporting it. If I were you – with your integrity as an engineer – I would have resigned. 

It is a shame; it has lowered your integrity. I need to tell you this: many people might be afraid to tell you and they may go behind your back but I am not afraid to tell you. I tell you the reality as a colleague.

Madam Speaker, if these people were doctors then this was a wrong diagnosis. If you are saying that 90 per cent of the accidents are caused by behavioural aspects and only two per cent are because of mechanical conditions of the vehicles and you come and say, “We need to inspect these vehicles.” If it was marriage – (Member timed out.)

7.07
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to join honourable colleagues in thanking the team that put together the minority but substantive report, which very ably exposed the gross negligence at the very best but perhaps even worse the abuse of office by technocrats and civil servants as named in the report. 

It also greatly exposed the attempt to financially rape Uganda through this contract. Most surprising for me, it also exposed comprise of Members of this House, especially on the committee. 

This rot has to come to an end if Uganda is to move forward. What bothers me the most is that we have talked a lot about bad Government contracts but the talk has never really resulted into bites. 

Madam Speaker, it is my prayer that with your guidance, those people that are found guilty in putting together this fraudulent contract – the civil servants – be prosecuted seriously and brought to book for their involvement in this at whatever level that they belong to.

I also pray that, with your guidance, we make sure that those Members of the committee that may have been compromised are also investigated and disciplined.

Madam Speaker, I also concur with the committee that this SGS contract be terminated and we have been given very many reasons how and why it should be done.

Last but not least, I do remember a minister contributing here that we need to be careful about our decision because apparently it might have far-reaching effects on Uganda. I am of the opinion that if we let this rot continue, it will have exponentially many far more reaching effects than correcting this once and for all and putting our country on the right track. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, 23 Members have contributed and are overwhelmingly in favour of the minority report but I would like the Attorney-General to address us on the issue of the impact of termination and the validity of the contract before we take a decision.

7.09
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr William Byaruhanga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We received both the majority and the minority reports this morning as well as the contract. Our quick perusal of both the reports as well as the contract shows much of the concerns that have been raised by the Members. However, as you are aware, first of all priority must always be to do something in the best interest of the country. If the termination is what is in the best interest of the country, that is precisely what we must do. (Applause)

The main issue here is to identify – and that is what we are going to do – the particular shortcomings from the SGS. For example, there seems to be – and I am saying from a quick perusal – a mix-up about whether the Attorney-General’s chambers gave an opinion or cleared the contract or did not. 

You have heard some Members arriving at the conclusion that because the contract was prepared in the Ministry of Works and Transport and simply sent to the Attorney-General’s chambers, that amounted to a void contract.

First of all, as I said, on quick perusal this morning, I found that a member from the Solicitor-General’s department cleared this contract. As far as Article 119 is concerned, that would, on the face of it, be sufficient.
 
The area that we really want to look at and the area that seems to be the most glaring is the one that touches on fraud. This is because once you establish fraud nothing else matters. Immediately, you terminate the contract. 

My proposal, therefore, was that bearing in mind that all of us – incidentally, there has also been talk about the Attorney-General’s chambers constantly clearing contracts that sometimes turn out not to be legal for the country. The truth of the matter is that the contracts come from the originating Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDA). It is an MDA that says, “We want to do X, Y & Z”. Just look at the contract.

Essentially, our chamber is supposed to look at the legality of what the originating MDA has sent to us. However, that includes being able to see where Government is going to be exposed. In cases where there is blatant exposure, we can link it to a bad intention and there has been a lot of talk in the report about fraud. 

Madam Speaker, I was going to request that you give us a week because this is a very urgent matter and you can see the sentiment of all the Members is that we must terminate. As seems to be the case on the face of it, we want to establish if there is fraud, that will terminate the contract straightaway - (Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Hon. Attorney-General, like you stated as mentioned in the minority report that one person – our own Engineer Sabiiti – handled this thing single-handedly and the way it came to you following the dossier that the minister of state issued – as the committee members disowned it that it did not come through the normal channels from the ministry to the Attorney-General’s chambers, what is your take on that?

THE SPEAKER: I thought that is what he wants to establish. Honourable members, the Attorney-General is saying there are areas he wants to examine – whether the contract was actually cleared; whether it went there or it did not go there. This is what he wants.

MR ARIKO: Madam Speaker, this would also help the Attorney-General as he seeks to clear that. The clarification I would like to seek from the Attorney-General is in relation to the submission from the honourable member that presented the minority report. While making reference, specifically regarding the draft contract moving from the Ministry of Works and Transport to the Attorney-General chambers, he mentioned that one person single-handedly – according to a dossier they had received from the minister – worked on this draft and sent to the Attorney-General’s chambers.

Secondly, the fact that the committee or the Members that presented the minority report make reference to a minister, who is a colleague of the Attorney-General in Cabinet, it would also be critical for him to let us know if in the address of somebody from his chambers or the Solicitor-General’s chambers being involved in the contract, it means that the honourable minister –

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us not go into that. Let him examine the legality of the contract. If there is fraud, it is finished. You do not need anything more.

MR BYARUHANGA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As I said in my opening remarks, what we are prioritising is in the interest of the country and as long as we establish fraud – as I have already said – this shall terminate the contract. I can answer the question about whether the document came correctly from the ministry; Sometimes this is an administrative matter and if it is owned by the ministry, the presumption is that that ministry agreed. 

Madam Speaker, if you could allow us to come back. Because of the urgency of this matter, if you gave us one week, we would be able to come and lay here before the Members of Parliament the options in order of the priority. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the Attorney-General. I think it is important that we do it neatly, taking into account all the implications of our actions so that anyone taking us somewhere, will find no channel to catch us. Do we give you one week? Okay.

Honourable members, I want to thank you. House adjourned to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 7.17 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 15 February 2018 at 2.00 p.m.) 
