

Tuesday, 9 February 2021

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I have just a few issues to communicate. 

First, I want to thank Members for the work done last week. We were able to do the National Curriculum Development Centre (Amendment) Bill, 2020 as well as the Uganda National Examinations Board Bill, 2020 among other business. Thank you very much for that.

Two, I want to give notice that tomorrow, Wednesday, 10 February 2021 at 10.a.m., we shall have a special sitting to pay tribute to the following distinguished Ugandans: Dr Sarah Ntiro, who was an academician and activist; Owobusobozi Desteo Bisaka; and the Umukuka Bob Kipiro Mushikori, the king of the Bamasaba. I have also read somewhere in the press that the Ikumbania of Bugwere also died. I hope that the Government will give us an update officially. I urge you to come early so that we can conclude the special sitting by 1.00 p.m. in order to be ready for the normal sitting of the House.

I also want to inform honourable members that on Tuesday, 23 March 2021, it will be exactly 100 years since the first Uganda Parliament came into existence. It was then called the Legislative Council. It held its first sitting on 23 March in the Chambers of the High Court. At that time, the High Court was in Entebbe. 

The Council had seven Europeans, who were discussing issues for us: the Gov­er­nor, Sir Robert Coryndon who was the Pres­i­dent of the Council; the Chief Sec­re­tary, Mr E.B. Jarvis; the Acting At­tor­ney-Gen­eral, Mr A.B. Howes; the Treasurer, Mr A.E. Boory; the Prin­ci­pal Med­ical Of­fi­cer, Dr C.A. Wig­gins; Mr E.H. Levis and Mr W.S. Gar­nhem.
 
It had been the desire of the Parliamentary Commission to conduct a colourful and befitting celebration of this 100th anniversary by carrying out various activities. However, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, together with budgetary constraints, it was agreed by the Commission that the celebrations be deferred until next year. We hope that the challenges we face currently will subside and allow a conducive environment for us to have that celebration. However, I want to give notice that on Tuesday, 23 March 2021, there will be a motion for a resolution of Parliament to mark the existence of the 100 years of Parliament and its achievements.

I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate Dr Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala upon her appointment as the new Director General of the World Trade Organisation (WTO). She is the first woman but also the first African national to become the chief executive of the global trade organisation. 

Dr Ngozi is a Nigerian-African economist and a development expert. She has had a 25-year-long career at the World Bank as a development economist, scaling through the ranks to the position of Managing Director, Operations, which she held from 2007 to 2011.

Dr Ngozi has as well served twice as the first woman Minister of Finance in the Government of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. She served in this position between 2003 to 2006, under the leadership of H.E Olusegun Obasanjo, and again in a similar position between 2011 to 2015 under the leadership of H.E President Goodluck Jonathan.

As part of the Third World, since for long global trade terms have not been very favourable to the Third World - they have been skewed in favour of the advanced countries - it is our sincere hope and prayer that the elevation of Dr Ngozi to the top office of WTO will give leverage to our position as competitive trade partners with other global economic blocks. Thank you.

The other matter, honourable members, is that yesterday, I received a delegation from the Union of Sports Federations and Associations of Uganda. They are 51 altogether. Among the things they want us to do is to support them to repeal the 1964 Sports Act, which they say is obsolete and does not facilitate investment. 

They also complained about the issue of youth unemployment and idleness, which could be properly handled if they were given sufficient sports facilities. They talked about the use of funds by sports federations in the country and the low budget for sports, which we have discussed here in several motions. They also complained that within the sports fraternity, there are sports that are considered priority and others that are not.  They want that corrected.

They complained about the absence of proper training facilities. I would like to urge our ministries to ensure that the sports facilities, for instance in Kapchorwa and the Akii-Bua Stadium, are completed as quickly as possible.

Honourable members, I will be formally writing to the Government to ensure that the areas that they have raised are handled, so that we can unlock the true potential of sports in Uganda. We have very brilliant people in this country and they have done a good job over time in sports. I will be writing to the minister to ensure that more attention is paid to the sports sector. 

Thank you very much. There are just two matters of national concern.

2.54
MR ERIC MUSANA (NRM, Buyaga East County, Kagadi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to a project this Parliament got money for, amounting to Shs 22.8 billion, for the construction of the Kagadi Water Project that was meant to cover up to four town councils. The project was supposed to be completed within 12 months. It started in 2018 and was supposed to be complete by 2019. However, up to now, it is incomplete. There are several questions about the project in regards to the Shs 22.8 billion.

The contract was given to an Egyptian company called Samcrete Contractors. This company has altered the project designs. They have also not done compensations in regard to this project and now, we have several questions; for example, where is the project?

My prayer is that the line minister comes to Parliament to explain why the project has not been completed yet we allocated money to it. The minister should also tell us why the project is stalling, yet all the money and project designs were completed. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the ministers is here. Hon. Beatrice Anywar, have you heard about the Shs 2.8 billion water project in Kagadi?

2.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Beatrice Anywar): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleague, for raising this pertinent issue. 

Indeed, water is life and our people are agitated if we do not deliver that. I am aware of this project. However, I will come back on Thursday and brief Parliament on what has happened. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. The matter will be reflected on the Order Paper for Thursday.

2.57
MR ROBERT CENTENARY (FDC, Kasese Municipality, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and congratulations upon your victory. I rise on a matter of national importance in regard to the burning of the Rwenzururu king’s palace on 26 January 2021.

Aware that this palace had been cordoned off as a scene of crime after the November 2016 attacks by Gen. Elwelu and his militia, the palace has been under the watch of the joint security forces of the Uganda Police and Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF). Power and water services were disconnected from that palace but to our surprise, it was totally set ablaze and burnt to ashes. 

My prayer is that Government, because this palace is under their custody as a scene of crime, or the line minister should come and explain to Ugandans and the Banyarwenzururu at large the circumstances under which a palace, which is a scene of crime and under the guard of the security forces of Government, caught fire to that level. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether that is supposed to be for the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs or the Minister of Internal Affairs. Can we ask the Minister of Defence and Veteran Affairs to come to the House next Tuesday and explain the circumstances under which the palace of the Omusinga was burnt on 26 January 2021.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE CONTINUED PROHIBITION OF UGANDAN DAIRY PRODUCTS TO ACCESS THE KENYAN MARKET

THE SPEAKER: The Minister for East African Affairs is not here.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE IRREGULARITIES AND INCONSISTENCES IN THE PAYMENT OF ALLOWANCES TO POLICE CONSTABLES WHO RENDERED SECURITY SERVICES DURING THE ELECTORAL EXERCISES IN VARIOUS PARTS OF THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: The Minister of Justice is not here.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

ON THE LEGALITY STRUCTURE COMPOSITION AND OPERATIONS OF THE MINERAL POLICE PROTECTION UNIT IN THE COUNTRY

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I received a letter from the Minister of Internal Affairs indicating that he will be available tomorrow to respond to this issue. So, let it be reflected again on the Order Paper. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.02
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Parliamentary Commission Annual Report for financial year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back. 

3.03
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE	(FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Uganda Registration Services Bureau Annual Report for 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: It is also sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for perusal and report back.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.4 AND ADDENDUM 1 AND 2 TO SCHEDULE NO.4 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.04
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Opolot): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are aware that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development introduced to the House a request for Supplementary Expenditure Schedule No.4 but also introduced addendum 1 and addendum 2 to Schedule No.4 for a supplementary request for the financial year 2020/2021. Schedule No.4 was a request for Shs 94.32 billion and addendum 1 to Schedule No.4 was a request for Shs 111.477 billion. Addendum 2 was a request for Shs 86.597 billion. 

It should also be noted that before, there was Schedule No.1, which was introduced but was not subjected to prior approval by Parliament. Schedule No.2 was the same although part of it required prior approval. Schedule No.3 was introduced on 20 October 2020 and the House approved it.

The report of the committee is in two parts, A and B. Part A shows the methodology, that is, the interaction the committee went through with the stakeholders. It also shows the legal framework – the relevant provisions of the law. We have part B, which indicates the request, and then the justifications as observed by the committee for the different requests.

Permit me to go straight to the different votes and pronounce the observations and recommendations by the committee.

Vote 002 – State House

They requested for funds to facilitate the research for the anti-tick vaccine development, under the initiative handled under State House. There was a partnership between State House and Makerere University College of Veterinary Medicine. This research is in advanced stages and the researchers intend to roll out the vaccine by having trials at Ngoma Field Tick Farm. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament approves a sum of Shs 2.27 billion to State House to facilitate completion of the research for the anti-tick vaccine.

Vote 006 – Office of the Prime Minister

It was noted that the Office of the Prime Minister, under the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), had a balance of money on their account. Take note that this programme is supposed to wind up but the balance of the money on their account, plus the appreciation of foreign currency, led them to realise Shs 12.87 billion. As such, it is required that we approve this money, which is for external funding, so that the Office of the Prime Minister can spend it.

The committee, therefore, recommends approval of Shs 12.87 billion for the Office of the Prime Minister for Northern Uganda Social Action Fund.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Madam Speaker, these are also external funds from the World Bank, whose balances were not appropriated during the year because the projects were supposed to close under the Resource Enhancement and Accountability Programme (REAP).

The committee recommends that Shs 10.18 billion be approved for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to allow them spend that money.

Vote 012 – Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development

Take note that there was a one Medard Kiconco whose land at Kyadondo, Lusanja, in Mpererwe was sold. He bought the land and tried to evict the tenants. The Government found it fit that this land is bought by the Government from Medard Kiconco at a total of Shs 3.844 billion.

There was also acquisition of land from a one Ephraim Enterprises, which was land occupied by the Church and the owner of the land demolished it. Negotiations by Government deemed it fit that the owner is compensated and the land taken over and the Government supports the Christians to build the church.

The committee, therefore, recommends the approval of a total of Shs 7.67 billion to Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development for acquisition of the two pieces of land.

Vote 013 – Ministry of Health

COVID-19 Related Activities

Honourable colleagues, you recall that there were donations made by organisations, companies and individuals towards the COVID-19 cause. These donations also included motor vehicles, cash, foodstuffs and other equipment.

Be aware that there was a cash donation of Shs 34.6 billion. The taskforce, which was handling COVID-19, recommended the monies to be spent as follows:

    (i) Shs 23,893,860,000 to procure 282 pick-up vehicles for local governments, given the challenges they meet.
    (ii) Shs 2,400,000,000 to construct two border health posts at Vurra and Cyanika. 
    (iii) The taskforce, as directed by the President, decided that they construct phase I of two blood banks at Soroti and Arua.

The committee, therefore, observed that they need to proceed to construct the health centres at Vurra and Cyanika. It is also right that they continue with construction of the two blood banks. However, the committee noted that instead of procuring the pick-ups, there is an urgent need for ambulances.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Parliament approves the release of Shs 34.6 billion for the Ministry of Health to procure the ambulances but not pick-up vehicles - (Applause)- which would support the ambulance system in the country; construct two border health posts at Vurra and Cyanika; and finance the phase 1 construction of blood banks in Soroti and Arua districts.

The committee also decided that these ambulances be allocated to every district in Uganda. (Applause)

Vote 015 – Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives

You are aware that there was an outcry by the tobacco farmers in Bunyoro who supplied to companies, which ended up not paying these farmers with an excuse that their export licence had been withdrawn. The tobacco farmers made an outcry up to Parliament and the President. The directive was given that Government supports the tobacco farmers by allocating Shs 11.251 billion to compensate the tobacco farmers in Bunyoro.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Shs 11.251 billion be approved for the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives to facilitate the compensation of Bunyoro farmers. In addition, the committee recommends that the ministry be allocated Shs 9.243 billion for compensation of various cooperatives that are demanding money from Government –

    1. Banyankole Kweterana Cooperative – Shs 1 billion;
    2. Wamala Growers Cooperative Union – Shs 1.5 billion;
    3. Busoga Growers Cooperative Union – Shs 1 billion;
    4. Okoro Cooperative Union – Shs 0.743 billion;
    5. Teso Cooperative Union – Shs 1 billion;
    6. West Nile Central Cooperative Union – Shs 1 billion;
    7. Masaba Cooperative Union – Shs 2 shillings;
    8. Lango Cooperative Union – Shs 1 billion.

Vote 114 – Uganda Cancer Institute 

There is a request for funds to clear outstanding arrears to Roko Construction Limited, which is handling the construction of the Uganda Cancer Institute.

The committee recommends approval of Shs 1.28 billion for Uganda Cancer Institute to cater for outstanding payments to Roko Construction Limited.

Vote 156 – Uganda Land Commission

Uganda Land Commission has a lot of challenges. They need to compensate people for a lot of pieces of land. They requested approval to compensate the following:

1. 	Kasiya Rwabukurukuru with land at Kiyunga, Sheema, has a balance of Shs 6.43 billion unpaid from a total of Shs 9.43 billion. 

2. 	Ms Nagenda Stephen Peter from Kibale Bwanswa has a court order requiring him to be compensated Shs 1,062,778,000.

3. 	Busuulwa, with land in Buyaga, Kibaale, has a balance of Shs 1.4 billion unpaid. Those were among the lost counties. 

4. 	Ms Natalia Namuli from Buyaga, Kibaale, has a balance of Shs 1.6 billion unpaid. This one has never been paid any money and she is in urgent need of medical attention.

5. 	Mr Yisaka Lwakana from Buyaga, Kibaale, has a balance of Shs 125,346,000 unpaid from a total of Shs 1,175,346,000. He is also in dire need of medical attention. 

6. 	Mr Geoffrey Mugisha, also from Buyaga, needs urgent medical attention. He has a balance of Shs 1,494,000,000 unpaid.

The committee, therefore, recommends approval of a total of Shs 12,112,124,000 for Uganda Land Commission to enable them compensate the above individuals. 

Vote 157 – National Forestry Authority (Shs 570 million)

These are balances of externally funded money, which were not budgeted for this financial year. So, we recommend that Parliament approves this funding to allow the National Forestry Authority to spend these monies.

Votes 500-597 – Local Governments

Aware that money was returned by Members of Parliament to different local governments as COVID-19 funds, these local governments need approval to spend this money because it was remitted to the Treasury. The details are in table 3. It will consume some time if I read vote by vote. Perhaps, some Members would like to hear where their money is going, so I will read.

    1. Vote 591 – Gomba District, Shs 20,000,000
    2. Vote 562 – Kiruhura District, Shs 20,000,000
    3. Vote 607 – Kole District, Shs 59,990,000
    4. Vote 536 – Mbale District, Shs 4,600,000
    5. Vote 528 – Kotido District, Shs 40,000,000 
    6. Vote 544 – Nakasongola District, Shs 20,000,000 
    7. Vote 570 – Amuru District, Shs 19,990,000
    8. Vote 594 – Namayingo District, Shs 59,990,000
    9. Vote 611 – Agago District, Shs 39,980,000
    10. Vote 507 – Busia District, Shs 61,980,000
    11. Vote 517 – Kamuli District, Shs 99,990,000
    12. Vote 152 – Kabale District, Shs 80,000,000
    13. Vote 616 – Rubanda District, Shs 60,000,000
    14. Vote 569 – Nakaseke District, Shs 18,500,000
    15. Vote 620 – Rukiga District, Shs 20,000,000 
    16. Vote 515 – Kalangala District, Shs 60,000,000 
    17. Vote 627 – Kapelebyong District, Shs 20,000,000 
    18. Vote 590 – Buvuma District, Shs 40,000,000 
    19. Vote 122 – Kampala Capital City Authority, Shs 40,000,000.

The total is Shs 785,020,000.

The committee, therefore, recommends that those individual votes get approval so that they spend that money, which was returned to the Treasury for COVID-19 purposes.

Addendum No. 1 of Schedule No.4 

Vote 008 - The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development 

The committee recommends that Shs 6.983 billion be voted for spending at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development’s skilling project under the Skills Development Facility (SDF) of the Private Sector Foundation Uganda. These are funds from donors, which were lying on their accounts. The project is supposed to have been closed but extension was given to this project to run up to December 2021. 

We, therefore, recommend that these funds are approved for spending so that the skilling project can move ahead. 

Vote 008 – Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development

Aware that Government has restructured the budgeting system from output based budgeting to programme based budgeting, this calls for the upgrade and redesign of the Integrated Financial Management System (IFMS) and the Programme Budgeting System (PBS) to fit into the programme budget approach. The IFMS requires Shs 15 billion for the redesign and upgrade and PBS requires Shs 10 billion for that upgrade. 

The committee, therefore, recommends approval of Shs 25 billion for Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to work out the upgrade and redesign of these two systems.

Vote 013 - Ministry of Education and Sports

Mandela National Stadium

The committee recommends that Shs 1.451 billion be approved for Mandela National Stadium to allow them meet outstanding staff, administration and operational costs. 

Vote 008 – Ministry of Health 

Facemasks

The committee observed that the Ministry of Health received facemasks worth Shs 85,831,802,400. That is a quantity of 35,763,251 facemasks, which were initially distributed. However, the funds, which were availed and paid was Shs 54,500,000. Therefore, it leaves a balance of Shs 31,331,802,400.

There are two districts where distribution of facemasks had not taken place. So, a new order was placed for 926,797 facemasks, coming to Shs 2,224,312,800. The outstanding debt for masks, therefore, comes to Shs 33,556,115,200. This is an amount that was found to be outstanding. 

Therefore, the committee recommends approval of Shs 33,556,115,200 to Ministry of Health to enable them to pay for the facemasks.

Vote 112 - Kampala Capital City Authority 

COVID-19 Funds (Shs 60 million) 

The committee recommends that this money be voted to enable Kampala Capital City Authority spend that money.

Vote 312 - Petroleum Authority of Uganda 

They require Shs 1.88 billion, which is for an external funded activity. They got that money from external funds requiring them to train medium scale companies to grow about 500 jobs. So, we recommend that this money be approved for the Petroleum Authority, amounting to Shs 1.88 billion.

Madam Speaker, under this addendum, we also have another schedule for COVID-19 funds returned by Members of Parliament to the districts. There were five districts under this. We have –

    1. Vote 522 - Katakwi District, Shs 39,990,000 
    2. Vote 535 - Mayuge District, Shs 40,000,000 
    3. Vote 603 - Ngora District, Shs 39,990,000 
    4. Vote 626 - Kwania District, Shs 19,990,000 
    5. Vote 631 - Rwampara District, Shs 19,990,000 

The committee recommends that Parliament approves the above funds to enable those local governments to spend that money.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, we again have a request for Uganda Intergovernmental Fiscal Transfers Programme (UgIFT) funds. That is to cover local governments, which had micro-scale irrigation development sub-grants, health development grants and counterpart fund. Also, it is to cover the upgrade of health centres II and III and balances for seed schools. That amounts to Shs 23.14 billion.

Honourable colleagues, at the closure of the financial year, these balances were lying in the accounts of these different local governments unspent although work was ongoing. The certificates were not ready and this money was reversed to the Consolidated Fund.  It is, therefore, deemed fit to approve these funds, so that they are returned to the local governments for them to clear their bills.

Madam Speaker, permit me not to read the details because this will take us a very long time. Health centres, schools and irrigation development projects are handled under tables 6, 7, 8 and 9.

Vote 106 - Ministry of Works and Transport 

The Uganda Railways Corporation has of late worked on the rehabilitation of the route from Malaba to Kampala under the COVID-19 arrangement, to reduce the traffic at the border point for trucks. Government, therefore, mandated the railways corporation to acquire new locomotives, so that most of the goods are ferried by train. Uganda Railways Corporation, therefore, sourced for supply of these locomotives and has signed a contract with a company called GPR Leasing Africa for the locomotives and another company for supply of reach stackers. 

Uganda Railways Corporation analysed scenarios where they could procure new locomotives, 20-year-old or six-year-old locomotives. The financial analysis showed that the net present value and return on investment would be more feasible if they procured the second hand six-year-old locomotives. 

The contract requires that before delivery, we make a payment of Shs 31.2 billion. However, as per the available funds under this schedule, the committee recommends that we approve Shs 11.5 billion to Ministry of Works and Transport for initial deposit for the locomotives. The balance of Shs 19.7 billion is required within one month’s time. The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is directed to source for these funds and bring another schedule for allocation of this money.

Addendum No. 2 of Schedule No. 4 

We again have the Ministry of Health under this, but this is good news - the COVID-19 vaccine. Ministry of Health has negotiated with the AstraZeneca vaccines company for vaccines from the Serum Institute of India.  Government has negotiated with them to supply Uganda with the COVID-19 vaccines.

It is believed that –(Interjections)– Yes, the price is available. The price per dose includes the purchase price, flight and all handling services and it comes to $8.46, and every person has to take two dozes. Therefore, it comes to $16.92 per person.

The Ministry of Health communicated the need for 18 million doses to cover nine million people. However, for the start, the agreement is that we make a commitment payment of $5 million, so that the manufacturing is done. We will expect deliveries at the beginning of March, if we meet the payment schedule that the supplier will give us.

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the committee recommends, therefore, that Parliament quickly approves the Shs 18.5 billion for Ministry of Health, to allow the ministry make a commitment fee payment of $5 million to the Serum Institute of India so that we get the vaccine. 

However, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is also directed to quickly bring a request for more funding because the total is $161,567,118 and we are making a commitment payment of $5 million only. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is right here listening. 

Vote 101 - Electoral Commission

Colleagues, you are aware that Government went into a contract with a supplier for a biometric voter verification system. This system was not provided for in the budget. It was at a total cost of Shs 93,762,000,000 and Government made a payment of Shs 50,000,000,000. As such, there is a balance of Shs 43.762 billion for the contractor. Therefore, their request is that we approve that money. 

Government created new parliamentary constituencies, local governments, town councils and cities which required reorganisation. All this required the Electoral Commission to readjust their funds to enable them conduct these elections. These elections have been conducted at a cost. Election of the five older persons was conducted at around Shs 1 billion. 

The Electoral Commission had to engineer their resources from within. That meant frontloading the monies and using monies, which they would have used for other activities like payment of the supervisors of the elections, gazetting of the election results, which has not been done - gazetting the winners of the elections - and also collection of election materials from the field. All these have not been done. They will only do that when the funds are approved. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that a total of Shs 55.023 billion be approved for the Electoral Commission to continue handling all their activities. 

Vote 126 - Uganda National Examinations Board (UNEB) 

Aware that exams for senior four, senior six and primary seven candidates are going to be conducted from March under the acceptable Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), it means UNEB is going to incur additional costs as far as renting space, increasing the number of supervisors, washing machines, sanitisers, masks and so on are concerned. 

We, therefore, recommend approval of Shs 10,465,000,000 for Uganda National Examinations Board to enable them conduct the examinations for those classes without violating the SOPs. 

Madam Speaker, again, under this addendum, there are funds for some local governments to cater for the upgrade of health centres II and Alebtong District for the balance of monies for seed secondary schools at Abia. In Sironko District, the funds will cater for Mutufu and Budege health centres II upgrade; in Alebtong, for Awei and Ngetta health centres II upgrade; Mubende for Lwemikomago Health Centre II upgrade; and Serere District for Arapoo and Kagwara health centres II upgrades. 

We recommend that those funds also be voted for to enable those local governments pay the outstanding bills. 

In conclusion, I request that the House considers the committee’s recommendations and approves supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 4, including the two addenda - 1 and 2.

I beg to lay on the Table the minutes, the copy of the report and the schedule for supply for our Hansard. 

I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the report and it has been signed by the necessary honourable members of the committee. I just have one question on the issue of ambulances, which is on page 8. I would like to get confirmation that the islands have got water ambulances. I do not know whether these are to be used on the road or even on the islands. Are the water ambulances part of this? 

MR PATRICK OPOLOT: Madam Speaker, the plan from the Ministry of Health was to procure 282 pick-up vehicles. However, the committee, on interacting with the ministry, found that it was better for them to procure ambulances for all districts. It, therefore, depends on how the ambulances are to be procured. At the implementation stage, this House can possibly direct the ministry to provide for the islands, since it is also urgent. The water ambulances are also a big requirement as of now. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, it has been a demand of this House that the Minister of Health provides water ambulances for those areas. 

3.45
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA SSENYONGA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a problem in consideration of issues for implementation. There is no way you can say that you are planning to buy pick-up vehicles or ambulances for 254 districts and then think that later on, when it comes to implementation, they will consider the islands.

This has been long overdue. This issue has been coming up repeatedly but extended all the time. If this is the only chance to consider the islanders. Let the islands also be considered -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform the honourable member that islanders must be very careful. The ministry has ever bought pick-up double cabin ambulances. Therefore, the specifications must be known. 

If they are ambulances for the islanders, they must specify the type. If they are for people on the islands, are they going to be special boats that have those specifications? There are many ambulances that were bought by the same ministry and they were double cabin vehicles.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, do not lose the issue of the water. Has the ministry provided for the boat ambulances for the islands? That is what I want to hear.

MR SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, I am emphasising that point because we had a request brought to the committee and they promised that by all means, in this financial year the ambulance boats would be provided for the islanders. However, up to now, they are still talking about ambulances. Much as they are going to change from pick-up vehicles to vans, they are not considering the islanders. Therefore, I would like to agree with you, Madam Speaker, that they should consider us this time.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we do not have 282 districts.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, the committee considered the fact that we are in a pandemic and therefore, the situation might get worse. Because of that, each district must have an ambulance because there has been an outcry. Therefore, that issue should be resolved. 

If there is any thing over and above that, then we can probably take care of other areas where we do not have enough, like the islands, for instance, if they require special specification.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you have not understood the situation of the islanders. They do not want the motor vehicle ambulances; they want boat ambulances. If you are going to take patients to Kalangala, you need a boat ambulance. You cannot drive on the water. That is what we are talking about.  Where is the minister? It must be clear; we are not going to leave it to the ministry. If there is money, the islanders must get their boats.

3.49
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. You are spot-on. We seem not to understand the argument you are presenting. What you are saying is that whereas the provision of ambulances is considered for every district, which I think the island districts can also get, movement from the island to the mainland is what the Speaker is emphasising. That is what we thought the budget should consider. 

The ambulances can remain in Buvuma but let us have the second ones, which will connect Buvuma to Kampala via Mukono. That is what we are talking about. Therefore, there should be a budget for that, including the one at the district. 

We needed this like yesterday. The other day, I also had a problem; one of my relatives across the islands was not able to be moved to the mainland and someone lost their life. That must be considered. How I wish the revision of the pick-up vehicles to ambulances would include boat ambulances to move islanders to the main land. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR NAMBESHE Madam Speaker, water ambulances are a crucial matter and I support it. However, consideration also should be made for other hard-to-reach areas. I know islands are part of the hard-to-reach areas. How about those of us who come from mountainous areas? In fact, we need to give due consideration to these places. There are small aircrafts, which could help reach those places, which are not accessible by these double cabin pick-up vehicles for purposes of serving all parts of Uganda, which are hard to reach. Thank you.

3.51
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whereas the Committee on Budget presented the procurement of 288 ambulances, it is imperative that at this stage, we look at the 288. In previous communication, they said at least each district should have a means of transport reflective of an ambulance. Now that we are budgeting for 288, I think the interest of the islands should be top on the agenda. 

Madam Speaker, it should not necessarily be an ambulance; we also want a means of transport. In the islands, for example, you cannot put the same ambulance, which you put in Kampala. When we are considering the ambulances, we need to look at their capacity to help the people. That should be reflected in the budget. 

What I know is that Government has procured ambulances but they do not serve the interests of the people. They are left to get spoilt at the district headquarters or health centres. That is why Members of Parliament end up being donors of ambulances. Therefore, as we approve the supplementary budget for these ambulances, let us look at the interest of all Ugandans, including those in the hard-to-reach areas like islands. 

An ambulance can be a pick-up vehicle as long as it is working as an ambulance, and that is good enough. Some of the ambulances that are procured by Government are not cost effective and sometimes they do not work for the interest of the people. 

Let us pass this budget but look at individual areas. The Ministry of Health should have a modus operandi on how these ambulances will operate, instead of just procuring vehicles to be packed at the district-

THE SPEAKER: Where is the Minister of Health anyway?

MR GUTOMOI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like some clarification. When we decide to buy ambulances instead of pick-up trucks for the local governments, are these going to be the same vehicles, which we shall call ambulances?  You are going to buy trucks and talk of ambulances, but has the committee realised that the price is the same? Also, when you come to the issue of islanders, the price of motorboats may be different. 

What is the criterion in naming these trucks as ambulances? On many occasions, we have bought small vehicles or trucks and named them ambulances. The real meaning of the word “ambulance” has been abused. Can I get clarification on that? What type of trucks or ambulances are we going to procure? Thank you.

3.54
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, let me first thank the Committee on Budget for making the decision to divert from buying pick-up vehicles and other vehicles for the districts as ambulances. I believe that as a country, we have specifications for ambulances. It is not right for us to keep thinking about what kind of ambulance is going to be bought because the specifications of an ambulance are known. 

Our important issue is that at policy level, where we are now, we should recommend that there must be motorboats used for ambulances for those in the islands. In the absence of the Minister of Health, we are going to keep talking here but not come up with a conclusion. We have to recommend that they must buy motorboat ambulances for those on the islands. Otherwise, we are taking a lot of time discussing the same thing when I know that there is a specification of what should be called an ambulance in Uganda. Thank you. 

3.55
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and the entire committee plus the ministry for bringing this supplementary budget. 

My point is about your communication of Tuesday last week, which concerned the supplementary budget for payment of Makerere University Business School (MUBS) lecturers -

THE SPEAKER: No, can we finish with what has been presented first? 

MR TIMUZIGU: Okay, let me talk about another thing. However, I thought it was your direction that they bring it in this supplementary budget so that those people can be paid because it has taken so long, since they were promised in December, 2019. 

Maybe if it is coming in another way, let me go to the compensation of tobacco farmers, which was part of this report. 

THE SPEAKER: Let us close the issue of the ambulances.

MR TIMUZIGU: Madam Speaker, I beg that you give me another chance. Thank you.

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, the Shadow Minister of Finance has simplified our work because originally, this is money we received from donations from the public. The Ministry of Health was guided by the national taskforce to use the money that was donated by the public to buy pick-up vehicles, build two border health posts, and construct phase I of the blood bank at Soroti and Arua as directed by His Excellency the President.

In the wisdom of the committee, they said that instead of buying pick-up vehicles, buy ambulances. It is my understanding that the ambulances you are referring to are of the standard ones that are accepted by the Ministry of Health.

In addition, the House has suggested a recommendation that we shall take seriously - that ambulances should include boat ambulances. Therefore, in areas where we need boat ambulances, we shall buy boat ambulances instead of motor ambulances. What we now require would be to get a firm recommendation from this House and we shall implement it. I would like to confirm that once that recommendation is adopted by this House, the Executive will –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister should clear the air on the issue of the 282 districts because once you leave it as it is, we shall end up finding some districts benefitting more than others.

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Ogwal explained that as a member of the Budget Committee.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, the 282 were pick-up vehicles for local governments, not districts. In other words, in some districts, we could have more than one. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can the Chairperson of the Budget Committee please formulate an amendment to the recommendation of the committee in relation to the boat ambulances?

MR RICHARD GAFABUSA: Madam Speaker, even though the minister has gone, I would like to clarify that we are not buying only boat ambulances for the island districts. For the island districts, we need two, the vehicle ambulance and the boat ambulance. 

Kalangala, for instance, has 86 islands but 56 of them are inhabited. Vehicles only go to the main island, so the main island will need the vehicle ambulance. The other islands will need the boat ambulance to get patients from the islands to the main island where they can use the vehicle ambulance to the rest of the country.

THE SPEAKER: Can our chairperson please formulate a recommendation along those lines? Let us finish with health first and later touch the other issues.

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, I appreciate the Member who was holding the Floor. When we are buying these ambulances, where we need boat ambulances, we shall go for them alone. Where we need both motor and boat, we shall also do that. 

However, the understanding of this recommendation is that we are letting the Ministry of Health to rationalise the resources that we appropriated, which is Shs 34 billion, to cater for these ambulances, depending on the prevailing prices and standards. When we make a decision, we shall come back to the House and inform you, just in case the resources are not enough to buy all the ambulances at a go. We shall come back and state what we bought using the resources available. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us wait for the formulation. Let us go to other comments on other areas There was something on tobacco.

4.02
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am sorry that I had gone to tobacco before the ambulance issue was over. 

I appreciate the committee bringing this report concerning the payment of tobacco farmers. Being a member of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry, I know the issues of tobacco farmers and I am happy that they are going to be paid. 

Madam Speaker, I need clarification from the ministry about how the investors are going to pay back that money because they bought and sold that tobacco. Those investors bought the tobacco from our farmers and they sold it, so they have got the money. Although they might have faced financial distress, they have the money. I pray that I get clarification from the ministry or even the chairperson about how those people are going to pay Government. 

Secondly, I would like you to allow me to ask whether the supplementary budget concerning the payment of MUBS lecturers, which was supposed to be under the vote of the Ministry of Public Service, is being prepared. Madam Speaker, last week you directed that the ministry brings here a response concerning that same matter. 

These people were promised this payment on 26 December 2019 by the President and the First Lady and the Minister for Public Service was there. The amount is Shs 4.92 billion, which can be included in the supplementary and those people get their salaries. We need to observe that Makerere University’s ranking has been going down for the last four years. If we do not consider those lecturers, when we expect to export education and get foreign exchange, then we are in trouble. Madam Speaker, I beg that you guide the House on how this money can be got so that these people are paid.

Lastly, allow me to talk about the money for the Electoral Commission, which they are asking that we pass in form of a supplementary budget. Some people have already been suspended, implying that their allowances are not there. They know they are not going to get their allowances. Therefore, if the allowances were reallocated for something else, we want to know. 

We want to know, in future, from the ministry concerned whether those people were paid their allowances after Parliament passing the supplementary budget? Currently, some people know that they are not going to be paid and their money might change hands somewhere, when we have passed a supplementary budget. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Concerning the money for MUBS, I had instructed the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to work expeditiously and lay the supplementary budget here, so that it could be considered together with this report. However, I do not think I have seen it as yet. 

4.06
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am going to raise three issues. 

One issue is on the supplementary budget for the Uganda Land Commission. It is good that the people in Buyaga are going to be paid. However, we have the land fund and we would like to know how the land fund has been used to compensate even those in other areas. I ask this because we have many people in many parts of this country who have not been compensated. We would like to know whether the Shs 12 billion is for Buyaga only and then, whether there is another plan for other areas that have similar challenges of compensation.

Secondly, I would like to comment on the Lusanja compensation. It is said that they are going to compensate Mr Kiconco approximately Shs 4 billion for the land so that the squatters are not evicted. We want some specifications because in compensating Mr Kiconco, what are we going to leave for the people of Lusanja? Is this compensation going to include giving land titles to the people who have been affected - those who are being evicted? Are they going to be given land titles or not, and is it just a matter of compensating Mr Kiconco? That should be very clear because we must have the ownership when Government has compensated Mr Kiconco.

Finally, Madam Speaker, we have talked about the Shs 1.4 billion for Namboole Stadium and that this is going to be used for operational costs. However, we know that Namboole is not in a good state. The management of the Confederation of African Football (CAF) even talked about the standards of Namboole Stadium. Why are we not looking at the improvement and modernisation of Namboole Stadium, other than just looking at the operational costs? We know –(Interruption)  

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, honourable member. Madam Speaker, I would not agree with any money given to Namboole. In the Public Accounts Committee, we investigated this. Namboole is already shared by some people and it is not remitting any funds. We have been asking who is in charge of Namboole but the answer is negative.

Namboole has a hotel, which is managed, I am told, by hon. Mike Mukula. People are stealing money, yet they are making money out of it. We have asked for the income that has been generated from Namboole by the balokole with their prayers and the political parties, which have been organising their meetings there. 

Namboole became a money-generating venture for some people. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not get any earning. We need an audit so that we know where the money goes before you give Namboole any money. Otherwise, there is a lot of theft in Namboole. The Public Accounts Committee was questioning that, but they could not give us an answer. Now, when you give them a supplementary budget, you are giving them something to feast on.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, we all know that the cardinal objective of Namboole Stadium is sports. We know that in as far as sports is concerned, we have only one national stadium. If it has been used for other activities, then we must put it right, so that we do not really face challenges when it comes to hosting international matches.

Finally, when we talk about Shs 85 billion for masks, we are crying because we have seen the quality of these masks. We have seen that many Ugandans were not given proper masks and up to now, those masks are like the disposable ones. Right now, you can hardly find any Ugandan putting on a Government of Uganda (GOU) mask because they are of poor quality and could not last long. 

When we talk about the Shs 2 billion for two districts and we say that these are the districts which did not receive masks, even here in Kampala, only very few people received masks. For those who received, the quality was very poor. Madam Speaker, I do not think that at this time, we must go in –(Interruption) 

MR SSENYONGA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. Madam Speaker, it was this Parliament, on 28 June 2020, which passed Shs 89 billion for masks. The same Parliament, on 2 October 2020, passed Shs 30 billion for masks. That totals to Shs 119 billion for masks. 

When you now look at the new demand for another Shs 33.5 billion again, it makes Ugandans wonder whether in each house, we have 50 masks, whereas in many villages, including nearby in Mukono, very few people were able to access the masks. There is a lot that this House needs to look into on the issue of masks, as we also look into the issue of the price of the vaccines that they are giving us, compared to what they are giving Kenya and Tanzania. If given time, I am going to google and come with the figures of Kenya and Tanzania. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, I will wind up on the issue of masks and the additional supplementary budget that they need of Shs 33 billion. Unless there is an audit in as far as these masks are concerned, I do not think we are in a position to allow the Government to spend more Shs 33 billion, when the accountability for what has been given is not convincing.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, during our campaigns, I found that in my Kamuli, probably only a quarter of the people had masks. I was supplying masks throughout the campaigns. 

4.13
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I hope hon. Bahati is listening.

From the money stated here, we must thank COVID-19 because without it, we would not have raised Shs 34.6 billion to buy ambulances. That means our country is only good for donations and there is no planning. It is very serious for a whole Government not to plan for the health sector and wait for donations so that they can do this.

I would like to tell hon. Bahati that under the law, ambulances are exempt from taxes. So, it means with this money that you have, even if you are going to buy pick-up vehicles, you would buy more than 282 of them. Do you really like Uganda? Even if you went for ambulances, which are exempt from taxes, you will buy more than 282 of them. 

When you tell them to readjust and buy ambulances, they will say Parliament directed them to buy ambulances. However, they are going to come with a price that is far higher and they will say, “Instead of 282 pick-up vehicles, we bought only 130 ambulances.” I am just giving an example. I, therefore, think as Parliament, since this was a donation, which we are going to appropriate, we should seriously get interested in knowing the prices of the ambulances and remember that they are tax exempt. 

Madam Speaker, if you go to Mandela National Stadium at Namboole, you will realize that the land has been shared. We have a hotel and one of the persons who signed for the hotel is called Mike Mukula, the National Vice-Chairman of the National Resistance Movement (NRM) for Eastern Region. For the entire six years, he has not paid even one shilling for rent. If we decided to enforce rent only, you do not need to appropriate this Shs 1.4 billion. The total money for rent is now over Shs 7 billion. So, why don’t we, as Parliament, say that we collect our rent to operate Namboole and the swimming pool? We should take this as a serious issue to deal with. 

On the issue of facemasks, they said that the total cost for facemasks delivered is Shs 85.8 billion. The money we appropriated is Shs 119 billion. So, before we add more money, where is the balance of the money we appropriated? We must get that balance first. I do not know why the Committee on Budget runs very fast. You are the ones who brought here a request for Shs 89 billion and Shs 30 billion, which totalled to Shs 119 billion. Hon. Opolot, you are an accountant and you know that Shs 119 billion is not equal to Shs 85 billion. Why didn’t you first tell us about the balance?

Whereas at the end of the day we say, “the ayes have it”, these are serious issues. If we pass this Shs 33 billion before they account for the other balance - Maybe let me subtract for you. The difference between those two figures is Shs 34 billion, which is more than the Shs 33 billion that they are asking for now. So, how do we appropriate more money, yet you have not consumed what we appropriated for you the last time? Which kind of accounting is this, hon. Opolot? Tell us! You see, sometimes we take things for granted but such things are very dangerous to this country.

Let me go to the church, which was destroyed, and Lusanja matters. Somebody broke down a church and he is going to be paid Shs 3.8 billion. We need the people of Uganda to understand that. Is it Gen. Salim Saleh who is going to be paid this Shs 3.8 billion or the church or the person whom they took to court?  (Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the contribution. I also would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me give this information. 

At least, I am one of the witnesses in this matter. I appeared with the minister on a radio programme on some Saturday. During that programme, I said, “Madam Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, let us go to that place and find out who deployed policemen to guard that church before it was demolished.” When I said that during the radio talk show, the person who had deployed the policemen to guard the church removed them but even then, the minister never went there. 

There was room to stop that church from being demolished, but still, the Government forces gave way to those who demolished it. We cannot turn around so fast like this and begin talking about giving money to that church. Who has valued that land and the church building? Where is that report, which has been used to determine the money to be paid out? 

I think we are just giving out money to people that just want to recover their election expenses. I am worried! That is not fair. Court should conclude that matter and the person who broke down that church should be brought to book before Parliament and Government come in. Both the police and the army were guarding that church until it was demolished. 

Yes, the minister is there. Let her deny appearing on a radio talk show and I asked her to go and find out who deployed police to guard that church. The church was demolished at night. We are going for another unnecessary expenditure before getting the committee report about these people; it is very dangerous! 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: This is very interesting. We need to find out what this compulsory acquisition is all about. Who is the beneficiary of the breakage and who is going to get the money? I am a Christian, a God-fearing person, but I do not want us to use churches or mosques to steal public funds. I think a Member has talked about Lusanja. We also need to find out who is going to benefit amongst those Lusanja victims.

I now go to the Electoral Commission. I think the Electoral Commission has taken this country for a ride. Whenever they want money, they come in plenty. Let us start with the Biometric Voters’ Verification System (BVVS). This system never functioned during the elections. Let us look at the figures - Shs 43.76 billion was allocated. Initially, they had some machines; they only added some more. Let us, however, assume they bought new biometric machines. Each of the 34,000 polling stations countrywide had one machine, but I can say that they brought to the polling stations machines that were not functioning. 

Let us imagine they bought 40,000 verification machines. When you divide Shs 43.76 billion by 40,000, you realize that each of those poor machines, which you saw, was bought at an approximately Shs 1.2 million, yet even a basic laptop cannot cost Shs 1.2 million. So, are you then telling us that that machine is more expensive than a laptop? Is that machine more expensive than iPhones? This clearly shows there is theft at the Uganda Electoral Commission and because of this theft – (Interruption)

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you very much, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, for giving way. 

The information I would like to give, in relation to the Electoral Commission machines, is to the effect that the BVVS machines do not actually capture data. If you would like to know how many people have voted through the system, that data is not there. When we asked for it in the Supreme Court in 2016, the then Chairperson of the Electoral Commission said the machines could not capture data. The same problem exists even with the current machines. So, even their use in trying to avoid multiple voting is virtually not there. That is the information I had to give. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we want to assume that the EC never bought all the 40,000 machines because they had some old ones and so, they just added more. Assuming they added 10,000 machines – I would like to run numbers before we do the appropriation – it means each of the 10,000 machines was bought at Shs 4.3 million. 

I feel bad that people use Parliament when they want to steal. I remember after winning, the NRM candidate said, “I am going to deal with budgets.” I do not know whether he has looked at this supplementary budget because if he has done so, there is this biometric system of Mr Byamukama, which we are talking about; how many did he buy and at what price?

I would like to give you a vivid example. In the Local Council V (LCV) elections, there was a polling station with 530 voters. That health centre had recorded 25 deaths since the time of registration. There are those who died from the health centre and those who died from home. However, the total number of voters on that day, using the biometric system of Mr Byamukama, was 516 plus eight invalid votes, totalling to 524. This was in addition to the 21 who died from the health centre, giving a total of 542, which is already beyond the registered number of voters.

That biometric system must have got some thumbprints of the dead to be voters. Is this system that we are buying really a biometric system or it is being used for theft? Madam Speaker, seen all that, it clearly shows that we want to appropriate money to the Electoral Commission for stealing. They removed Rwakoojo saying he was a thief but these ones who have come might even be worse thieves than Rwakoojo, because if you can take Shs 55 billion in the shortest time possible, that is very dangerous.

Regarding demarcation, Madam Speaker, you should get interested in this budget because it is going to either exonerate us or it will not. We came here and agreed that we are zoning constituencies and now, they are going back and bringing bills of Shs 2.8 billion and 7.3 billion.

We asked the Electoral Commission whether they had the money and they said they did not have it. We asked them how they were going to do it or whether there was a tribunal. This is because when you are going to demarcate these constituencies, there must be a tribunal appointed by the Chief Justice. It was never there and they have never responded. Therefore, they have never done demarcations. They are using what the local councils produced and they are now giving us a budget of Shs 2.8 billion, Shs 7.3 billion and over Shs 1 billion, which is about Shs 12 billion. 

These are thieves. They have never gone to the ground to do demarcations for the Shs 12 billion. This was done by local councils which said, “This sub-county is being added to the other to form a county and here it is”. Are we being fair?

Regarding the Electoral Commission, I, Nandala-Mafabi, can tell you that if we agree, we should not accept this Shs 55 billion and hon. Opolot must explain it to us. We thought you were a good Etesot but it looks like from this report, you are becoming spoilt and at this point, we must deal with it here.

Finally, –(Interjections)– Order for what? Okay, I am waiting –(Interruption)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is on the money for Uganda Land Commission. It is good we are going to consider a supplementary for Uganda Land Commission. However, there are many people who are demanding for money, to the tune of Shs 1.1 trillion, from Uganda Land Commission – (Interruption)

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. The point of order has passed. There was no point of order. (Laughter) I would like to conclude, my brother, so that you can deal with this. 

Having spoken all those words and stated everything, I would like to request that at the time of appropriation, you give us an opportunity to deal with this budget and open it up to scrutiny. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

4.29
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to comment on the supplementary budget proposed for Uganda Land Commission. 

It is true and I believe that we should consider a supplementary budget for Uganda Land Commission because there are many people demanding for their money from the commission. However, it is not fair that only people with “godfathers” in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Bunyoro and other areas are considered. They are presenting a supplementary budget for a few people only.

My proposal is that the proposed supplementary budget should go to Uganda Land Commission but it should be the commission, under the stewardship of hon. Byenkya, to allocate that money to different people. There are people who are still demanding for their money from Uganda Land Commission right from 2003. Some are very old and very poor people. However, at this time, they want to compensate rich people, leaving out people without “god fathers” and “god mothers”.

We have people from Kamuli, Mubende and everywhere who are demanding for their money. Therefore, let us put this money into Uganda Land Commission. Actually, we can even bring more supplementary requests because Ugandans are demanding for over Shs 1.1 trillion and many are dying before they receive their money.

Finally, I have a concern regarding the money for buying masks. Why don’t we think about converting this money to the fund for buying more vaccines in order for more Ugandans to benefit? Nursery children can go back to school if this is done. Thank you. 

4.31
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Nansana Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I am very happy that finally, at least a portion of money has been assigned to answer the cry of the people of Bunyoro over non-payment for the tobacco supplied. Up to the eve of elections, people in Bunyoro were calling me over that money. 

My only worry is that we just estimated and never did a thorough investigation. I hope that the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will do a thorough investigation, receipt by receipt. There are people who are demanding for Shs 500,000 only but they are very emotional, and there are those demanding for millions. Therefore, these small people must be looked at.

We thank the Members of Parliament who petitioned your office, Madam Speaker. We did an investigation –(Interruption)

MR ATIKU: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. Madam Speaker, thank you once again. The issue of tobacco farmers is not only for Bunyoro region but also West Nile. The people of West Nile presented petition after petition and we have been to the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives several times but I do not see them here among the people who are supposed to be compensated.

Even during campaigns, people were calling us and at one moment, somebody circulated rumours that money was already allocated. With this supplementary, we should expect anxiety in West Nile because I do not see West Nile here. Therefore, hon. Kasule, it is important that you comment on the situation of the people of West Nile as we discuss this supplementary. 

MR KASULE: Thank you, honourable member. That is why I said we only estimated and there are many other areas such as West Nile that were not included. This is the first batch and I hope that Parliament shall agree that this time, they will pay the people of Bunyoro and next time, they should look at the plight of the people from West Nile. I thank you, Madam Speaker. 

My chairman of PAC, please, as much as we have debated here, we need you to do a greater job on the masks and other things that have been debated here. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: I hope the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives will tell us how the tobacco companies will reimburse the Government money. How will the companies refund this money that we are paying? 

4.35
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We carried out a survey on the issue of tobacco. We sent out a team comprising of officials from Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, some officials from the respective areas, officials from the Ministry of Agriculture, and local leaders. 

Bunyoro is the one which completed its report earlier, so we phased out the payments. We are starting with Bunyoro this time. We will be able to cover the other areas in the first quarter. Our survey was interrupted by COVID-19 and we had to recall the teams that had gone out. Nevertheless, I would like to commit that we will be able to do that. 

On the issue of payments, probably the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will help me explain the payments to the companies. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Timuzigu wanted to know how the companies are going to refund this money that we are paying to the farmers.

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is true that the outcry of the people of Bunyoro and West Nile necessitated Government to come in and help them. Once this money is paid, we are making a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) to ensure that the two companies that were supposed to pay the farmers pay this money to Government. As we speak, we are coming in to help the struggling farmers as we wait to sign an MoU. Thereafter, the two companies will have to refund this money. 

On the issue of Namboole, we are handling a gazetted area that was taken over by the Ministry of Health to admit people and treat them from there. This is the only limited area that we are talking about. We took it over as the Ministry of Health, but the Namboole management could not raise the resources to pay the bills for that specific area, including salaries. 

On the other issues regarding hon. Mukula - the Minister of State for Sports can talk about the broader issues of Namboole but this particular one is as a result of the Ministry of Health taking over Namboole Stadium to administer people with –(Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank my colleague for yielding the Floor. If I understood you correctly, you did say that you want this House to approve this payment regarding the tobacco farmers, and thereafter, reach a memorandum of understanding with the companies.  

The Government is paying somebody’s debt without an agreement. You first make an agreement and the conditions under which you are paying out this debt. Once you have already paid somebody’s debt, how sure are you that the person, whose debt you have paid, will agree to pay you back and even comply? 

The first thing to do before we pay your debt is to make an agreement. I do not know what your Solicitor-General advised you. Is this the advice of the office of the Attorney-General? Did he advise you to pay out the money to the farmers and thereafter reach an understanding with the private companies, whose debts you have paid? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I at least attended the meetings of the Committee on Health, although I am not a member. The Ministry of Health has already done some renovations in the areas they took and they have spent money, so there is no need for Shs 1.4 billion. I do not understand what money the minister said they are going to cater for in that particular area, yet the ministry has already done renovations in those particular areas, and they started paying even before taking over their payments. We are not saying this in bad spirit but we know what we are saying. Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of hon. Katuntu, first, I would like to congratulate him for winning the elections on the independent ticket. I wish you could have joined the mighty party. 

The issue of how we are handling this is based on a co-current process. There is an engagement with the companies and at the same time, the farmers are complaining. We have come in to help the farmers but we have confidence and assurance that these resources will be paid by the company. 

On the issue of Namboole, I would like to request, with your permission, that the Minister of State for Sports gives more details. However, I can assure you, hon. Ssewungu, that the Ministry of Health took over Namboole Stadium to use it as an isolation centre. This has implications in terms of the revenue that Namboole has been getting and the facilitation of the staff of Namboole in terms of paying the bills for Namboole. The Minister of State for Sports can give more information to this House – (Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I am at pains raising a point of order against a senior member of this House. I do not know whether the minister is going to continue camouflaging in order to succeed in releasing nugatory funds. I have just said here that the Ministry of Health has been spending money and they even carried out renovations in those areas that they are working from. Is the honourable minister in order not to respond to the issues I am talking about? 

The minister has gone ahead to tell us about the staff of Namboole, who are not even professionals in medicine; they are not doctors. The staff of Namboole simply clean, wash and slash grass at the stadium. Therefore, is he in order to come here and tell us that they are going to spend money on the staff of Namboole and not the purpose of the money that we are contesting? 

The minister knows very well, and I have told him, that the Ministry of Health has already spent money and is spending money on Namboole from the date they began utilising that facility. Is he in order, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not privy to all that information. How has the facility at Namboole been used since they started? They have just said that the Ministry of Health has fully taken over it. 

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, from the Ministry of Finance, we are not aware of any duplicated costs. The money that the Ministry of Health requested for Namboole is to help them to pay costs of running Namboole. Ordinarily, they are supposed to use these resources from the money they collect from the activities of the stadium but because the Ministry of Health took over Namboole, they cannot get money out of this. 

It is because of this that they have been able – The Minister of State for Sports can shade light on this, but I am not aware of any duplication of costs, at least from the information that we have.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I think the problem of the Committee on Public Accounts of this House is that they have not seen any income out of Namboole for all the years that it has been there and they are aware that activities have been going on. That is what they are saying. Where has the money gone to?

MR BAHATI: That is why the Minister of State for Sports is here to give more information and he has abundant information regarding this issue, if he can be allowed.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, let me also give information because I am a member of the Committee on Education and Sports. 

Hon. Bahati, let us not hide our heads in the sand by telling lies. When the Ministry of Health took over the Namboole facility for treatment of its people, they went into the field, not the parking area where pioneer buses are parked or the hotel managed by hon. Mukula, plus the land and sewerage management area. The Ministry of Health particularly occupied the playground and that is where they placed their tents to take care of the sick. 

Do not tell us that the Ministry of Health is getting money to repair the seats of Namboole, where hon. Ssempijja and hon. Ssewungu sit to watch football during the Africa Cup of Nations. That is not true. Your interest is in that particular area where you are carrying out treatment and other activities. Let us not meander by giving misleading information. The Ministry of Health is in better position to tell us about that money, not the Ministry of Education and Sports because they have spent money on Namboole. 

We are saving you, hon. Bahati. You should be able to tell us that you have released this amount of money to the Ministry of Health, because they could not have taken up possession of that place before getting money. They could not. What have they been using? That is what the Speaker is asking.

Therefore, when you are giving misleading information, do not consider us nursery children whose studying has been suspended in Uganda. We do research and get to know what is taking place. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I invite the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development as the Minister of State for Sports prepares to come up. 

However, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, I am not satisfied with your answer that the tobacco companies will pay. It is because of pressure from this House that Government has now moved to support the farmers. So, I am not sure that those people are going to pay our money; you need to convince us. Let us have the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

4.46
THE MINISTER OF LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (Ms Beti Kamya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I, please first register my belated congratulations to you for your resounding success and to Members of both sides who made it back. For the causalities like myself, there is life after Parliament.

I would also like to thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget for presenting the supplementary schedule, particularly on the land section. Hon. Sebaggala, hon. Nandala and hon. Mbwatekamwa all discussed this matter and they have similar concerns. I will respond to them combined.

First of all, colleagues wanted to know about the land fund and how it is used. This land fund is poorly funded, given the size of the need and the intention for which it was created, as ably explained by hon. Mbwatekamwa. This financial year, the land fund was allocated Shs 19 billion and out of this, Shs 17 billion has been released so far. Colleagues will appreciate that this is very little, given the amount of work that they need to do. 

Indeed, the land fund account is now garnished and not even operational, but the process is in place to get it ungarnished. This fund is seriously underfunded. I would like to thank hon. Mbwatekamwa for bringing it out seriously. We are planning to bring it to Parliament after Cabinet. We will present a request for funding in order to resolve this matter of the land fund and the land issues in Uganda, which have their roots in the colonial history of Uganda. I hope that colleagues in Parliament will support this.

Regarding the Lusanja matter, colleagues wanted to know who is going to be compensated and who is going to be the beneficiary of the land. I am sure that you, colleagues, have been following the story of Lusanja. This land was bought by Mr Medard Kiconco but over 2000 people have settled there. He has been to court about three times and court found him to be the rightful owner of this land. Therefore, Government negotiated with Mr Kiconco and he agreed to give way to the 2000 settlers for compensation, so that he can buy another piece of land. 

The practice normally is that when Government buys land for the benefit of settlers - bibanja, bona fide and other squatters - they are given land titles and that is what will happen. However, in the meantime, the land has to first be registered in the names of Uganda Land Commission, after which it will then be transferred to the beneficiaries. However, that takes time to map and survey in order to know who belongs where - 2000 people are many.

Finally, the honourable members wanted to know about the church and again the same questions were asked: who is benefiting from this payment? Who is benefiting from the land? Who put the police there? There were also other questions that hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised.

Madam Speaker, I would like to remind this House that the Government of Uganda has three independent pillars and one of them is the Judiciary. Therefore, most of the land activities are actually generated from the Judiciary where eviction orders come from, and where it is decided on who actually is the rightful person in cases of contestation.

In the case of Ndeeba Church, as in the case of Lusanja, it is court that decided that Mr Dodovico Mwanje bought this land legitimately and holds it legitimately. It is court who gave an eviction order to Mr Mwanje. Therefore, Government is only dealing with the rightful owner as provided for by court. When Government has finally paid off Mr Mwanje, the Government has undertaken to donate this land to St Stephens Church of Uganda. I beg Members to support this- (Interruption)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister for giving way. I think the minister is very mean with facts. 

First and foremost, I would like the minister to tell this House who initiates a supplementary budget. As far as I am concerned, within few minutes, I can bring a document from Uganda Land Commission; they are protesting because they are not aware of the supplementary budget for these people who are supposed to be compensated in Bunyoro. The names for the Shs 12 billion have been read out.

They requested for a supplementary budget some time back to go and budget for all the people and it was never considered. This money they are requesting for, for Uganda Land Fund, is generated by mafias. Give me 20 minutes, and I will table a document under protest brought by hon. Byenkya who is heading the Uganda Land Commission because she is not aware about the money.

What is the criterion used to get the Shs 12 billion that is supposed to compensate the people in Bunyoro when we have a fully-fledged land commission with all the commissioners who are supposed to sit and determine the beneficiaries? Thank you.

MR BASALIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I seek from the minister is whether her office has had the benefit of looking at the evaluation reports for these various pieces of land, specifically in Lusanja and Ndeeba. Who carried out the evaluation to ascertain the figures that are reflected in the supplementary budget? 

Secondly, our Constitution and the land laws give certain rights to people who are on the land. In the case of Lusanja, for example, some of these people can easily be described as bona fide occupants and others are lawful occupants. Even in the case of Ndeeba, where court makes a decision, these people who find themselves on this piece of land are protected under the law.

Minister, are you saying that where there is a demolition or an eviction, people who are found on that land are not protected under the law, that you have to come to Parliament to seek intervention of Government through a supplementary budget to protect those? If Mr Dodovico was claiming for land somewhere and there were people on that land, the law is very specific on how to deal with people that were found on that land. They are supposed to be compensated before they can go away. Even where there is an eviction, the people must be compensated by the registered proprietor. 

In this case, we want to cushion the registered proprietors from their legal obligation of compensating people who have been found on the land. What then is the essence of the security of occupants that the law provides?

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, Ndeeba people have already taken possession of their church in its form as it was demolished. They put a tent and are praying. They are trying to raise funds to put back their church. Whoever demolished that church is supposed to be under detention or must be out on bail. 

MR BASALIRWA: Finally, we are setting a very bad precedent in this country that a person will go to court, seek an order, evict people and then Government will come and seek for money to compensate the people who are evicted, taking away the obligation of that person. 

Honourable minister, it would be better that we follow the spirit of the law when it comes to protecting people who are either bona fide or lawful occupants. You issued an instrument saying that there should be no eviction during these times of the coronavirus. Some of these things have been happening. Why should we now seek refuge in Parliament when the law is very clear?

MS KAMYA: I thank colleagues for their questions and interventions. On the question of evaluations, they are done by the Chief Government Valuer and these were presented to the Committee on Budget.

On the question of the Uganda Land Commission raised by hon. Mbwatekamwa, this budget is of the Uganda Land Commission and it will go to its account. The chairperson of the committee with the records of the committee will indicate that the chairperson of the commission was invited but they sent the undersecretary because they were holding a retreat in Jinja. I do not know if there were communication problems, but this is the information that I have - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. You are saying that the supplementary is for Uganda Land Commission, but it is very important that you take the information given to you by one of the colleagues that the Uganda Land Commission is not aware of that supplementary.

I am saying this because we had a very serious situation on our hands when the Ministry of Finance brought the budget in the name of Bank of Uganda but when we called the officials of Bank of Uganda, they denied. It is very important that we get to know whether Uganda Land Commission is aware of that supplementary budget or not. Thank you.

 MR SSENYONGA: Madam Speaker, the letter they are talking about is already in circulation among many of us, Members. It is not just mere lies from hon. Mbwatekamwa. Since the chairperson of the committee that has come up with the report that we are discussing is here, can I kindly request him to give us some few minutes, because it is as if you are trying to fight us by not giving the correct information.

This letter is dated today, 9 February 2021. It reads as follows: 

“The Rt Hon. Rebecca Kadaga, Speaker of the Parliament of Uganda. 

List of names for land compensation. 

I am dismayed and displeased that while watching Parliament on UBC this afternoon, I heard a list of people to be paid out as submitted by the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Development.

The Commission is not privy to this list and we want the minister to be brought to order for having assumed its powers knowingly. 

The Undersecretary, who is two weeks old, accompanied the Minister as a courtesy from the user agency of these monies. Therefore, I am kindly imploring you, Madam Speaker and your good office, to unpack the money given to Uganda Land Commission so that I can expeditiously carry out its mandatory responsibility.

I await your positive response with much anxiety and gratitude.

I thank you.
Hon. Beatrice Byenkya Nyakaisiki
Chairperson, Uganda Land Commission”

Here is a copy.

Madam Speaker, it must be on record that I have laid this on the Table. I thank you.

MS KAMYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matters of Ndeeba and Lusanja were initiated from the Office of the President and the Prime Minister. In the case –(Interjections)­– Can I be protected, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Allow the minister to present her issues.

MS KAMYA: The Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning– I would have brought the letter here – wrote to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Urban Development and brought all these matters to him and asked him to provide funds for Uganda Land Commission. The letter was copied to the Uganda Land Commission, almost three months ago.

Now, the Uganda Land Commission, acting not in good faith, did not raise the matter and when you see that letter, it is not even copied to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the Minister of Lands, Housing and Urban Planning –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am rising on a point of procedure. This is turning ugly. We are seeing uncoordinated movement of troops. To save the face of Parliament and Government, isn’t it procedurally right for them to retreat and reconcile their positions? You have seen what is happening here. I think it is not right for us to fight here. 

The procedural issue I am raising is: let the minister just ask for time and reconcile these issues with the chairperson of the Uganda Land Commission or we disregard the issue of that compensation and move with the rest of the items. It looks like there is smoke on this matter. I would not want Parliament to be tainted with this confusion.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to advise that we stand over this matter and allow the Committee on Budget, the minister and all the stakeholders to review this matter. I have received the letter myself and I think that we need to ensure that we are moving together on this supplementary budget. 

MS KAMYA: Madam Speaker, as you give your ruling, I would beg your indulgence for the minister of state to give some information because she has it.

THE SPEAKER: No. Honourable members, I have said we shall stand over the matter. We shall discuss it when we are all ready. Thank you.

There were also questions about the compensation for tobacco farmers. The answers are not satisfactory about how those companies are going to pay. Therefore, I am proposing that we stand over this entire supplementary budget – today is Tuesday - until Thursday. We shall stand over the entire supplementary budget until Thursday.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, we had others; UNEB also has issues and I have the record. I am about to bring a letter from –

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, I did not hear the Attorney-General say anything. They have not put forward our issue of compensation of the animals for Teso in this supplementary budget. We cannot simply watch. We also pay taxes. The people of Teso also want to be a part of the supplementaries that come to this House. What is happening? Where is Government? Government, where are you?

THE SPEAKER: Let us deal with the issues, which are already here. We defer this matter until Thursday.

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we have alerted the Government over this matter. We are proceeding to conclude this Bill. Hon. Ndeezi, chairperson of the committee, where are you? These people are not here. Read the clauses.

Clause 10

THE CHAIRPERSON: The chairperson of the committee is not here. They are not here. It will be reflected again on the Order Paper. Let us proceed with other business.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, before it is reflected on the Order Paper, it is important that as Parliament, we must express our dissatisfaction with this committee and the minister.

This Bill is very important for the people of Uganda who work, especially clause 10 which is very important for those people who should get mid-term benefits. We do not know why the minister ran away. I saw hon. Bahati around. I am sure he should accept – If you do not mind, Madam Chairperson, I can become the chairperson of the committee so that we move this Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Are there members of that committee around? 

MS OGWAL: Yes. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Where are they? 

MS OGWAL: There is hon. Nandala-Mafabi.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: I am not a member of that committee.

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, I do not think he is a member. Honourable members, I would like to place on record my disappointment that neither the minister nor the committee chairperson and members of the committee are here. This is a Bill we have been trying to process since September 2020. Last week, I gave notice that the Bill must be concluded on Thursday and they were not here. 

I would like the workers of Uganda to know that it is not the House but a few of the stakeholders who have failed us in this exercise for now. Let us have it on the Order Paper for tomorrow. Let us go and do other business.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Chairperson, this was a joint report of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development and the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I happen to be a member of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The law says, if the chairperson and the vice-chairperson of the committee are not around, any member of the committee can become a chairperson. I would like the House to appoint me a chairperson so that we move this Bill. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: No, the lead committee was the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development. Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume. There is no report, let us resume the House. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE CONSTITUTION (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019

THE SPEAKER: We were due to receive the report on this Bill. Where is the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs? There he is.

5.16
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr Jacob Oboth): Madam Speaker, I am very much around and ready to present the report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019. 

I would like to start by thanking the members of this committee. This is a historic time that we have had about four constitutional amendments and two Bills, which we are processing. I would like to give an abridged version of the report. I believe that the report was uploaded a long time ago. 
On 19 December 2019, a Private Member’s Bill entitled, “Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019” was read for the first time and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs pursuant to rule 128 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. 

Methodology  

We invited the mover, hon. Wilfred Niwagaba, the Leader of the Opposition, the Electoral Commission, the Uganda Law Reform Commission, the Democratic Party, the Forum for Democratic Change party, the National Resistance Movement party and the Uganda National Non-Governmental Organisations (NGO) Forum. 

The committee was also guided by the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, which in rule 128 prescribe the powers of the committee –(Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I am getting worried about following this report. The chairperson has read the National Resistance Movement party. Is it procedurally right to follow this report with the name “National Resistance Movement party” when we do not have any political party in Uganda called by that name? Is it procedurally right that he should continue with this report? 

THE SPEAKER: The chairperson of the committee will explain the people he met. 

MR OBOTH: Well, I am most obliged and I believe that the record – that is the Secretary-General of a sister party - 

I was referring to the methodology used. Rule 128 prescribes the powers of a committee to which a Bill is referred to, and rule 115 guides the extent to which a committee may amend or accept amendment to a Bill under scrutiny. 

The committee was further guided by the recent court decision in Constitutional Petition No. 2 of 2018 of Male H. Mabirizi, K. Kiwanuka and Uganda Law Society versus the Attorney-General, Constitutional Appeal on the restrictions imposed on moving a Private Member’s Bill under the Constitution, and the Rules of Procedure. 

Madam Speaker, this Bill seeks to amend the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda in accordance with Articles 259 and 262 of the Constitution to, among others – 

    a) Provide for the involvement of the Judicial Service Commission in the appointment of members of the Electoral Commission;
    b) Provide for the qualifications of the Chairperson of the Electoral Commission;
    c) Prescribe the grounds for the disqualification of members of the Electoral Commission;
    d) Require the Electoral Commission to determine election complaints that arise before polling within 10 days;
    e) Provide for the Oath of Allegiance of the Leader of the Opposition;
    f) Provide for the holding of presidential, general, parliamentary and local government council elections on the same day whenever possible;
    g) Remove representation of the army from Parliament;
    h) Provide for the Attorney-General and Deputy-Attorney General as ex officio Members of Parliament;
    i) Provide for the Speaker’s Panel;
    j) Provide for the involvement of the Parliamentary Commission in the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament;
    k) Allow political parties or organisations or voters to challenge presidential elections;
    l) Restrict presidential terms to two terms only;
    m) Replace the Office of Vice-President with the Office of Deputy President, and provide for his or her election;
    n) Repeal the Office of Prime Minister;
    o) Prohibit the appointment of ministers from amongst Members of Parliament;
    p) Restrict the number of Cabinet ministers and other ministers to 21 respectively;
    q) Provide for the appointment of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General by the President on the recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission, and their tenure of office;
    r) Increase the tenure of office of members of the Public Service Commission from four to five years;
    s) Mandate the Public Service Commission to determine salaries and allowances of public officers under Chapter 10 of the Constitution;
    t) Mandate the Public Service Commission, Education Service Commission and Health Service Commission, as the case may be, to appoint persons to hold or act in the respective office of the rank of head of department or above; 
u) 	Repeal the office of Resident District Commissioner;
v) 	Change the name of Uganda Police Force to Uganda Police Service and provide for the regulation of its conduct;
w)	Provide for the establishment and functions of city land boards; and
x) 	Provide for other related matters.

The committee examined the Bill and would like to report as follows:

Appointment and Qualifications of Commissioners in the Electoral Commission 

Clause 1 of the Bill proposes to amend Article 60 of the Constitution to make changes to the appointment and qualification of the commissioners of the Electoral Commission. 

The Bill proposes to amend Article 60 to require, among others, that –

(a) 	In the appointment of the Chairperson, Deputy Chairperson and members of the Electoral Commission, the President is to act on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission.

(b) 	In choosing the persons to recommend to the President for appointment, the Judicial Service Commission is required by notice in at least two newspapers of wide circulation and electronic media to invite suitable Ugandans to express interest to serve in the commission.

(c) 	The chairperson of the Electoral Commission must be a person who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court and should possess at least three years’ experience in electoral matters, governance or public administration. 

Madam Speaker, the committee notes that currently, Article 60 of the Constitution empowers the President to appoint the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and five members of the Electoral Commission with the approval of Parliament. The presidential discretion is not affected in any way, since the President is free to appoint any person he or she desires to the Commission, as long as that person is vetted and approved by Parliament.

The committee notes that the requirement to have a public process of soliciting for members of the Electoral Commission is redundant since already, the current law allows Parliament to approve the persons nominated by the President, a duty that Parliament has been doing very well chaired by you, Rt Hon. Speaker.

The committee is, however, agreeable in principle to impose some restrictions on persons who can be appointed members of the Electoral Commission. For instance, as proposed in the Bill, the committee agrees that a person who is of unsound mind and has been adjudged bankrupt and a person who has been convicted by a competent court of an offence whose sentence is imprisonment for three years or more, should be ineligible for appointment to the Electoral Commission. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the amendment proposed in clause 1 of the Bill –

    a) in paragraphs (a) and (b) be rejected as reasoned above.

    b) in paragraph (c), the use of the word “unsound mind” should be rejected and instead the words “suffering from mental illness” be adopted, since there are procedures for determining whether a person is suffering from mental illness, and also to adopt international best practice in the use of such words.

    c) the proposals in paragraphs (d) and (e) should be rejected since they are redundant and ambiguous. 

    d) Include, as a matter that disqualifies a person from appointment on the Commission, the requirement that if a person has been found in an election petition judgment to have participated in election irregularities, illegal practices or participated in the commission of an election offence, such a person is ineligible for appointment on the Electoral Commission.

Determination of Election Complaints and Time for Holding Elections in Uganda 

Clause 2 of the Bill proposes to amend Article 60 of the Constitution by introducing a new clause (1a) requiring the Electoral Commission to determine an election complaint filed with the Commission within ten days. 

The committee recommends that the proposal to prescribe the time within which the Electoral Commission may determine complaints should be rejected. The justification is that it is a detail that should be contained in the election laws including the Presidential Elections Act, the Parliamentary Elections Act, Local Governments Act and the Electoral Commission Act and not in the Constitution. The Constitution generally deals with the principles

The proposal to have presidential, parliamentary and local government elections on the same day, where practical, should be supported, since it will save Government resources and also remedies a mistake made by court in Consolidated Petition No. 49 of 2017, 3 of 2018, 5 of 2018, 10 of 2018 and 13 of 2018: Male Mabirizi versus Attorney General; and Constitutional Appeal No. 2 of 2018: Male Mabirizi & Others versus Attorney-General.

Removal of Army Representatives from Parliament and Declaration of Ministers, Attorney-General, Deputy Attorney-General and Vice-President to be Ex Officio Members of Parliament.

Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend Article 78 of the Constitution by repealing paragraph (c) and amending paragraph (d) to require that the Deputy President, Ministers, Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General are ex officio Members of Parliament without a right to vote on any issue requiring a vote in Parliament.

The committee recommends as follows: 

1. 	The proposal is to amend Article 78 to directly remove army representatives without following the procedure prescribed in Article 78 (2) be rejected. 

2. 	The proposal to have all ministers and the Vice-President as ex officio Members of Parliament be rejected since it will infringe on Article 93.

3. 	In recognition of their cardinal duty as listening posts and to ensure that army representatives do not participate in political arena by taking sides in any matter before Parliament as well as shielding army representatives from partisan politics, army representatives should be ex officio members.

Establishment of Speakers’ Panel 

The Bill proposes in clause 5 to insert a new Article 82B introducing into the Constitution a Speakers’ panel. The committee recommends that this proposal be rejected. However, the Government should take it up for consideration during the constitution review process. 

The major reason was that it has financial implications and it would have a bearing on the private Members. You would not have the Speakers’ panel of one Member of Parliament from Kumi or the other from Bugiri or Kyaka who will not be facilitated in one way or the other.

Regarding Deputy President, the Bill in clauses 7, 8, and 12 proposes various amendments to Articles 98, 100 and 108 of the Constitution. In Articles 98 and 100 of the Constitution, the Bill proposes to change the nomenclature from Vice-President to Deputy President. In clause 12, the Bill proposes to replace Article 108 of the Constitution by changing the terminology used from Vice-President to Deputy President, prescribing the functions of Deputy President as well as the term of the Deputy President.

The committee recommends that the amendments proposed in clauses 7, 8 and 12 relating to the change in the nomenclature referring to the Vice-President be rejected. The details are in our detailed report, which I know you have been reading for the last few months. 

Challenging Presidential Elections

Clause 10 of the Bill proposes to amend Article 104 of the Constitution by allowing an aggrieved political party and a voter to challenge a presidential election. Currently, Article 104, clause 1, only entitles a candidate in a presidential election to challenge a presidential election. 

The committee notes that the proposal to expand the persons or entities that can challenge a presidential election is welcome and should be supported, since it will afford all persons and entities that have a stake in an election to challenge a presidential election, other than leaving the challenge to a presidential candidate alone. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Article 104 be amended as proposed by the Bill, albeit with amendment to restrict the right to only a political party or organisation that sponsored a candidate in a presidential election, since extending it to a voter will be impractical. You can imagine a voter from Kamuli challenging a presidential election, Madam Speaker, and the need within 15 days to get all the evidence – (Interjection) – but Kamuli is part of Uganda; Kamuli is in Uganda. 

Restoration of Presidential Term Limits
Clause 11 of the Bill proposes to amend Article 105 of the Constitution by restoring presidential term limits and limiting the office of the President to only two terms of five years.

This committee, where I happen to be the chairperson, observes that in its report on the Constitution (Amendment) No.2 Bill of 2017 recommended the restoration of term limits in the Constitution. The reason is that the removal of the age restriction in Article 102 will remove the last remaining measure against the indefinite seeking of the Office of the President. 

The committee, therefore, still stands with its earlier decision to reinstate presidential term limits, as was illustrated in the 2017 amendment to the Constitution, since it is an international best practice. The fact is that the proposal received popular support by stakeholders the committee interacted with in the past. It is also in line with the decision of the House when the proposal was made during the consideration of the Constitution (Amendment) No.2 Bill of 2017. 

In light of the above, the committee recommends as follows: 

(i) 	Presidential term limits be restored as proposed in clause 11.

(ii) 	The term of all elective political offices be extended from five years to seven years.

(iii) 	The Government commences the process of increasing the term of all elective political offices from five years to seven years, which is in compliance with the relevant provision of the Constitution and should not apply to the Parliament in which the proposal is effected. 

Madam Speaker, we were only faulted that we wanted to apply it to the tenure of our office and those who decided said we sounded selfish. Now, we are saying that it should be for the next Parliament. How about that? 

Abolition of the Office of the Prime Minister 

Clause 13 of the Bill proposes to delete Article 108A of the Constitution, which creates the Office of the Prime Minister, the occupant of which is appointed by the President and is the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. 

The committee recommends that the abolition of the Office of the Prime Minister be rejected and the status-quo remains. 

Changes to the Composition and Appointment of Cabinet 

Clauses 15, 17 and 18 of the Bill propose to amend Articles 111, 113 and 114 of the Constitution. In Article 111, the Bill proposes to substitute clause 1 with the following: “There shall be a Cabinet which shall consist of the President, Deputy President and such number of ministers as prescribed by this Constitution.” 

In Article 113, the Bill proposes to amend it by deleting the words, “except with the approval of Parliament” appearing in clause (2) and substituting clause (1) with the following: “Cabinet ministers shall be appointed by the President with approval of Parliament from persons qualified to be elected as Members of Parliament but are not elected Members of Parliament.” 

In Article 114, the Bill proposes to amend the article by deleting the words “except with the approval of Parliament” in clause (3). 

The committee recommends that proposals under clauses 15, 17 and 18 be rejected for reasons given in detail above. 

Appointment of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General 
 
Clauses 19 and 20 of the Bill propose to amend Articles 119 and 119A of the Constitution. 

Clause 19 proposes to amend Article 119 by requiring the Attorney-General to be appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission with approval of Parliament.

The committee recommends that the proposal in clauses 19 and 20 be rejected since it poses a number of legal and constitutional challenges as explained above. 

Public Service Commission and Determination of Salaries of Public Officers 

The Bill proposes to make various amendments to Articles 165, 166 and 172 of the Constitution. 

The committee recommends that the amendment proposed to the Constitution in clauses 21, 22 and 23 be rejected since they are redundant. They do not uniformly apply to all other constitutional commissions and they interfere with the executive authority of the President. 

Creation of City Land Boards 

The Bill proposes, in clause 28, to insert a new Article 241A in the Constitution to provide for the creation of city land boards for each city. 

The committee recommends that clause 29, as proposed, stands part of the Bill. 

Madam Speaker, we know that we have several cities now and more are coming. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to lay on the Table the report of the committee. The minority report is attached, signed by three members - hon. Medard Lubega Sseggona, hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda, and hon. Asuman Basalirwa, the President of JEEMA. 

I would like to also lay on the Table a copy of the main report of the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019 and the minutes of the proceedings of the meeting on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill 2019. 

For the record, the office of the Attorney-General and the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs is mandated to respond to this matter. We made several attempts and they probably did not have time to reply. I see them here today. So, they might have the chance to reply. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Chairperson of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and the members of the committee for that comprehensive report on that Bill.

Can I now invite the movers of the minority report to make their presentation before the Attorney-General or other stakeholders can speak to the Bill. 

5.42
MR ASUMAN BASALIRWA (JEEMA, Bugiri Municipality, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the comprehensive report of the majority. However, with the greatest respect, we wish to defer from the majority’s position by presenting a minority report of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs on the Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2019.

I will adopt the style of the chairperson. I will not read the entire report; I will just consider some background information on every point and the recommendations because the report is with us.

The objectives of the Bill have been highlighted and I would like to focus on the points of dissent, and that is point No. 4.0. The points of dissent relate to the following areas: 

(a) 	Removal of the army representatives from Parliament; 
(b) 	Declaration of ministers, Attorney-General, Deputy Attorney-General and Vice-President as ex officio Members of Parliament; (c) Appointment of the Clerk to Parliament; 
(d) 	Qualifications of the Electoral Commission; 
(e) 	Abolition of the Office of the Prime Minister; and 
(f) 	Abolition of the office of RDCs.

Madam Speaker, this part of the report gives a critical analysis and basis for dissent in regard to the amendments proposed and adopted by the committee.

Removal of Army representatives from Parliament

Clause 3 of the Bill proposes to amend Article 78 of the Constitution by repealing paragraph (c). The proposal will have the effect of removing the army from being represented in Parliament. The committee examined the proposals made by the Bill and rejected the proposals and recommended as highlighted by the main report.

The minority disagree with the majority’s position on two major grounds. The first ground is that the committee’s position will have the effect of creating a distinct and lower class of membership in the same Parliament, a position we feel is contrary to the provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution.

What happens to the people they represent? The minority note that removing voting rights from Members representing the UPDF while maintaining the same rights for other special interest groups will be viewed to be discriminatory and may be challenged before courts of law. (Applause) The minority note that the UPDF is a representative constituency like any other in Uganda, therefore its representatives in Parliament cannot be granted less rights than are enjoyed by all other Members of Parliament.

The minority further note that the proposal of the committee to maintain army representatives in Parliament enables army representatives, who are serving members of the UPDF, to participate and take part in partisan discussions and decisions contrary to the commands of Article 208 of the Constitution. It is axiomatic that political representation is by politicians and not technocrats. Soldiers, in our view, are technocrats.

Furthermore, the minority observe that since the adoption of the multiparty dispensation and political system in Uganda, army representatives have no business in Parliament. The minority observe that since the adoption of multiparty politics in Uganda, Parliament operates on partisanship basis and the decisions of the House are based on the aspirations and ideals of a particular political orientation. In that regard, therefore, the UPDF cannot be maintained in a partisan House, yet by the command of Article 208, they are individually, as representatives, and collectively, as an institution, required to be non-partisan.

Indeed, the minority are aware that Article 208 (1) of the Constitution establishes the UPDF and commands it in clause (2) of the same Article to be non-partisan, national in character, patriotic, professional, disciplined, productive and subordinate to the civilian authority as established in the Constitution. 

The minority note that having the UPDF maintained in a partisan House like this Parliament and taking part in partisan decisions contradicts the dictates of Article 208 of the Constitution as well as the conventions of political norms, which Article commands the army to show complete neutrality and impartiality on political matters. 

We, therefore, recommend that army representatives be removed from Parliament as proposed in the Bill and the committee’s proposals be rejected.

Manner of Appointment of Deputy President

The Bill, in clauses 7, 8 and 12, makes various amendments to Article 98, Article 100 and Article 108 of the Constitution. In Article 98 and Article 100, the Bill proposes to change the nomenclature from “Vice-President” to “Deputy President”. The minority note that the proposal to have a Deputy President was rejected by the committee, a matter that the minority disagrees with.

The minority support the proposal to have a Deputy President rather than a Vice-President. The minority note that having a Deputy President has advantages over having a Vice-President. The minority note that whereas the Vice-President is appointed by the President and can be removed from that office any time, the Deputy President cannot be removed since he or she was also on the ballot of the President. This grants security of tenure to the Deputy President, thereby ensuring that in the discharge of the functions of the office, the President can get independent advice and assistance from the Deputy President.

The minority are also aware that there are instances where the Vice-President may occupy the office of the President and exercise executive authority bestowed on that office. These instances are where the President resigns from office, is dead or is removed from office under Article 105 (2) and Article 107. In such a situation, a Vice-President may occupy the office of the President and exercise executive function, yet that person was not elected by the people of Uganda. 

The minority are of the considered opinion that having a Deputy President on the same ticket as the President will give the people of Uganda advance notice of the person who is likely to take over the Government in case the President ceases, for any reason, to occupy the office of the President. This will enable the people of Uganda to pass judgment on both the presidential candidate and running mate.

The minority are also aware that the people of Uganda, during the Constitution-making process, had recommended that the President of Uganda should be deputised by a Deputy President who should possess the same qualifications as the President and should be included on the same ballot paper as the President.

Recommendations

In light of the above, the minority recommend that the proposals contained in the Bill in relation to changing the nomenclature from “Vice-President” to “Deputy President” be adopted.

Manner of Appointment of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General

The minority observe that the majority report rejected the proposal to have the appointment of the Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General changed as proposed by the Bill. 

The minority observe that currently, Article 119 and Article 119A of the Constitution create the offices of Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General respectively, and require the occupants to be Cabinet Minister and Minister respectively, and to be appointed by the President with the approval of Parliament. It is important to note that the Constitution currently does not impose any term limits on the occupants of those offices. 

The minority note that both the Attorney-General and the Deputy Attorney-General are drawn from Members of Parliament, sit in Cabinet and are Cabinet ministers. The manner of appointment makes the persons who occupy the offices of Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General, and the fact that such persons are members of Cabinet compromise the quality of the advice given by the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General, and also their professionalism and independence.

The minority also note since the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General are Cabinet ministers and are usually politicians, they are unable to give independent and professional advice to Cabinet and Parliament.

Furthermore, the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General have dual and conflicting loyalties, since they are part of Cabinet while at the same time are the principal advisers to Government, which Parliament and the Judiciary forms a part of. These cannot, therefore, give independent advice to Parliament or the other arm of Government since they are bound by Cabinet collective responsibility.

The dual loyalties of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General has made the advice given by the Attorney-General to the other arms of Government to always be taken with suspicion since they assume that the Attorney-General or Deputy Attorney-General are normally skewed towards the interests of the government of the day.

The current manner of choosing the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General infringes on the doctrine of separation of powers since they are both members of two arms of Government, being the Executive and the Legislature, yet the two arms of Government are supposed to be separate in the performance of their functions.

The minority recommends that the proposal by the committee be rejected and the proposals in the Bill are upheld since they result in independent, professional, accountable and effective offices of the Attorney-General and Deputy Attorney-General.

Abolition of the Office of the Prime Minister 

The minority notes that the majority rejected the proposal to abolish the office of the Prime Minister and recommended that the status quo be maintained. 

The minority disagrees with the recommendation of the majority since the practice of having the Prime Minister operates where they are using a parliamentary system. In a parliamentary system, the elected party with the majority elects the Prime Minister and forms the Government with the executive powers. It becomes irregular, redundant, to have a Prime Minster and the Vice-President or Deputy President in the same country. The proposal is a duplication of roles and justifiably increases public expenditure and creates an office whose occupant has no real power.

In the circumstances, the minority recommends that the Office of the Prime Minister be abolished as proposed in the Bill, since the office is redundant in light of the existence of the Vice-President in Parliament and the Government Chief Whip; also, in light of the fact that such an office does not possess any real executive authority since the same is granted to the President by the Constitution.

Appointment of the Clerk to Parliament

The Bill, in clause 6, proposes to amend Article 87 of the Constitution by requiring that the Clerk to Parliament is appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Commission.

The committee rejected the proposal to have the Clerk to Parliament appointed on the recommendation of the Parliamentary Commission, with the justification that the Clerk to Parliament is an accounting officer and appointing him or her in a manner proposed in the Bill will create a distinction between the Clerk to Parliament and other accounting officers.

The minority disagrees with the proposal of the committee. Currently, Article 87 is to the effect that the Clerk to Parliament is appointed by the President on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission. In appointing the Clerk to Parliament, the President is not guided on the qualifications or other attributes of such a person. 

Appointing the Clerk to Parliament in a manner proposed in the Bill will enhance the independence of Parliament and further entrench separation of powers by ensuring that Parliament has a say in the appointment of the Clerk to Parliament, unlike now where it has no say in who and how a person is appointed Clerk to Parliament.

Furthermore, the provision will ensure that the Clerk to Parliament is able to fully be accountable to Parliament since he or she is appointed through a process that the institution of Parliament has participated in.

Currently, since the Clerk to Parliament is appointed by President, there is a high chance that such a person has dual loyalty arising from serving one institution while being appointed by another power centre. 

This proposal should be supported since it is in line with international best practices on the appointment of Clerks to Parliament under national assemblies world over, especially in Commonwealth countries. In these assemblies, the relevant Parliament or national assembly has a say in the appointment of the Clerk. 

Under the Constitution of Kenya, for instance, the clerks of the National Assembly and Senate are appointed by the Parliamentary Service Commission with the approval of the National Assembly or Senate. In Ghana, the Clerk to Parliament is appointed by the Parliamentary Service Board, which is equivalent to our Parliamentary Commission. In Nigeria, the Clerk is appointed by the President in consultation with the Senators.

In light of the above, the minority report recommends that clause 6 is adopted and stands as part of the Bill and the committee’s proposal be rejected. We beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, movers of the minority report, for your distinct positions. The report is lengthy and the minority report is equally lengthy. I am not sure – Originally, the chairperson had requested for adequate time to discuss this matter. 

THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I arise on a procedural matter. Given the fact that even zoom is not working and yet coronavirus is still a problem with us, I request that we shelve this and have it discussed at a time that we are able to realise two-thirds majority of Members of Parliament because right now it is a problem.

I do not know whether we should debate and shelve or shelve it and then debate in the near future when Members of Parliament will be here in big numbers. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Bring 233 members to sit here! The voting is part of the debate. Her worry is that under the circumstances, where we have only 80 Members sitting here because of the COVID-19 issue, how do we get the other 200 members to sit? That is her worry. I do not know what the Government side has to say.

6.02
THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Jackson Kafuuzi): Madam Speaker, this is a submission we had prepared, as a ministry, to table before the committee of Parliament; will you allow me to present the same to Parliament?

THE SPEAKER: Were you not able to appear before the committee? Did you not appear?

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, I do not know if my colleague was able to appear but I personally was not able to appear. The chairperson can maybe –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Oboth, did the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs appear?

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs were invited severally but they were not able to get the opportunity to appear. (Laughter) I am trying to be very diplomatic. (Laughter)

MR KAFUUZI: Madam Speaker, with me, I have a submission that was meant to be presented before that committee, meaning that probably, there was no opportunity for us to appear for one reason or another, which I am not able to tell you now. That notwithstanding, I would humbly request that you let us make this submission because it is one and the same that we would still make about this matter here.

THE SPEAKER: No. I think the Attorney-General can only come in after we have debated.

MR KAFUUZI: Most obliged.

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I did not want to call a whole Attorney-General out of order. However, I would like to draw the attention of the House on a point of procedure.

As Parliament, we cannot digest the submission that the Attorney-General wants to make. We have a specialised committee to look at your submission, analyse it and bring it to us in Parliament. I think it is wrong for the Attorney-General to attempt to smuggle his submission to Parliament, when we actually had a properly appointed committee to look into the intricacies and professionalism of the nature of his presentation and bring it to us in a manner that we can actually put together with the report of the committee and that of the minority report.

Madam Speaker, I think, procedurally, you can guide us or guide the Attorney-General to know where to go with his submission. I do not think this Parliament is competent enough to handle his submission at this stage.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will have to give a ruling on the point raised by the Leader of the Opposition as to the procedure, taking into account the circumstances. I will give some guidance tomorrow on how we will proceed with this issue. 

Let us go to the report on trade. We had already taken a second reading. We are waiting for the report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE ACCREDITATION FOR CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BILL, 2018

THE SPEAKER: Did you move for the second reading? We are to receive the report now. Where is hon. Sebunya to present the report of the committee?

MS KYAMBADDE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that the chairperson presents. 

6.07
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Robert Kasule Sebunya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry on the Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill, 2018. I beg that I read the summary.

We met all stakeholders and the Bill is somewhat technical. I can start from point No. 2.1.

Benefits of Accreditation

1. 	To improve the competitiveness of the country’s goods and services in regional and international markets, through standards harmonisation. 

2. 	Accreditation is an internationally recognised stamp of approval, demonstrating compliance with agreed standards and requirements. No country has achieved the middle-income status without a robust national infrastructure, of which accreditation services are a key pillar.

3. 	Accreditation leads to provision of quality goods and services to consumers and thus, promotes their health and safety. This is due to the fact that quality of goods and services has been tested, inspected and certified. This boosts public confidence in the country’s goods and services.

4. 	Through accreditation, the technical competence of conformity assessment bodies in the country is determined. This will go a long way in deciding the specific types of conformity assessment Conformity Assessment Bodies (CABs) can undertake.

5. 	Enhancement of bilateral and multi-lateral international trade agreements due to the provision of an acceptable quality of goods and services amongst the trade partners.

6. 	Accreditation is an effective marketing tool for testing, calibration and measurement of organisations and a passport to submit tenders to contractors that require independently verifiable conformity assessment bodies which are competent.

7. 	Accreditation can be used to attract foreign direct investments in the free export zones or free trade zones. This will arise due to the fact that the exports of a particular country enjoy credibility in the procedures and practices.

8. 	Lastly, conformity demonstrates due diligence in the event of legal action. The trade environment is fluid, with the potential of legal suits anytime and under any circumstance. A legal suit can be worth millions of shillings or dollars and may lead to the collapse of a company. When properly implemented, accreditation takes care of technical details, thus reducing the potential for legal action or boosting the possibility of putting up a strong defence.

Madam Speaker, I can now go to the objective of the Bill.

1. 	To establish the Uganda national accreditation system, which shall be responsible for carrying out accreditation in respect of conformity, assessment and calibration;

2. 	To provide for an internationally recognised national accreditation system as a crucial element of a well-functioning technical infrastructure that is aligned with international best practices; 

3. 	To provide a supportive legal environment for accreditation of conformity assessment and calibration;  

4. 	To promote competence and equivalence of accredited persons;  

5. 	Ensure that the national accreditation system supports the needs of Uganda’s enterprises competing in the global economy; and 

6. 	Promote accreditation as a means of facilitating international trade, enhancing economic performance and transforming and supporting public policy objectives in terms of health and safety matters.

In the process of considering the Bill, we met with officials from the following entities: 

    1. Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; 
    2. Ministry of Works and Transport;
    3. Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development;
    4. Department of Government Analytical Laboratories; 
    5. National Agricultural Research Organisation; 
    6. Uganda National Oil Company; 
    7. Southern and Eastern Trade and Information and Negotiations Institute; 
    8. Initiative for Social and Economic Rights; 
    9. Kampala City Council Authority; 
    10. Uganda Scientists, Researchers and Allied Workers Union; 
    11. Uganda Law Reform Commission;
    12. National Information Technology Authority; 
    13. Institute of Surveyors of Uganda; and 
    14. Uganda Industrial Research Institute.  

This law will put in place a system that will verify all our laboratories in the medical, trade and infrastructure departments. 

Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that the title, “Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill” is not inclusive of all the components and types of accreditation. Conformity assessment is just one type of accreditation. There are many other components or types of accreditation and services, which are envisaged to be provided once the Bill is put into law. 

The committee recommends that the title of the Bill be changed to “Accreditation Services Bill”, which will eventually be the Accreditation Services Act, to reflect on the wide scope. 

Inadequate Certificate of Financial Implications 

I think that one was cleared. At that time, it was not cleared. The committee had recommended that they re-submit a certificate of financial implications and they have done so. 

The Composition of the Board

According to the Bill, the board of the national accreditation body shall be composed of representatives from the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives; Ministry of Health; Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; conformity assessment bodies in the country; the academia; consumers; and the executive director.

The committee noted that the composition of the board will not be representative enough in relation to the wide scope and object of the Bill. The Government, as the regulator, will have more representatives in comparison to the private sector, yet Uganda’s economy is private sector led. 

Key sectors like works and transport as well as oil and gas are missing from the composition of the board. The committee further noted that the specific type of academia and consumers on the board is not clearly stated in the Bill. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that the composition of the board should be revised to include representatives in the key sectors of works and transport as well as oil and gas since they are key in implementation of the Bill once it becomes law. 

The representative of the academia should be an expert in the field of standards while the representative of consumers should be sourced from the consumer organisations. 

Appeal against the Decision of the National Accreditation Body

The Bill provides for an appeal against a decision or decisions of the national accreditation body so as to arrive at a review. The appeal should be lodged with the Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. 

The committee noted that the timelines of appeals are not indicated, which may lead to a prolonged and protracted process. 

Lodging appeals with the minister will add onto the huge workload of the minister, which he or she already has, and the minister may not have the technical expertise to handle the matter. 

There is also a possibility of a member of the appeals committee having a conflict of interest in the matter at hand. 

The committee recommends, therefore, that the timelines for the entire appeals process should be clearly stated in order to reduce uncertainty and anxiety, which may arise on the part of the aggrieved party. 

The Minister of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives should set up a three-member appeals committee to handle appeals of conformity assessment bodies, hence speed up the process. 

A member of the appeals committee should never have a conflict of interest. If they do, they should declare their interest and immediately cease to be members of the committee.

Monitoring and Evaluation of the Conformity Assessment Bodies

The committee noted that the Bill does not put in place a monitoring and evaluation framework for conformity assessment bodies, yet it is a key factor in ensuring that the accredited bodies adhere to the set standards. Monitoring and evaluation of adherence to set standards will further increase public confidence in accredited products and services from the country. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill should provide for representatives of the national accreditation body to have access to, with or without notice, any facility for calibration, testing, verification, inspection and certification as well as the existing data and materials. It will go a long way in strengthening the supervision function with Government in force. Therefore, they should be given security when going to these facilities.

Affiliates of Accredited Institutions

The committee noted that the Bill is silent on the relationship between accredited institutions and their affiliates. This is unrealistic given the practical reality on the ground where affiliates may enjoy the same privileges as their parent companies. Accreditation is a quality assurance mechanism and as such, it needs to be done on a case-by-case basis. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the affiliates of accredited institutions should be accredited individually instead of relying on the accreditation of their parent company.

In conclusion, the need for a national accreditation body in Uganda cannot be underrated since it would go a long way in promoting and boosting international and regional trade. This calls for setting up of an independent technical institution, which would be assisted by experts from various fields from time to time when need arises.

When we want to test products in our organisations, we take them to South Africa. There is one company called South African National Accreditation System (SANAS) from South Africa. They take money in dollars. So, we export dollars, which we would have used here. Once we pass this Bill, there is even going to be more specialised employment; our scientists shall get employed. As a result, we will not lose our dollars in exporting jobs. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Accreditation for Conformity Assessment Bill, 2018 be passed into law, subject to approval of these amendments. I beg to move. 

I also do have records of the minutes and I beg to lay them on the Table. Thank you. There is no minority report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the members of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Cooperatives. The report has been signed by the minimum number of members required. You are free to debate. I do not know whether we should start debate now or do it tomorrow. 

Honourable members, it is half past six now. I advise that we go read the report and internalise it because it is a technical Bill, so that tomorrow we are able to discuss it from a point of knowledge. Is that okay, honourable members? At 10.00 a.m., we have the special sitting relating to those big people. We shall, however, convene at 2.00 p.m. So, you have enough time to read the report. 

We have a tribute to Dr Sarah Ntiro, Bisaka, the god of Bunyoro, and the Umukuka of the Bamasaba. So, we have three tributes in the morning and in the afternoon, we shall have our ordinary session. I informed Government that the Ikumbania of Bugwere has died, but I am waiting for them to guide us on how to move. Tomorrow, we will have those three I mentioned at 10 o’clock. Please, come early and we finish by 1.00 p.m. so that we are ready for the afternoon. House is adjourned to 10 o’clock in the morning. Thank you.

(The House rose at 6.22 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 10 February 2021 at 10.00 a.m.)

