PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES(HANSARD)OFFICIAL REPORTTHIRD SESSION - THIRD MEETINGTUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA12002THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024Tuesday, 27 February 2024because we are doing what we are mandated to do as per the Constitution - oversight. Government, you need to guide us. Should we just sit here, appropriate money, we do not see what is being done and call it a day? Remember, this is taxpayers’ money that we must account for. Yesterday, I also received a petition from the tea growers, promoters and processors from Tooro Region, led by the District Chairperson of Kabarole, that is, Mr Richard, who is also the Chairperson of Uganda Local Governments Association ( ULGA) . The petition looked at the challenges faced by the tea sector, whereby farmers have started cutting down tea plantations because there is no market, no quality control and no herbicides for tea growers. There is no legal framework or policy in place for these tea growers. Unlike Uganda Coffee Development Authority (UCDA) - for coffee and cotton. These people want a remedy and it is only this Parliament that can give that remedy. The leader from Tooro will present this petition as per Rule 30(3) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. On a rather sad note, on Sunday, we received with deep sorrow, the news of the murder by shooting, of the Head of the Ndiga  Clan of Buganda, Dr Eng. Daniel Bbosa Lwomwa. I would like to call upon the relevant security agencies to thoroughly investigate the cause of this incident. IN THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDAOfficial Report of the Proceedings of ParliamentTHIRD SESSION - 13TH SITTING - THIRD MEETING Parliament met at 10.02 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.PRAYERS(The Speaker, Ms Anita Annet Among, in the Chair.)The House was called to order.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIRTHE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I welcome you to this morning session. I am surprised that some Members have not yet arrived. I know that they are in the committees, but we want them in the House too because we have a clarification that we need to make to the committees that they are sitting in. As part of accountability for the money that we give out to Government institutions and as per Article 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995, it is prudent enough that we do our oversight role as Parliament by ensuring that we follow-up on how much money has been given to an institution, how much has been used and whether there is value for money.Based on that, yesterday, the Leader of the Opposition led a team to one of the institutions that we are giving money, that is Lubowa Hospital. To my surprise, I am told, which I am here to confirm, that the team was denied access to see what is happening where our money has gone. That was very unfortunate 12003THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024In addition, Police should make sure that all the CCTV cameras that have been installed are operational. We may be just looking at them when they are not working, so that we can be able to follow up incidents from the start.I would like to urge Ugandans who can afford CCTV cameras to equally install cameras around their homes. However, Government should also come up with an incentive by reducing the cost of the cameras so that everybody can have them. Thank you for coming. We are going to look at rationalisation. We will look at the Bills, but there are two clarifications that we need. One, on Certificate of Financial Implications and that should come from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Planning. Two, a clarification on the titling of these Bills done by the Attorney-General, Thank you. 10.11MR HILLARY LOKWANG  (NRM, Ik County, Kaabong):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I can see that the quorum is not enough in the House. How shall we be able to handle the Bills when there are not enough Members even from the Opposition side? THE SPEAKER:  The Members are coming. Do not worry about quorum. Whoever is trying to demobilise so that we do not have quorum is wasting his or her time. It will be there and we will rationalise. 10.12MR GABRIEL OKUMU  (NRM, Okoro County, Zombo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. Emanating from your communication, I would like to send condolences from the people of Okoro Constituency to the family of the leader of the Ndiga  Clan. It is very regrettable and the people of Uganda should not take the law in their own hands. We should, generally, detest the murder of our citizens in cold blood. Secondly, Madam Speaker, in your communication, you mentioned that the Leader of the Opposition visited Lubowa Hospital. It is in the interest of Ugandans that the hospital be completed and be able to serve Ugandans. The Government should know that Parliament is an arm of Government and that, together, we shall make our country successful and achieve its objectives.On the same note, we come from West Nile. Recently, they were working on Karuma Dam, which crosses into West Nile and northern Uganda. However, the alternative route is in Buliisa, through Murchison Falls. When we use the road made by the Government of Uganda – as Members of Parliament, we go to our constituencies to do our oversight role.Madam Speaker, this thing has been mentioned on this Floor. However, I would like to ask your indulgence that as we keep on crossing, at least, as Members of Parliament, the Government should allow us to cross that road without paying. We cross, weekend in and weekend out, yet it takes some big amount of money from us. I would like to ask, through your big office, for the Government to have mercy on us, especially Members of Parliament. Thank you very much for the opportunity. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, don’t you want to pay as Members of Parliament or members of the public?  MR OKUMU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  By the way, you must know that there is an alternative route. However, what I am asking is: don’t you want to pay as Members of Parliament or you are pleading for the public – the people that you represent? MR OKUMU:  Madam Speaker, there are two scenarios here. First of all, we have had instances where our roads are blocked and we cannot use Karuma Road because of flooding. People travelling in those vehicles, even in such an emergency, are asked to pay when they are using the alternative route, which is there. Secondly, Madam Speaker, in this particular matter, I want to address the plight of the Members of Parliament because if we move even across the park, we are doing our oversight 12004THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024role and it would be procedurally right that you pronounce yourself on this. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us be mindful of the public, not for ourselves. It is about the people that we represent and we should be legislating for the people that we represent – the people who sent us to this House. On the issue of the murders, Ugandans need to be tolerant. Let us accept to live with each other, irrespective of whatever problems that could be there. Killing is not a solution. To the people of Buganda, the  Ndiga  Clan, the Chairperson of Buganda Parliamentary Caucus and, generally, the people of Uganda, as Parliament of Uganda, we bring in our condolence on the loss of the clan leader. Please, accept our condolences. We are with you in this trying time. Yes, Hon. Solomon -10.12MR SOLOMON SILWANY (NRM, Bukooli County Central, Bugiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communication. My area of interest in your communication is the issue of cameras. The Government committed itself to Parliament that they were going to put cameras everywhere. I remember that in the last Parliament, it was supposed to be done in phases.The question I want to ask the Prime Minister is: when is the last phase being done? There are still very critical areas that do not have cameras up to-date, yet we agreed here, in Parliament, that all areas would be covered in phases because the budget was inadequate at that time. THE SPEAKER:  First of all, as I said before, we need to find out whether all the cameras are working and then we can go on to a rollover for the next areas. Prime Minister?10.18THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to condole with the people of the  Ndiga  Clan for the loss of our brother. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I have said all that on behalf of the Office of the Prime Minister and the Government of the Republic of Uganda. We are sorry about what happened, but I know the culprits - since we have some, even the rest will be got. Madam Speaker, on the issue of cameras, I am going to call the Minister of Information, Communications Technology (ICT) and National Guidance –THE SPEAKER:  The Minister of Internal Affairs.MS NAKADAMA: Yes, and the Minister of Internal Affairs. Of course, they are working together with the ICT minister -(Interjections)-  okay, the Minister of Internal Affairs. He will come and give us a brief on how much area has been covered and what is remaining. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Member for workers - (Members rose_)  - you will all speak. 10.20MS MARGRET RWABUSHAIJA (Inde -pendent, Workers’ Representative):  Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your communica -tion. I am concerned about the oversight re -sponsibility. It looks like it is slipping out of our hands. Therefore, we need to demand, once again and let the other organs know that we are still Members of Parliament and it is our re -sponsibility.It was very disheartening when I saw, on television, a big team of Members of Parliament who were denied entry. That was belittling Parliament. At the same time, it reminded me about the English that we used to study when we were in primary school, when we talked [Mr Okumu] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12005THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024about imaginary ghosts. I think they are sealing it off that nobody should go there because it is a ghost.We do not know what is happening. If there was work going on, then, there would be nothing to fear. Also, coming when they are armed yet our Members of Parliament are not armed, is threatening. One of these days, we might hear that a Member of Parliament has been shot. Therefore, something must be done to make sure that we are safe. We should know that some of our responsibilities are slipping out of our hands. I am looking at you, Madam Speaker and I thank you for being able to point it out.THE SPEAKER:  I want to find out from the Attorney-General: is oversight still part of the roles of Parliament or it was scrapped off?10.22THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The last time I checked, it was still on the Statute book. (Laughter)  The only way it can be removed is through this House. I have been here often lately and I have not seen any such amendment. Therefore, the oversight role of Parliament still exists. Thank you. 10.23MR EMMANUEL ONGIERTHO (FDC, Jonam County, Pakwach):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We may have to repeat this Lubowa incident because it is not the first time Parliament is going there and it is denied entry. I remember some time back, the Committee on Health went and they were denied entry. The question we should ask ourselves is: is this facility there? Is it being constructed? The answer the Government should give is yes or no so that if we have to forget about it, we forget about it. Otherwise, Madam Speaker, as the people of Jonam, we condole with the Ndiga  Clan for the murder of their head.  What pains me is that in this country, we value human beings less. In other countries, one death alone can cause a lot of problems. Yet here, people die and in one or two days, everybody has forgotten. Nobody cares what happens.  For instance - what I am saying is not in your communication, but look at the death, which happened on Jinja Road. It is very painful. That accident - I know they are saying one person died and many were injured, but from the pictures, you could see probably more people died. So, let us value life as much as possible.When we are talking about Lubowa, we are still talking about the value of life. So, when Members of Parliament are denied, then somebody needs to answer.  I want to repeat that the answer I want to hear is whether this facility is there or not. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as you have heard from the Attorney-General, for the time he has been here, no amendment has taken place on the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. Our role is to do oversight. Can we find out from the Government why we are not being allowed to carry out our role in a facility where Parliament has put tax payers’ money?10.25THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, it is sad that Members of Parliament were denied entry to Lubowa. I am going to look into this matter with the Minister of Health because Members had a letter from the Ministry of Health.  We are going to look into the matter so that Members can access that area. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, when you look at Article 164(3) which is on accountability, it says, “ Parliament shall monitor all expenditure of public funds ”.  The word is “Shall” not “May” and we are not asking for too much.  We are actually helping you.12006THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024When you look at the letter from the Minister of Health, the minister just told the Leader of the Opposition, “I wish you good luck”. What does that mean? Hon. Allan -10.27MR ALLAN MAYANJA (NUP, Nakaseke Central County, Nakaseke):  Thank you, Madam Speaker for this opportunity.THE SPEAKER:  I am coming to all of you.MR MAYANJA:  My concern is about the death of Eng. Daniel Bbosa, the leader of Ndiga  Clan. Madam Speaker, you have guided that the responsible office should carry out a thorough investigation and I concur with you. However, the ministers responsible should also come to this Parliament and give us an update because we have had many killings like Jajja Iculi, the minister, but we have never got any update.I think it would be procedurally right for the ministers responsible specifically, the Minister, Office of the President (Security) and the Minister of Internal Affairs to come before this Parliament and give us an update in that regard. THE SPEAKER:  Can we have a report on the killings?  You have even been investigating and nobody has reported about Jajja  Iculi; nobody has reported about a number of those that have been shot. We want a report on the Floor.  Just as Eng. Daniel has been shot is the same way any of us can be shot.  (Member rose_) He has not finished.MR MAYANJA:  Madam Speaker, lastly, about Lubowa, I suggest you appoint a select committee and assign it special powers to investigate this matter because it has been an issue since 2018, yet Parliament is pumping a lot of money into that facility. Yesterday, we were there –THE SPEAKER:  I am going to assign the Deputy Speaker to go to Lubowa with a team on Wednesday.  (Applause)  On Wednesday, the Deputy Speaker will go to Lubowa and they will give us a report.MR MAYANJA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Ibrahim – 10.29MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso:  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The reason I was raising a point of procedure earlier was because during the consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper, I did ask the Chairperson of the Committee on Health why he was not reporting on Lubowa. Hon. Dr Ayume told the Committee on Budget that Lubowa has since then been moved to the Office of the Prime Minister. It is no longer under the Ministry of Health. He said it.  If there are other members of the Committee on Budget, they can bear witness. I am now shocked, Madam Speaker, that the Prime Minister says, “I am going to consult the Minister of Health.” Maybe, she meant another person because Hon. Dr Ayume said that in our committee and if you read the report of the Committee on Health, there is nothing about Lubowa. However, of interest to this Parliament - If you read the report of the Auditor-General, he reports that while the Government is supposed to have a resident engineer, that angel called Pinetti has since chased the resident engineer. Her resident engineer is the one submitting requisitions to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to pay and the Auditor-General said that they have actually paid over $70 million for no work that has been certified. That is the report of the Auditor-General.I feel sad because Hon. Bahati was here putting the whole Parliament “at gunpoint” to approve this promissory note immediately.[The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12007THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024THE SPEAKER:  Where was the gun? [Member: “Here”] No, let it be on record that there was no gun on the Floor because nobody is allowed to carry a gun. MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you will forgive me.  I am -THE SPEAKER:  Let us change the language.  He was either spitting fire or - but Hon. Bahati did not have a gun. MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, forgive my language. I am a journalist. If people do not pick it immediately, I withdraw. THE SPEAKER: Okay.MR SSEMUJJU : The point I made was that Hon. Bahati who was at that time representing the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development all the time said, “we must approve this loan request today, immediately, or else we are going to begin paying fines” and that project was supposed to have been constructed under 48 months, but it is now five years.I think there should be a time when these people are being matched to Luzira like it happened when Amin was removed. Hon. Bahati’s warrant in Luzira should find him at the gate. Madam Speaker, how do we continue sitting here when he told Parliament, “if we did not pass this, we were going to begin paying fines.” How come the one violating the contract is not paying fines?  THE SPEAKER:  There is a point of order.MR BAHATI:  Madam Speaker, Hon. Ssemujju was here when we were approving this Budget. All of us looked at the objectives of this project, which was to have a specialised hospital in Uganda to stop medical tourism. All of us approved of this. To inform Hon. Ssemujju, when the House takes a decision, he is bound by that decision. Yes, and if he does not approve of it, he knows the rules. The House is playing its oversight role and you have appointed the Deputy Speaker to go there; is he in order to put a situation that I am responsible for what is happening in Lubowa when we have a whole Ministry of Health supervising this project?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the responsibility is a collective one for the House and not a personal one. However, there is something that needs to be clarified, where they said that it ceased to be under the Ministry of Health and it went to the Prime Minister’s Office. Is that true?10.34THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, as far as I am concerned, hospitals belong to the Ministry of Health. I do not know when and where that guideline was passed that Lubowa Hospital should be – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable Prime Minister, Lubowa is not a hospital; it is a construction site. It is a project for a hospital, but not yet a hospital. I do not know whether it is finished or whichever because nobody can access it. You need to clarify and guide us.MS NAKADAMA:  Madam Speaker, that is what I was trying to say; that I have never heard of that project being taken over by the Prime Minister’s Office. As far as I know, it is being supervised by the Ministry of Health. That is why the Leader of the Opposition, Honourable – yes, he went to the Minister of Health and she is the one that gave him that letter. Thank you.MR SSEMUJJU:  Let me conclude my submission on this matter. THE SPEAKER:  You mean you had not finished.MR SSEMUJJU:  Yes, the Chairperson of the Committee on Health is a Member of this Parliament, he can be contacted because that is what he said in the Committee on Budget. 12008THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024Finally, Madam Speaker, on your communication about the death of the Ndiga Clan leader, I saw initially part of the security blaming the boda  boda  riders who chased the suspects and killed some of them. My issue and I think colleagues who are responsible for security should help us understand how someone can be shot and for three kilometres or more, it is the Wananchi  chasing after the suspects and there are no police, no Internal Security Organisation (ISO) or anybody in the middle of Kampala City. The murder happened in broad daylight because he was shot before 6.00 p.m. and it was the Wananchi  chasing the suspects and because of their anger and lack of training, they did what they did.  Can we be told where the security is if a murder can happen in the Capital City and for three kilometres, there are no soldiers and no policemen yet when the Leader of the Opposition reports at Lubowa, every minute there is a clan of security people reporting; Police, Prison, Special Forces Command? Why are they not there when people are vulnerable and helpless, but rush to where the Leader of the Opposition is inspecting and doing his oversight work? THE SPEAKER:  We would like to thank the civilians for being vigilant. All of us should be vigilant. Those people did a good job of chasing these suspects for three to five kilometres. Yes, there is a procedural matter from Hon. P.P. Okin. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, I have seen you.MR OKIN:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have lamented a lot on the issue of gun violence in this country and we do not have any more time to go on lamenting. I would like to move that we have a substantive motion to debate, discuss and resolve the issue of gun violence. Waiting for the reports and investigations that never come yet we continue experiencing death through gun violence - I would like to know whether it is not procedurally right for us to have a substantive motion put before this House that is debated to have this issue sorted once and for all. That is the procedural matter I would like to raise. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, that is not a procedural matter. Put the House on notice as per Rule 56 of the Rules of Procedure. It is not a procedural matter.MR OKIN:  Madam Speaker, I am more than willing to bring that motion in this House so that we can debate the issue of gun violence once and for all. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Kivumbi – 10.40MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala):  Madam Speaker, on behalf of Members of Parliament from Buganda, we pay our condolences. We have lost very many people in this country. I was a shadow Minister for Internal Affairs for quite some time and I tried to follow up on the murders in this country. Even when we were going to move a motion after the death of Assistant Inspector General of Police (AIGP) Kaweesi, the President of Uganda addressed a session of Parliament and outlined ten measures that were to be taken. At the end of it all, he pledged that murders would be no more. I cannot remember how many motions have been moved in this Parliament on murders, but they have continued. Even as we praise the public for pursuit, we need to further investigate that because there is a possibility of cover-up in the pursuit as the assailants are about to be captured so that the case dies at that point, executed in the mob justice, complicating matters of investigation.Madam Speaker, no single case has been exhaustively executed, even the one of Kagezi. It is only recently that we have seen the actual people being brought to book. We are losing very many people that we may reach a level where we implore the President of Uganda to come back to Parliament and account for the ten measures that were undertaken. Why? We have allocated billions of money in cameras, billions of money in classified expenditure yet our people continue to die.[Mr Ssemujju] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12009THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024On Lubowa matters, as the Chairperson of the Committee on Public Accounts, I have looked at it and I have already summoned witnesses from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to appear before the committee. There are small matters to sort out as well. You are also aware that the Auditor-General did a special investigation on Lubowa Hospital. I have been –(Interjections)  - yes, the committee, while handing over the Auditor-General’s report, he said it was complete.THE SPEAKER: Did they allow them in? MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  What? THE SPEAKER:  Were they allowed in, the Auditor-General? MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI:  According to the Auditor-General’s report, they were allowed in and did a thorough investigation. We are asking is that the Auditor-General produces that report to you.Therefore, while we are considering this matter  –(Interjection)  yes, while we are considering this matter, we can also look at the special report of the Auditor-General that he has carried out on Lubowa Hospital. If I utter the details I have read, I will bias the investigations of the matter before me. With interest, we immediately demand that special report.The Auditor-General is denying that it is not yet ready and not yet final, but while presenting the Auditor-General’s report, he said it was ready. We need it to complete this process.THE SPEAKER: Okay. Clerk, can you make a follow up with the Auditor-General’s Office? We need a report for us to know what is happening. Hon. Betty, Hon.  Semakula, Dr Abed, Hon. Gorreth -10.44MS BETTY AOL (FDC, Woman Representative, Gulu City):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of Acholi and my behalf, we condole with the Baganda on the brutal death of a leader and an engineer. I would like to say that I condemn this brutal death. I condemn it properly. We need to do a lot more so that this stops.I want to comment on the stopping of people from entering Lubowa Hospital premises. The Minister herself in the 10th Parliament was stopped. I think I am not lying. The Minister of Health was stopped from going to do her oversight role at Lubowa Hospital site. This Lubowa issue is something that is beating most of us.How I wish the President answers this. It looks like it is defeating to even the person who acts on behalf of the President, that is the Minister of Health. That is why she said, “I wish you well.”It is not only Lubowa where, especially us in the Opposition face a lot of challenges. Parliament spends some money, but when you go to do your oversight role, you are stopped.  I remember we were stopped - we were twelve Members of Parliament and we were stopped when went to do our oversight role in Apaa, by guns.If Members of Parliament can be stopped by guns, then how about the  wananchi . I wish one time the  wananchi  could get up and rise against the power of guns because power belongs to the people. They must stop killing people.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Betty, former Leader of the Opposition, do not incite violence, please. At the end of the day, you are going to lose these people and you will have lost your people. You cannot tell Members to go and just do that; no, that should not happen.MS AOL: Madam Speaker, I withdraw, but I want to just say, allow us also to do our oversight role.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, that is a constitutional mandate. Yes, Hon. Ssemakula.12010THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202410.47MR PAULSON LUTTAMAGUZI (DP, Nakaseke South County, Nakaseke ):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. You have given cameras as one of the measures to curb insecurity. As Parliament, when we debate, we should try at times to give solutions. Don’t you think it is high time Parliament investigated taxes, which are imposed on cameras that there comes a time when cameras are not taxed such that they can be -THE SPEAKER:  I said it. MR LUTTAMAGUZ: Madam Speaker, in the same vein, there are several police posts that have been removed recently from different areas of the country. Isn’t it high time that the Minister of Internal Affairs, Gen. Kahinda Otafiire restored such police posts in different areas of the country such that they can also help in covering up the insecurity?There is also another security issue we should discuss as Parliament. It is raining outside. There is what we call food security. I would wish since it has started raining, to know whether Members are going to access seeds this time. If they are not budgeted for, we find ways of getting money to purchase seeds such that we can also look into food security. Thank you.10.49DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City):  Madam Speaker, on the Lubowa Hospital issue, I want to implore you -MR LUTTAMAGUZI: They have not allowed you; first wait for the ruling of the Speaker. (Laughter)DR BWANIKA:  When did you take over the role of the Speaker of Parliament? Madam Speaker, I did not know that you have given your powers to Hon. Luttamaguzi; he is ruling on your behalf.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Hon. Luttamaguzi was wrong about food security. I do not see a Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries here, but I see the Prime Minister. Rt hon. Prime Minister, the issues of food security. Just like the other day, I had said before you merge NAADs, can we have our seeds? Can we first have a response?10.55THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries is coming on the date you will give him to give us a brief on the seeds and food security. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Can I have a response on that today? All of you ministers are supposed to be in the House.Ms NAKADAMA:  Much obliged.THE SPEAKER:  Yes.10.50MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (NUP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker, you see this country has big issues. As we are speaking about seeds, in the countryside where we are, this year for some good reason, we got so much rain. We have a bumper harvest of maize. The price of maize in this country has gone to levels where it is going to discourage more people from growing maize.A kilo is now going for Shs 400. There is a lot of harvest in the countryside. Under the Parish Development Model, we said people should grow maize. They have grown it, but the Government cannot even ensure that people buy maize.We want to know across the country what the Government is doing with the bumper harvest of maize and where farmers are losing crucial sums of money, which they borrowed and they cannot pay back because they invested in maize.COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12011THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 202410.51THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, as you have ruled before the Minister for Agriculture -THE SPEAKER:  Now that is trade -MS NAKADAMA:  No. He is talking about the bumper harvest of maize.THE SPEAKER:  Yes. Who does the marketing? Who does the selling? It is a trade.MS NAKADAMA: Let me call the Minister for Trade, Industry and Cooperative to come and talk about that.10.52THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):   Madam Speaker, there are two things that we are trying to do to save the situation for now and the future. The first one is to look for external markets for the products that we produce. The second one is to find alternative uses of the products that we produce, setting up factories, for example - (Interjections) –  THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us first hear from the minister, then you will submit.MR BAHATI: For example, setting up factories for animal feeds using the products that we produce. I would like to inform this House that it is not possible to have Government subsidies at the moment. Coming in to control prices means giving out Government subsidies. We should be clear to our people that we are not going to have subsidies for these products at the moment. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you mean there is no way Government can help people to sell their products? Maize is at Shs 300 per kilogramme. MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, we are looking at alternative markets to sell our products, but the idea of coming in to put more money to control prices is not possible at the moment. THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, for you to control the prices, you do not need subsidies. You need a buffer system where the people are able to store their products and have them sold at a later time. (Applause)  Honourable members, can I have some silence? I need feedback from the minister. MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, if I am a farmer and the Government says, “I am going to store your produce.” I will need to be paid and to be paid, means that the Government has got to put in money. That is what we mean by a subsidy yet this is not possible at the moment. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a very big problem. Honourable minister, come back to this House tomorrow and tell us the plans you have to save the farmers out there with their crops, which they cannot sell because of the prices. 10.55DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Madam Speaker, you have given me the opportunity to speak. The answer to the fluctuating prices for agricultural products is a contract farming law and we did our work on the Bill. The only way to secure a farmer is to ensure that before they go farming, they have already secured the price. Right now, we are selling maize to Tanzania at a cheaper price. After three months, we are going to buy it back at a very high price and the Government cannot do anything? I implore you that this Bill is given space on the Order Paper so that we can help farmers in this country. THE SPEAKER: Tomorrow, we will have a report from the Ministry of Trade. Honourable members, are you all still responding to the communication? 12012THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202410.56MR DAN ATWIJUKIRE (NRM, Kazo County, Kazo): Madam Speaker, I wish it would also encompass the issue of milk prices. We have raised this issue a thousand and one times and no one seems to understand us. I can see that it is now biting far and wide and we are coming up with one voice. I therefore, beg that when we are finding solutions, let us not do it piecemeal, but look comprehensively at the farming challenges of this country. Farmers sell a litre of milk at Shs 300 – (Interjections)-  even Shs 200. For the last 10 years, as I wind up - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can you listen. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, whom do you want to bite? You sit. (Laughter)MR ATWIJUKIRE: Honourable colleagues, a litre of milk is Shs 300. And yet on the market, when the manufacturer has done only boiling and packing, they sell it at Shs 3,000, but the Government does not have a solution to that effect. (Interjections)  I beg that we handle the issue of prices comprehensively. Thank you, very much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, I would like to hear from- I had given Hon. Gorreth and then Hon. Mbwatekamwa. Do you know why Members are laughing? Hon. Kimosho, they have said that unlike dairy, which has free grass to graze, it is different from - (Laughter)- yes, Hon. Gorreth. 10.59MS GORRETH NAMUGGA (NUP, Mawogola County South, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. When it comes to issues of prices of agricultural products, we need to be very careful because 70 per cent of the informal sector is in agriculture. We must be very – THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not talk about agriculture. We are going to have a report tomorrow and we shall discuss it. MS NAMUGGA:  Noted, Madam Speaker. There is a very big elephant in this House, in addition to Lubowa Hospital. I want this House to pick interest in the money that is borrowed and not utilised, the so-called undisbursed loans. The $14.9 trillion that accrues interest and other related funds, As you pick interest in Lubowa Hospital, kindly pick interest in loans that we borrow and money is not utilised. Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: The money for Kampala-Jinja express highway was also borrowed, but it has never been used since 2020. 11.00MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): I am humbled, Madam Speaker. On the issue of Lubowa Hospital, I am very happy that the honourable minister was denied access some time back. What was she going to see? Actually, she was helped and her time was saved. I remember, in the 10th Parliament she was the one, along with Hon. Bahati, agitating and saying, “please, give us money, the hospital will work”, but we refused completely. I wish to thank – (Interjections) -  yes, hello? No, I am already informed about the affairs of Lubowa Hospital-  THE SPEAKER: There is a point of order. MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I was in this House when the matter came. The Minister of Health, in the alternative government, presented to this House a report and a separate request of an amount of Shs 1.3 trillion. She pleaded with this House that instead of giving Shs 1.4 trillion to Lubowa Hospital, you can give it to the Ministry of Health so that the whole country can be done. That record was included and the report was brought to this House. COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12013THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024Therefore, is Hon. Mbwatekamwa in order to come and misrepresent the facts as it was presented to this House then, to the extent that the Minister of Health was the one who did that? THE SPEAKER:  Additionally, it was not the Minister of Health that approved it, it was the House that approved it. It is a collective responsibility, and the mistake was by the House – and Hon. Mbwatekamwa was part of the House. (Laughter)MR MBWATEKAMWA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concede, much as we refused, including even the Committee on Health – if you still recall – led by Dr Bukenya. We were, one time, also stopped from accessing it. The matter I am bringing is about the person who is running that project, Madam Pinetti. I am wondering, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members – MR MBWATEKAMWA:  No, no, no. Madam speaker, I have a point.THE SPEAKER:  A minute.MR MBWATEKAMWA:  The same person has been allocated to deal with tea. THE SPEAKER:  Which tea? MR MBWATEKAMWA: Recently, the Prime Minister called a meeting and Pinetti was part of the team. So, Madam Speaker, who is Pinetti in this country?THE SPEAKER:  You are shouting. Honourable member, you are shouting. Speak slowly. Calm down.  (Laughter)MR MBATEKAMWA:  Okay, okay, okay. (Laughter)  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  No, you calm down.MR MBWATEKAMWA:  I am calm now. (Laughter)THE SPEAKER: We can give you some water. First, give him some water. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, you can speak slowly.MR MBWATEKAMWA:  Okay. Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you also mentioned the people who brought petitions in regard to the tea. The reason why I am very concerned is that we have been complaining about tea prices –THE SPEAKER:  Take some water.MR MBWATEKAMWA:  Yeah. I need to take it.  Otherwise, I might even bite some of the people here. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, we have been talking about tea. The prices have dropped completely – THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Mbwatekamwa, I have a petition in my office. The best you can do is to come and pick that petition and present it to the House, as per rule 30. MR MBWATEKAMWA: Most obliged.THE SPEAKER:  The earlier you do it, the better. (Laughter)  11.05MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (NUP, Kalungu West County, Kalungu):  Thank you, Madam Speaker.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I told you that I needed two clarifications and I was buying time to have my good MPs in the House, since they come earlier than me. I need two clarifications; a clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on certificates of financial implications and a clarification from the Attorney-General on the titling of the laws. However, before we do that, I will hear from the Member for Kalungu.12014THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024MR SSEWUNGU:  Madam Speaker, I would like to give light that as the minister brings the statement about maize, we want to know why the price of maize bran is twice as high as the price of a kilo of maize.Secondly, Madam Speaker, on the issue of these rampant killings, we need to find out why we have many guns in the public. For example, the people who killed the head of the Ndiga Clan are civilians. The system of people having guns irregularly is growing day by day. In this House, we have ministers who are ex-officio  Members. However, some of them are very irregular here. For example, there are a number of issues raised in Parliament concerning the President, and the Minister for the Presidency must respond to these issues.  However, this is one of the Members who are very irregular here though she is always seen in public rallies and elsewhere. The appointment of someone as the Minister for the Presidency is because he or she should come here to represent the President on matters incidental to the President. He or she has powers to respond to our issues here, other than anybody else.Lastly, Madam Speaker, we are now making two years without having a substantive Governor, Bank of Uganda. They have taken us to court, saying the money we are using in this country is irregular because the Deputy Governor cannot deputise a Governor who is not in office. How do you deputise someone who is not around? Atingi-Ego, the Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda, is using his name to sign on our currency notes as deputy governor yet there is no substantive governor. Attorney-General, that is yours – and the minister for the presidency. What are you doing? Don’t we have educated people to run that office? Thank you, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Prime Minister.11.07THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, the Government Chief Whip made a rota for ministers’ attendance in Parliament. So, the Minister for the Presidency is not here –(Interjections)-  I think it is because of the rota for today.THE SPEAKER: Yes, Government Chief Whip.11.08THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, it is known that I laid, on table, the rota for all ministries, departments and agencies of government. I wish you could give me some few minutes to read, under the Office of the President, who is meant to be in Parliament today.THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Attorney-General, the issue of the governor. 11.09THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Madam Speaker, as we all know, no governor has been appointed at this point. However, for me, it is wrong to say that the deputy governor cannot perform those func -tions. Now, the question of how long it will take – THE SPEAKER : The Bank of Uganda Act does not specify how long one can act. The Bank of Uganda Act says that in the absence of the governor, the deputy will be in charge. Members, you leave the man to act. (Laughter)By the way, that position is an established position, not contingent on the governor. Let the deputy governor work. Let him work. Yes. Aah, what? You leave Dr Atingi-Ego to work. I see Hon. Okwalinga there, saying – the Ayes have it. (Laughter)  Can I have the Leader of the Opposition?COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12015THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 202411.10THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Joel Ssenyonyi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In your communication, you hinted on several critical matters. I want to, firstly, join you in condoling with the family of the late Dr Eng. Daniel Bbosa, who has been the Head of the Ndiga  Clan. We have had so many unsolved murders in this country, and Ugandans increasingly get agitated. They are now taking matters into their hands.I do not think that is a place we want to be at. This mob justice is actually not mob justice; it is mob action. These are people saying, “we do not trust that the killers will be brought to book, let us deal with them ourselves.” Once this becomes prevalent, even innocent people along the way could suffer. I am glad, Madam Speaker, you have directed the Minister of Internal Affairs to bring a report to this House – maybe you will guide on the duration when that should happen – on all these unresolved murders so that the country gets to know what is happening and whether or not people should keep doing what they are doing. We need some kind of assurance from the Government. What is the latest? What is happening with these investigations? Secondly, Madam Speaker, as you did mention, I went with a couple of Members of Parliament to the Lubowa Hospital site. We wrote to the Minister of Health, among other things requesting her to join us and to take us around or to delegate anyone from the ministry so that we establish what exactly is going on. Parliament injects plenty of money, on an annual basis, into this project. The minister wrote back to me and indicated she could not make it because she had a Cabinet meeting. She signed off by saying “I wish you a successful tour ”. Madam Speaker, I want to Table a copy of the response by the minister.  Of course, people interpreted that variously to say this same minister has been denied access to those very premises yet she is in charge. So, by her saying she was glad about the tour we were going to do, but signed off saying, “I wish you a successful tour” – (Laughter)  - no wonder, we met resistance and we could not access the venue.Madam Speaker, it is important that this Parliament, and by extension the nation, get to know who exactly is in charge of this project. This is because the Ministry of Health, as far as I understand, should be in charge of the project. However, we are told it is now the Office of the Prime Minister yet the Prime Minister has said, “No”, it is the Ministry of Health. Yesterday, police officers and the military kept telling us that we had not got clearance. I told them that the project is under the Ministry of Health and showed them a letter of clearance from the health ministry. Madam Speaker, the Government needs to tell us who exactly is in charge of this project. The Ministry of Internal Affairs should also explain to this House why Members of Parliament have been denied access by security outfits not just yesterday, but even in the past. As Parliament, we appropriate this money; billions of shillings on an annual. Why is it that now, security does not want us to go and establish what the money we are sending there, is doing? With your indulgence, Madam Speaker, I think the Minister of Internal Affairs needs to let this House know why Parliament cannot have access to this project. You have said the Deputy Speaker should go there on Wednesday. However, as the Minister of Health said, we wish him a successful tour. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should give a status update to this Parliament and account for the money so far spent. Denying us access to these premises is a clear indication that may be, there is not much going on. Therefore, we want to appeal to you, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  There is a procedural matter.12016THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024MR ENOS ASIIMWE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. My concern is that many colleagues have talked about Lubowa Hospital, but there was one submission that was very critical that we should have listened to properly.Hon. Muwanga-Kivumbi said that the Auditor-General went and did an audit on this project and he was allowed time to understand the project and he is about to bring that report to us.My procedural matter is, don’t you think, Madam Speaker, that it would be procedurally right to wait for that report to come here? Possibly, it may answer most of the questions we are raising.  Madam Speaker, the Auditor-General is part of Parliament. The fact that he was allowed to access the site and do an audit, I believe he will give us proper answers because he is part of Parliament. Thank you so much.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Leader of the Opposition.MR SSENYONYI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Clearly, some things do not need to be responded to. I am sure that is why you have said I proceed. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, as I was saying, we need to compel the Minister of Health and the Minister of Finance, Planning and economic Development to come to this Parliament to give us a status report and account for the money so far spent on this project. Otherwise, we do not know what is going on there now that we have been denied access yet we appropriate this money. The taxpayers are now blaming Parliament. They are saying, “You people, appropriate this money. What is it doing? Maybe you need to stop”. So, it is important that they come and account to us and by extension, to the general public –(Interjections) - with the Speaker’s permission, I can take the information.MS OPENDI: Thank you, the Leader of the Opposition. Madam Speaker, the information I want to give this House is that the Mulago Specialised Women and Neonatal Hospital, a 450-bed facility was constructed at $34 million. Lubowa International Specialised Hospital is supposed to be a 200-bed hospital and you know how much has been spent so far –THE SPEAKER:  How much has been spent? MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, so far $150 million.MS OPENDI:  It is close to five times what was spent; over Shs 400 billion. I do not have the figures.THE SPEAKER: Get information from the minister.MR MUSASIZI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The total project cost for the Lubowa International Specialised Hospital is $379,789 million. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, listen.MR MUSASIZI:  We have so far paid, through promissory notes, an amount of $156 million. MS OPENDI:  Madam Speaker, that is the information I wanted this House to know as we talk about Lubowa. With $34 million, we were able to put a 450-bed facility at Mulago for the women. Thank you.THE SPEAKER: Thank you. The Leader of the Opposition -MR SSENYONYI:  Thank you, honourable member for that imperative information. Madam Speaker, we actually intend to move this House via a motion that, even as we wait for that accountability - because money has been spent already and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has confirmed. We halt paying any more money to Lubowa International Specialised Hospital as Parliament, because they are not accountable COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12017THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024and we cannot access it to see what is happening there. Let us halt it. (Applause). Otherwise, the taxpayers will blame it on Parliament.Two, Madam Speaker, we think that -THE SPEAKER:  First, I want to find out from the finance minister whether there are obligations they have entered into that cannot be stopped, in terms of promissory notes. I want to get a legal opinion to that effect.11.20THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Madam Speaker, I think we need to look at the terms of the contract and understand it.  Otherwise, I am not in a position to answer the question whether there are any obligations that have been entered into which cannot be stopped at this point.THE SPEAKER:  Okay.MR SSENYONYI:  Madam Speaker, you see, the practice, financially and even legally of promissory notes is that before another promissory note is issued, the contractor is meant to give -THE SPEAKER:  A certificate -MR SSENYONYI:  A certificate of milestone completion. We want that accountability. Why do you keep issuing promissory notes without accountability?THE SPEAKER:  Maybe we need to get the certificates of the milestone completion that were given to the finance ministry before it made payment. (Applause)MR SSENYONYI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is part of the accountability that we are demanding as Parliament. Madam Speaker, I think it would be prudent and as a colleague gave information, we have got hospitals in this country -THE SPEAKER:  There is information from this side.MR SSENYONYI: Yes, please.MS BETTY NAMBOOZE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my brother, the Leader of the Opposition. We were told in this House that this contract was supposed to be executed in two years. It is now coming to seven years since this work began. I do not know if we are still going by the same contract, agreement and understanding that was presented to this House when we secured Shs 396 billion to facilitate that work. The work was supposed to be concluded in two years and handed over to the Government of Uganda after eight years. I do not know if that contract still stands. MR SSENYONYI: Thank you for the information. Madam Speaker, the agreement was revised for this engagement. Two or three things are problematic. One, the scope of the work was actually lessened yet the amount of money was increased. It does not quite make sense because if the scope is lessened, then the money should lessen. However, that revised agreement has never been tabled here in Parliament. Why is the Government operating that way and you only come to Parliament as an Automated Teller Machine (ATM)? The first agreement was tabled. Why has the revised agreement not been tabled here? Two, when you say you want to revise the amount, it is Parliament that is meant to approve. That is why it is important – let me wait for the Chief Whip who is distracting the Speaker. I apologise, Madam Speaker; I wanted to catch your eye for this very critical issue.The agreement was revised; the scope was lessened, but the amount was increased. However, that revised agreement has not been tabled in Parliament. So, we do not know what is going on. Also, Parliament has not approved –(Interruption)MR ARIKO: Thank you, honourable Leader of the Opposition in Parliament. Madam Speaker, in relation to the point that the Leader 12018THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024of the Opposition is bringing to this House; in the 10th Parliament I happened to have been in the Committee on National Economy that processed this loan. One of the critical issues that the committee grappled with - to add to what Hon. Jonathan Odur said - was that the honourable Minister of Health was very hesitant to support this loan before the committee. THE SPEAKER: Which Minister of Health? Was it Hon. Aceng? MR ARIKO: At that time, it was Hon. Jane Ruth Aceng.THE SPEAKER: Or Hon. Opendi. I want it on record.MR ARIKO: Hon. Jane Ruth Aceng –THE SPEAKER: Not Hon. Opendi?MR ARIKO: No. Hon. Opendi was the Minister of State for Health. Madam Speaker, may I, with your permission, elaborate on this point?At that point, the Ministry of Health were themselves a little bit worried about the competence and experience of the leader, in as far as the Joint Purpose Vehicle was concerned - that was Ms Enrica Pinetti. When the committee got into a state where we had to make a decision, we unpacked the Joint Purpose Vehicle (JPV) and at that time, the committee was persuaded that ROKO was still very competent, in as far as construction was concerned. In the JPV , we had been made to understand that Ms Enrica Pinetti would bring in technical expertise and competence, whereas the person who was supposed to do the construction was the partner, who was ROKO. Within two weeks of passing the loan here, ROKO was thrown out of the JPV . This brought in a challenge that Ms Enrica did not have the competence to undertake construction because they were simply agents of persons who were supposed to supply the equipment and train the experts that were supposed to work in the hospital. That is the reason as of today, Ms Enrica cannot take off from the aspect of construction because they do not have the capacity to undertake construction. Madam Speaker, as I inform the Leader of the Opposition, what, therefore, baffles this House is that if the total amount of the loan was $379 million, how possible is it that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development continued to pay up to $150 million, yet the total amount included equipment, training of specialists and transfer of knowledge, which are other aspects different from construction.Two, honourable Leader of Opposition, the other question was on reduction in the scope of the works. The loan that this House passed included a partner in the JPV called ROKO, which this House understood would undertake the construction. Who then, other than this Parliament, authorised Ms Enrica Pinetti to undertake the aspect of construction? It means that the JPV or the agreement with Uganda had already been abused by the other person and therefore, it should have collapsed. (Applause)  Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable LoP.THE SPEAKER: Thank you so much, Hon. Ariko, for that. As you conclude, LoP, Hon. Kivumbi already asked for the audit report, which is before the auditors. We also expect a report from the team that is going there on Wednesday. Further, we need the certificates that the finance ministry based on to release the monies. (Applause)MR SSENYONYI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and for the information colleagues have raised, as we speak, there is no contractor on site because ROKO abandoned it. However, as you recall, in December, Shs 2.7 billion, through a supplementary, was allotted to supervise ongoing construction. Which construction? I think we are taking the taxpayer for granted in very annoying ways. You are saying you need Shs 2.7 billion just to supervise construction, but there is no [Mr Ariko] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12019THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024constructor on site; he abandoned it. Lastly, on this very issue, we would like to move Parliament -can we begin to allocate this money to the referrals that we have in this country and the health centre IVs that are functional and operating, but are struggling with shortages of drugs, medical equipment and so on? (Applause)  At least, we know we are sending money where it is needed. This one –THE SPEAKER: For instance, we passed a law on organ transplant; the dialysis department does not have staff. The Intensive Care Unit of Mulago does not have staff, yet we have the best equipment in this country. We should put that money in that. (Applause)  LoP, thank you so much.MR SSENYONYI: Madam Speaker, I request for two minutes to wrap up. You did communicate about rationalisation; thank you for pointing out some very critical issues that we have been grappling with. The wording of these bills is going to raise unnecessary legal challenges. THE SPEAKER: That is going to be responded to.MR SSENYONYI: Madam Speaker and Members, these entities were created for efficiency. Now that we are saying, “Let us send them back to the ministries”, what guarantee do we have that efficiency has been created and all is going to be well?For example, Rural Electrification Agency (REA) was rationalised –THE SPEAKER: You have started in anticipation.MR SSENYONYI: I was just giving a general picture, in response to your communication.THE SPEAKER: You are still going to speak as a LoP, after they have presented. MS SSENYONYI: I was just giving this example to paint a general picture, so that as we debate, we think about these critical issues. I was saying that when REA was rationalised and merged with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development, the ministry decided to reallocate that money, which REA was meant to receive to other activities meaning the activities that REA was undertaking have come to a halt.As we rationalise and take them back to the ministries for efficiency to happen, it does not seem to be the case. The Government needs to come clean. What exactly are they trying to do? Even as they are rushing Parliament, let us deal with this issue very critically. We need to guard ourselves as Parliament so that we are not run through a brick wall. THE SPEAKER:  By the way, nobody is rushing Parliament. The issue is - yes, if we are to rationalise, and/or remove some of these entities, we are in the budgeting process. When you look at the Budget Circular, none of these entities has been budgeted for. We need to act as a House. If you want these institutions to remain without money, then we say, “Let us also sit back” because the power to rationalise is on us. It is up to us to determine whether we rationalise and have the money put there. However, because finance has decided not to give these people money, what do we do? We need to come in as an institution. Honourable members –MR SSENYONYI:  As I wrap up - this is the final one – I actually do –THE SPEAKER:  Hon. James, can you seat? MR SSENYONYI:  Madam Speaker, you are right, the power to rationalise lies with Parliament. The Executive seems to be taking that away from us because they have rationalised on the financial end, they are saying, “We are not budgeting for these.” It is as if Parliament is being arm-twisted. Let us retain that power and process all of this work 12020THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024without being arm-twisted by the Executive. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, Leader of the Opposition. In the public gallery this morning, we have students and lecturers from Kyambogo University. You are most welcome. Join me in receiving them. They are represented by the Leader of the Opposition, Hon. Joel Ssenyonyi and the Hon. Shamim Malende. Thank you, for coming. Stand up and we see you. You are most welcome, and this is your Parliament. In the public gallery on this side, we have a delegation from Bukedea Subcounty Women’s Choir. Please stand up. Have you seen my women, they are all yellow? They are represented by:(i) Hon. Opolot Isiagi, Chairman of the Committee on Budget; he is a good man, you should bring him back;(ii) Hon. Ikojo John Bosco, who is the “chairman of borrowing” –( Laughter )-  he is a good man;(iii)  Hon. Anita Among –(Laughter)-  the one who is unopposed.Thank you, for coming and this is your Parliament. Honourable members, can we have an explanation from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the issue of certificates? Hon. James, I am going to give you a chance to talk because I know you are going to talk on that one. There is a procedural matter? Is it on “unopposed”?MR SSEMUJJU:  No, Madam Speaker, it is procedural matter to seek your guidance because you have asked the Deputy Speaker to go to Lubowa. THE SPEAKER:  With a team of Members. MR SSEMUJJU:  I am wondering how reporting is going to be done. That is the procedural issue I want clarity on. THE SPEAKER:  The reporting will be done by the Members. I want to see how they can refuse the Deputy Speaker to enter. Have you understood? 11.36THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. While we laid the Bills accompanied by the certificate of financial implications in accordance with Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act, 2025, during the process of consideration of the Bills, an issue arose regarding providing the committees with a certificate of financial implications, indicating the estimates of revenue and expenditure over the period not less than two years after the coming into effect of the Bill, when we pass it. We agree that in compliance with this section, all this information should be provided. As I speak, a copy of the Bills capturing all this information is being delivered to your office.THE SPEAKER: Can I have the certificates? MR MUSASIZI:  I will be laying copies here shortly, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER:  Can we have them? Honourable members, the honourable minister has said he is going to have individual certificates in compliance with section 76(2) and that he is going to lay on the Table. Honourable minister could you, instead of wasting time taking them to my office, because it is a longer distance - bring and lay them on the Table? MR MUSASIZI:  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we realised that there was a mess. I do not want to say a mistake because that is what is being corrected. It was an oversight maybe. [Mr Ssenyonyi] SECTORAL COMMITTEE REPORT12021THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 202411.39MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bukimbiri County, Kisoro):  Madam Speaker, I thank the Minister of Finance for that information. However, for the Bill to be a Bill before the House for amendments, it must be accompanied by a certificate of financial implications. Does he mean that we do not have the Bills? We do not have them because there is no certificate. Is that what he means? THE SPEAKER:  We agreed that the Bills be sent to the committees. It is from the committees that we realised there was a mistake on the certificates, which must be corrected and the Hon. Odur the other day offered free –MR KWIZERA:  There is another mistake there. The Government presented a non-existent Act to be amended. The Act means –THE SPEAKER:  I have told you, keep your cool. We are sorting out issues one by one. We have sorted the certificate of financial implication. Can we have the one of the Attorney-General? MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, you recall that when those Bills were brought here, I did raise a matter of procedure regarding the certificates. I do not want to go into what has been administratively handled. I sit on the committee on legal and I know the committee has been in touch with you.THE SPEAKER:  I have not been in touch with the committee as a person. MR SSEMUJJU:  As a Speaker, I am sorry. This is a grave matter. Kindly, allow the Attorney-General to tell this Parliament that a Bill that was brought in that fashion will not have to first be withdrawn for it to be introduced. I want the Attorney-General to tell us because this is a precedent that we are setting as Parliament, that they can throw documents and then begin correcting them haphazardly as they brought them. Madam Speaker, I will be comforted if the Attorney-General says that they do not need to first withdraw the Bills, they just bring things the way they like.THE SPEAKER:  There is no Bill that is being withdrawn. We are correcting what we have. Attorney-General -11.41THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL  (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will first answer Hon. Ssemujju’s issue. The Bills that were here were presented with certificates of financial implications albeit; they were not sufficient and are being amended. I am of the considered opinion that that amendment would suffice. On the second issue, in respect to the title that Hon. Eddie Kwizera has raised, the Bills that were presented to this House are titled, “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies…”-for example, “Trade Sector (Amendment) Bill, 2024.”Most of these Bills that are before Parliament on RAPEX are seeking to repeal, amend or affect more than one Act. This can be described normally as a large Bill affecting different Acts, generally called smaller Bills on the broad topic before the House. The subject of all these Bills is rationalisation of Government agencies and the general rule is that Parliament has the power to make laws on any matter for the peace, order or development of good governance in Uganda. That is under Article 79 of the Constitution. To enable Parliament to process these Bills efficiently and effectively, the Rules of Procedure were put in place and these do not refuse or bar Parliament from handling Bills of this nature. In fact, the Bills that had been brought earlier were even more omnibus, but now they have been reduced into sector spaces. The RAPEX Bills may have disparate matters that are not necessarily directly related to the matter of the subject, but are in respect to the general government policy. 12022THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024The common form of the RAPEX Bills that are before you cover disparate matters and this can be done in miscellaneous Bills. Such Bills deal with amendments of laws related or unrelated to the subject matter that require demands of government policy to be addressed.Madam Speaker, a good example of a law such as this one is “The Law Reform (Miscellaneous Amendment) Act, 2023”, which we just passed recently. In one Act, we amended and repealed over 90 Acts of Parliament. Another law that has been passed by this House is “The Law Revision (Penalties in Criminal Matters) Miscellaneous Amendment Act, 2015”. That Act affects very many other Acts, all of them in respect to a similar subject, which will be the penalties. Similarly, “The Business Licences (Miscellaneous Repeals) Act, 2015” repealed redundant business licences under several amendments including the Produce Protection Act, the Fish Act, Hides and Skins (Export Duty) Act, Rivers Act and the Companies Act. The Act also rationalised and simplified Government business processes, practices and procedures under those laws to eliminate the multiplicity and overlap of business licences. Whereas, the RAPEX Bills that are before you touch upon several laws and matters, all these Bills fall under the ambit of the law as matters connected to the Government rationalisation policy. The title of a Bill is part of the Bill and When the Executive proposes a title of the Bill, it does not in any way deter Parliament from amending that Bill. I refer you to Rule 134(20) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. It states: “If any amendment to the title of the Bill is made necessary by an amendment to the Bill, it shall be made at the conclusion of the proceedings detailed above, but no question shall be put that the title (as amended) stand part of the Bill or shall any question be put upon the enacting formula.” As you consider the various rationalisation Bills before you, I request that you also consider, at the time-if you deem it necessary to amend the titles of the Bill, we propose that the Bills be referred to as they are presented before you, but we leave that to the House. I beg to submit. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Shadow Attorney-General.11.47MR WILFRED NIWAGABA  (NRM, Ndorwa County East, Kabale):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In making laws, particularly, in this House, we have basically three guiding laws. One, the Constitution. Two, the Acts of Parliament Act and our Rules of Procedure. A look at most of the Bills before us, I actually refer to amendments in respect of existing Acts of Parliament. This kind of legislation that is omnibus in nature, other than the existing permitted laws - The Law of Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act and -THE SPEAKER:  I am hearing. I multi-task.MR NIWAGABA:  Madam Speaker, other than the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, this kind of omnibus amendment of the Acts of Parliament is unprecedented. It does not only contravene our precedence in this Parliament, but also in my strong view and opinion, contravenes both our rules of procedure and the Acts of Parliament Act. I pity our students in law schools if we pass these Bills as they are. Moreover, when they are making a legal research, how will they know the exact position of the various laws? I do not know why the Attorney-General found it prudent to continue doing business in an omnibus way. There are three specific Bills they have brought properly: The Constitutional (Amendment) Bill, the Karamoja Development Agency (Repeal) Bill, 2024 and The National Records and Archives Bill, 1996 and the National Information Technology Authority Uganda(NITA-U). COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR [Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12023THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024I do not know why they did not adopt the same procedure in respect of all these other laws. Honestly, if you come up and say the Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Trade Sector Amendment) Bill, do we have an Act of Parliament called “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies?” So, what are we amending? Therefore, I invite members of Parliament to find this omnibus way of amending by way of repeal or amendment objectionable, unprecedented and this House should not be vulgarised. I therefore invite Members to reject the explanation by the Attorney-General. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Chairperson, Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs.11.51THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (M r Yusuf Mutembuli ): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I entirely associate myself with the submissions by senior counsel, Hon. Niwagaba, in as far as the particulars of this Bill are concerned. I was also asking myself - and it is the same question I wanted to ask the Attorney-General - as to whether we have that law called rationalisation that is supposed to be amended. You amend what exists. Now that there is no such law – I heard him saying that at committee level, we can change. That is very erroneous. We cannot change something that is wrong. That is one.Two, Madam Speaker, much as you said we are done with the issue of the certificate of financial implications, I did - THE SPEAKER:  I said we are done with the correction on the certificate – that certificates must come per Bill. MR MUTEMBULI:  Madam Speaker, I want to give my input, as far as that is concerned. Whereas we are reading section 76(2), we must be alive to the fact that section 76(1) is the one that guides us. When do you need this certificate? The certificate is needed at the time when the Bill is being introduced in Parliament. (Applause)Madam Speaker, there is no way a certificate can be amended when the Bill has already been introduced. The proper way this can be done is for us to politely withdraw the Bills, come here and introduce them in accordance with section 76 and Rule 118 of the Rules of Procedure, so that as we are introducing the Bill, it is accompanied by a sufficient certificate of financial implications. Otherwise, what we are doing is just ping-pong . Let us be honest to Ugandans, do things as Members of Parliament and as lawyers who know what to do, not just to appease people. My view is that the Attorney-General should advise the minister - I even advised the Minister of Public Service. I said I am not the Attorney-General, but as far as I am concerned, the best you can do is to have these Bills withdrawn and then you introduce them in accordance with the law. For us to have the Bills at the stage - THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, not all these Bills are going to be withdrawn. And, raising your voice – actually, my ears are even becoming sick.MR MUTEMBULI:  I apologise, but when I am discussing serious issues -THE SPEAKER:  Raising your voice is not the solution.MR MUTEMBULI:  Much obliged. Let me be a little bit low -THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, you can speak softly. I want to refer the Attorney-General to rule 116. Attorney-General, I would like to refer you to rule 116 - can I have some silence, members – it reads: “ (1) Matters with no proper relation to each other shall not be provided for in the same Bill.(2) A Bill shall not contain anything foreign to what its long title imports.”12024THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024My question is: are these matters related to each other – that you have put together in one Bill? 11.51THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Laws are made to deal with a policy. All the laws –  I will give you an example of the Bill that I have before me. All the Bills that are in this rationalisation –THE SPEAKER:  Which one is that?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  The one for the trade sector. The long title reads: “An Act to repeal and to make amendments to certain Acts of Parliament establishing statutory bodies in the trade sector, in order to give effect to the Government programme on rationalisation of agencies, public expenditure and other related purposes”. That is the long title. Madam Speaker, I wish to add for my learned friend – my highly respected Shadow Attorney-General. I gave examples of these Bills and your response was that there is no Act that this is amending. I want to refer you, for example, to the Business Licences (Amendment) Act 2015, which I read to you here.There was no law that was called “The Business Licences Act”. (Interjection)  - no, it is not there. If it is there, I beg to be guided, because I have read and I have not found it. Therefore, honourable colleagues –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can you listen?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  The purpose of a Bill is to bring a policy into action – to actualise a policy. When you want to actualise a policy on rationalisation, you can bring a Bill to deal with that. Now, to wonder how the students of law school will deal with this, I will tell you that just recently I did announce a completion of the law revision, where we reprint these Bills to show the amendments.When we make the amendment – for example, the miscellaneous amendments that we made here – we are not going to leave them in one statute book. We go on dealing with the reprints in these other Bills. That is an administrative matter in the Attorney-General’s Chambers and we will handle it. However, to say that it is not legally permissible, I have supplied you with three examples. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. Odur. MR ODUR:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I want to raise relates to rule 129(2). I have listened to what Members, including some chairpersons of committees, have said, that rule, once a Bill is referred to the committee, the only way for the committee to bring back information to us is through a report. It is my opinion, Madam Speaker, that such wonderful ideas on these Bills – they look very ugly, deformed, defective and cannot stand before the law – should actually come in the report. A committee of Parliament properly directing its mind to the law and to the facts would come and report to us, throw these Bills out and ask the Attorney-General to come with a garbage truck or something to take them back. That is what I would expect to come here. I ask for your guidance, Madam Speaker, whether it is not procedurally correct that we stick to our own Rules of Procedure and ask each committee to process the Bill, entertain them – and which was my point last time. I do not mind whether they have brought this or that, but the committee must direct its mind and then report to us the things we are discussing here and say “at this stage, Parliament cannot proceed because the committee thinks these are A, B, C, D”. The Attorney-General will go back, consult and bring them back.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, we are raising this issue because the Attorney-General was virtually chased away from the legal affairs committee. Even the minister for finance was chased away from the finance [The Speaker] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12025THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024committee. That is why we are bringing up this issue. Yes, Member for Kachumbala.12.02MR PATRICK ISIAGI (NRM, Kachumbala County, Bukedea):  Thank you,  Madam Speaker. Honourable colleagues, we must accept and remind ourselves that we are deliberating for the good of the country. There is nothing wrong with us doing things properly. The minister here cited that the certificate of financial implementing – whatever it is –(Laughter)- is being delivered. THE SPEAKER:  Financial implications. MR ISIAGI:  Certificate of financial implications. That means it is not yet here. Therefore, we cannot reason that it is sorted. It is either being processed or still on the way somewhere. It is not yet here. That means it does not exist. When we say we must hurry because we are in the budget process and the finance ministry has not allocated money – you do not bury somebody before he is dead. (Applause)  Rationalisation has not taken place. Where does the finance ministry get the authority not to allocate funds? (Applause) That means doing things the other way round. Therefore, Madam Swith due respect to this House and the country, let the Attorney-General not meander, but accept to go to the point. What is not ready is not ready. If he is withdrawing, then let him withdraw it and come back because the House is here. We shall proceed, other than us doing things in a shabby way because we are forcing what is not there. I beg to move. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Hon. James –12.02MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, it is in the interest of the Government that brought these Bills to do its work. It is also in the interest of Ugandans that we process these Bills in accordance with the law and what the people of Uganda want. Madam Speaker, I seek your guidance on this because apparently, it seems Parliament is pushing Government to do its work rightly yet they should be doing it properly because earlier, they did their work well and I think they have done their best. That is the best they can do and how far they can move. (Laughter)  I think the Attorney-General has done his best. Let us go to the committees, process the Bills, come back and report to the House. When we bring back the reports the way they are, we would have analysed their competencies or incompetencies. When we continue pushing back and forth, it is as if we have interest yet it is Government that brought the Bills here. Let us go back and have the reports. If they do not comply with the law, we shall throw them out. Why should we interrogate Certificates of Financial Implication when they have already been tabled? Why should we interrogate them here? Let us interrogate them when we are at committee level. If they are not there, let us throw them out.THE SPEAKER:  Commissioner –12.04MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (NUP, Nyendo-Mukungwe Division, Masaka City):  Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Initially, I thought I had understood the challenge that the learned Attorney-General was facing and I thought he would be committed to the issue of pending certificates and how much time he needed to have them delivered. I do not know whether it is a problem at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the House can understand because they are severable. When you look at the Bills that have been bundled in an omnibus, you notice that the certificates are severable and therefore, must be separately brought to the House. 12026THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024I thought the learned Attorney-General would indicate to the House how many hours he needs so that the House can settle its spirit on the availability of the certificates. Two, the House needs to be properly informed that even when we are undertaking rationalisation and budgeting at the same time, should there be a need to reverse, the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA) provides for a corrigendum and therefore, budgeting should not be an excuse for hurrying a fraudulent process. We are resetting for posterity and therefore, if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has an issue and needs to do back filling after the rationalisation, you have the PFMA at hand to come with a corrigendum for correction, addition, deduction and clarification.Therefore, budgeting should not be an excuse for us to do a shoddy and shabby job here. So, will the Attorney-General clarify what is missing and how much time he needs for us to do a good job?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Speaker, the Certificates of Financial Implication required amendments. I may have a bad car, but I have a car. So – THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there are Bills that had proper certificates. The ones that they are talking about are different. So, Attorney-General, guide.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Like the commissioner has stated, for the Bills that are being brought by sector, I have guided the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that each Act that is affected must have a severable report on its financial implications. I think that is what they are working on.Regarding the issue of when they can bring them, the minister is here. I hoped they would have had them last week - I still hope that they will have them, but I have guided that if the Bill has got several parts, it should have severable financial implications for each. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Attorney-General, what about the issue of bundling Bills? MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Speaker, I entirely agree with Hon. Odur. Let both the committees and us present our views on the law concerning those points and allow the committee to make its findings. I beg to submit.THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, Hon. Odur gave guidance. What Hon. Musasizi said is that he wanted to correct the issue of certificates, which he is ready to lay. It is then upon you in the committee to scrutinise what is required. If the Attorney-General is able to defend his position, let it be so. So, can I first have the certificates laid? MR SSEMUJJU:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have listened to Hon. Jonathan Odur - if the Attorney-General can listen - I see them also quarrelling there. (Laughter)When we were in the meeting of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs, the Attorney-General was not chased. Our agreement with him was that these things can be corrected.The Attorney–General, who is now running everywhere like a headless chicken - (Laughter) - and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are just making your table dirty. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, the Attorney-General and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development are not “dirty” and my table has not been dirtied. It depends on how you define being dirty, honourable Members. Hon. Okiror – 12.11 MR BOSCO OKIROR (NRM, Usuk County, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I look at this from two perspectives. I have done this categorisation and noticed that there are Bills [Mr Mpuuga] COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR12027THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024that have the correct Certificates of Financial Implication – THE SPEAKER:  It is not an assumption. I have the reports and everything. The four institutions are very clear.MR OKIROR:  Madam Speaker, the Bills that have correct Certificates of Financial Implication – THE SPEAKER:  Actually they are three. I have the one for National Information Technology Authority-Uganda (NITA-U), KDA and National Records and Archives Agency.MR OKIROR:  I have had an opportunity to look at them and surely, they are Bills that the House can proceed with.There is something, Madam Speaker - I sit on the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and we had an interface with the Attorney-General and the team – (Interjections)  – it was not chasing and I would like to put it clearly that one cannot chase the person of the Attorney-General. We agreed in principle, through consensus, that there was a fundamental issue regarding these certificates. That is when the Attorney-General – THE SPEAKER:  Which is being corrected -MR OKIROR: Which is being corrected, yes. The Attorney-General said that if he could not advance, he would retreat and consult with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. However, what came out in the media made it look like the Attorney-General had been chased; he was never chased.THE SPEAKER:  Now that it is being corrected. What next?MR OKIROR:  On the issue of the certificates that are being corrected, this is my humble view. These Bills were presented and sent to the committees; the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs – THE SPEAKER: Different committees.MR OKIROR:  Yes, different committees. When these Bills were presented to the different committees, the certificates that accompanied them, at the time, had that challenge. We are now putting the correct certificates in compliance with section 76(2). My humble legal view would be that these particular Bills that have rectified Certificates of Financial Implications be withdrawn and re-submitted, accompanied with these certificates.What we are about to do today; laying a certificate without a Bill may not be supported by our laws. Most obliged.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Attorney-General.  12.14THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka):  Madam Speaker – THE SPEAKER:  Attorney-General, on the view of Hon. Okiror – MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Speaker, if the House pleases, we will be happy to do it. (Applause)THE SPEAKER:  Bills with defective Certificates of Financial Implication – can you repeat what you said?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Speaker, the Bills with defective Certificates of Financial Implication will be withdrawn and re-tabled.THE SPEAKER:  When are you withdrawing? MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  They are withdrawn and will be re-submitted.  THE SPEAKER:  Honourable minister, are you ready to re-table them with the certificates now?12028THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 202412.16MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Madam Speaker, the proper procedure would have been for the Attorney-General to specifically mention the Bills, which the Government has withdrawn or for which they are seeking permission from the House to withdraw. He would then come at an appropriate time to re-tender them.MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Speaker, the Attorney-General renders advice. The Bills have sponsors. My advice is that the Bills with Certificates of Financial Implication, which are defective, be withdrawn. That is my advice. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, as we wait for the Government Chief Whip to organise his ‘troops’ - (Laughter) -  on the withdrawal and re-tabling of their Bills, there are Bills that are ready. Can we go to the next Bill? They will come and name them because they do not know. Can we go to the next Bill?BILLSSECOND READINGTHE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, can we have the Bill tabled by the Minister of Public Service?12.20THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Wilson Muruli Mukasa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the second time.THE SPEAKER:  Is the Bill seconded? It is seconded by Hon. Silwany, Hon. Rose, Hon. Muwuma, Honourable Chairperson of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government, Hon. Aza, Hon. Achan, Hon. Anyakun, the Front Bench and the ‘Royal Guards’. I can see you. I see Hon. Katusiime, Honourable Professor, Hon. Connie and Hon. Lillian. Would you like to speak to your motion? Just a minute. Honourable members, if you are going to continue making noise thinking I will first adjourn the House, do not lie to yourselves because that is not my culture. I will not adjourn the House. We must process the business and then I will leave you to go to your committees. Okay, speak to your motion.MR MURULI MUKASA:  Madam Speaker, you recall that the Cabinet took a decision to merge mainstream and rationalise Government agencies, commissions, authorities, boards and public expenditure to facilitate efficient and effective service delivery. The National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024 is one of the Bills introduced in Parliament seeking to give effect to the Government policy on the rationalisation of government agencies. This Bill seeks to amend the current National Records and Archives Act of 2001 to mainstream the functions of the National Records and Archives Agency into the Ministry of Public Service.  The rationale for mainstreaming the Archives Centre is to avoid duplication of roles and functions between the agency and the ministry. The general principle is that the staff of the National Records and Archives Centre are part of the ministry because the agency was never put into operation in the first instance. The functions have been going on well, there are no cost implications involved and therefore, it is quite in order for the amendment to be carried out. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. THE SPEAKER:  Thank you, honourable minister. I now call the chairperson of the committee to give us a report. 12.24 THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (Mr Martin Ojara Mapenduzi):  Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I embark on this task, permit 12029THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024me to lay on, the Table, the Report of the Committee on the Public Service and Local Government on the National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024. Permit me to also lay, on the Table, the minutes of the committee meetings. I beg to lay.THE SPEAKER:  Please do. MR MAPENDUZI: Madam Speaker, permit me to present the Report of the Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024. This Bill was read for the first time on Tuesday, 20 February 2024 and referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government for scrutiny in accordance with rule 129 (1) -THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Evans, come back to the House. Honourable members, do not leave other people. We are only going to handle one Bill and you go for lunch. You know, he thought I do not know his name. (Laughter)MR MAPENDUZI:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In accordance with Rule 129(1) of the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament of Uganda, the committee scrutinised the Bill in accordance with Rule 129(2), (3) and (4) of our Rules of Procedure and now begs to report to this House as follows.The National Records and Archives are a vital and valuable part of a country. In Uganda, keeping national records started way before independence in the 1950s. The records, at the time, were kept at the Protectorate Secretariat in Entebbe after the Secretariat Archives were established under the Chief Secretary’s Office. When Uganda obtained independence in 1962, the records were transferred to the Government of Uganda under the Department of Management Information Services in the Office of the President. In 1990, following the recommendation of the Public Service Review and Re-organisation Commission Report, the National Records and Archives were transferred from the Office of the President to the National Records Centre and Archives under the Ministry of Public Service, where they are to date.In 2001, the National Records and Archives Act was enacted to provide for the rationalised management of all Government and other public records and archives for the preservation, utilisation and disposal of such records and archives and for other related matters. Under this Act, Ministries, Departments, Agencies and Local Governments must ensure that public records are well managed and copies of publications deposited in the national archives. The Act further provides for the establishment of an agency called the National Records and Archives Agency to oversee the proper management of public records and archives. Much as the Act was assented to on 7 June 2001 and operationalised on 15 June 2001, the agency was never operationalised and so, the functions under the Act continue to be carried out by the Ministry of Public Service.On 22 February 2021, under Minute No.43 (CT 2021), the Cabinet adopted the policy of rationalisation where some Government agencies, commissions and authorities would be merged, mainstreamed or dissolved to reduce on public expenditure and facilitate effective and efficient service delivery. One of the agencies affected by the RAPEX Policy is the National Records and Archives Agency, which was established under the Act, but never operationalised or structured.The object and policy of the BillMadam Speaker, the object of the Bill is to give effect to the Government policy for Rationalisation of Government Agencies and Public Expenditure (RAPEX), which was adapted by Cabinet on 22 February 2021. The Bill thus seeks to amend the National Records and Archives Act, 2001, Act No.12 of 2001, to dissolve the National Records and Archives Agency and to transfer the functions of the agency to the Ministry of Public Service. It 12030THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024should be noted at the Records and Archives Agency was never structured or operationalised.MethodologyThe committee held meetings with officials from the Ministry of Public Service and the Department of National Records and Archives Management in the Ministry of Public service. Committee observations and recommendationsThe committee made the following observations on the salient provisions of the Bill:Clause 4: InterpretationClause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 2 of the principal Act; the Interpretation Section. This amendment seeks to do away with all reference to the National Records and Archives Agency in the definition section to place the ministry in its state. It is a consequential amendment to the dissolution of the agency whose functions are transferred to the ministry. The committee observed that clause 4 is necessary, however: a) The definition of “minister” should be amended to speak to the ministry, under clause 6 of the Bill, (ministry responsible for public service); and b) The word “ministry” needs to be defined under this clause because it is not defined in the principal Act. The committee recommends that clause 4 be adopted with the necessary amendments. Clause 5: Amendment of Section 5Clause 7 proposes that the headnote of section 5 (functions of the agency) be substituted with “functions of the ministry”. Clause 7 also proposes that the word “agency” in the provision be substituted with the word “ministry”. This clause shall, in essence, transfer the functions of the agency to the ministry. The committee observes that clause 4 is a necessary amendment to mainstream the functions of the agency into the ministry and recommends that it should be adopted. Clause 8: Substituting the word “Director” in the principal Act Clause 8 proposes that wherever the word “Director,” appears in the principal Act, it is substituted with the word “Ministry”. The committee observed that the definition of “director” was deleted under clause 4 and so, there is a need to delete it from the entire Act, which has been done under this clause. However, the head note of clause 8 is unclear in so far as it provides for “Act of principal Act” and not “an amendment of section in the Act”, or “an insertion of a new clause in the Bill”. The committee recommends that clause 8 should be deleted and provided for as an amendment of a section in the Act.Clause 14: Amendment of section 18 of the principal Act Clause 14 of the Bill proposes that section 18 (1) of the principal Act be amended by substituting for the words “his or her”, the words “the ministry’s”. The committee observes that this is a proper amendment to correct the grammatical error in the provision. However -  (i) the grammatical error in section 18(3) should also be corrected; and (ii) the cross-reference to section 25 in section 18(3) should also be deleted because section 25 has been repealed under clause 15. The committee recommends that clause 14 should be adopted with amendments. Clause 17: Amendment of section 31 of the principal Act [Mr Mapenduzi]12031THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024Clause 17 of the Bill amends section 31 of the principal Act, which provides for the mandate of the ministry to make regulations. The purpose of this amendment is to remove the words “advise or advisory committee” and to improve on the drafting of section 31 of the principal Act. The committee observes that section 25 of the principal Act also provides for the making of the regulations by the minister, to prescribe the fees that may be charged on the supply of copies, the certification of copies and the provision of other services. However, section 25 -  THE SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure. MR AKOL: Madam Speaker, I am sorry, somebody is whispering “best friend”, but he is not my best friend. He is a Member of Parliament. Hon. Mapenduzi, who is the chairperson of the committee, is already talking about the clauses. I thought he was going to just give us a general recommendation so that at an appropriate time, when we go to the Committee Stage, we can look at these clauses, one by one. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right for him to summarise and we go to the Committee Stage? Thank you. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That is from the Chairman of the Acholi Parliamentary Group; your best friend. MR MAPENDUZI: I take note of that advice, Madam Speaker. THE SPEAKER: Thank you. MR MAPENDUZI: However, just to correct, he is not my best friend. (Laughter)  Madam Speaker, the committee recommends that clause 17 should be adopted with amendments to add the prescription of fees by regulation. Additional amendments by the committee The committee recommends the following additional amendments to the principal Act, which were not captured in the Bill. Section 7 of the principal Act Section 7 of the principal Act stipulates the responsibilities of the creators of public records for their proper management, where section 7(a) mandates the heads of organs of state to nominate a senior officer in each organ of state to superintend the actions taken there, in respect of this Act. The committee observed that the use of the word “nomination” is not reflective of the mandatory spirit stipulated in the section. The committee therefore, recommends that section 7 should be substituted to ensure that a senior officer is designated for that purpose and not merely nominated. Section 9 of the principal Act Madam Speaker, section 9 states that in respect of public records created, received and maintained by public corporations and parastatal organisations, the responsibilities set out in sections 7 and 8 of the Act shall be those of chairpersons of the boards of those corporations or organisations. The committee observed that instead of chairpersons of the boards of those corporations or organisations, it is pertinent that the accounting officers of the respective corporations or organisations are responsible for the mandate under sections 7 and 8, such as the creation and maintenance of documentation of their respective institutions for purposes of accountability. The committee recommends that the role assigned to the chairpersons in section 9 of the principal Act be assigned to the accounting officers. 12032THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024Conclusion Despite the establishment of the National Records and Archives Agency in the principal Act, it is important to note that this agency was never operationalised. The functions of the agency that were envisioned under the Act have been and continue to be carried out by the Ministry of Public Service. Therefore, the intention of the rationalisation of this agency under the Bill to mainstream its functions into the ministry is appropriate. The committee recommends that the Bill be considered for second reading, subject to the proposed amendments attached hereto. I beg to report. THE SPEAKER: Thank you, chairperson. (Applause)  Yes, Jonathan. MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am raising a procedural matter and I want the Attorney-General and maybe the Minister for Public Service to help explain to us, because it could save us time on the other Bills. This Bill seeks to - I want to read from the wording here. “Clause 3 states that on the commencement of this Act, the National Records and Archives Agency, established by the National Records and Archives Act 2001, shall be dissolved.” The procedural matter I want the Government to address is on the procedure required for the Government to establish a department, and if that procedure requires you to come to Parliament to establish any department that you feel you need to help you exercise your functions within the ministry. If that is the case, then my submission is that this Bill should have provided for the repeal. Just repeal this and it will be like it does not exist. Then, you can go back to your ministry and establish a department, which can do the things you intend to do. I want the Minister of Public Service and the Attorney-General to address us because it also applies to the rest of the Bills. Otherwise, for you to come here and amend this yet we still have an Act - unless there is another way out, I see that the minister wants to exercise some functions so that we should just repeal. That is the procedural matter I am raising. THE SPEAKER:  Let me first get guidance from the Attorney-General in regard to the three - dissolution of national records and archives agencies -MR NIWAGABA: That is the further procedural matter I wanted to augment on, Madam Speaker. If the purpose of the Act was to establish the agency, which you are now dissolving, do you still need to have this Act simply to vest some powers in the minister? Do you need an Act of Parliament for the minister to act?12.41THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Kiwanuka Kiryowa):  Madam Speaker, you do not need an Act of Parliament always to vest powers in a minister. However, when you have an Act such as this one, which is going to require the minister to levy fees and that kind of thing, you will require Parliament to give you the powers to make those levies. So, you are correct: not everything that the minister has to do has to be set out by law. However, for certain functions – if they are going to exceed the ordinary administrative functions – you will need the law. Like in this case, I think you will need it because you need to set fees and the regulations, which are going to affect the keeping of records. I think that is where the difference is.MR NIWAGABA:  The clarification I want to get is whether the sole purpose of maintaining sections of this particular Act is in respect of levying fees. MR KIWANUKA KIRYOWA: The sole purpose of maintaining this is to manage records in accordance with the law. That is [Mr Mapenduzi]12033THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024the purpose, meaning that the minister cannot sit and administratively take action on how records are to be kept. This law may seem innocuous right now, but for example, if you got all these records of employees and wanted to keep them, the question is: did the minister keep these records in accordance with the law? We have other records; which we keep in whatever way we wish. The purpose here is for records, not just fees. Thank you.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Doctor.12.43DR ABED BWANIKA (NUP, Kimaanya-Kabonera Division, Masaka City): Madam Speaker, from this report, this law was enacted in 2001 and it came into commencement thereafter. However, we do not hear the reason the ministry based on never to operationalise this agency. What constrained you from operationalising it? It is very important to know because we need to understand what went wrong. THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Yes, Hon. Aisha.MS AISHA KABANDA:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. This informs the procedural point I have been rising on since we started: the defects in the law. All the 13 Bills we have here have the same defects. When we asked the minister to unbundle, unfortunately, they retained the same defects. For the 10 of them – leave the three – even the remedy they gave us is the same. For this particular Bill, when you read the defect in the law, it has nothing to do with the defect given to us. It talks about duplication of roles, the heavy expenses, the structure of payment that is not uniform – yet we are speaking about an entity that never existed at all. (Interjections) -  I am on a procedural issue; I am not debating. Madam Speaker, is it not procedurally right, one, that for the 10 Bills that are coming, we go and revise the defect – because the defect cannot be the same. Even for this particular one, the defect in the law that is given to us does not speak to the problem. THE SPEAKER:  Is it a copy-and-paste defect? MS AISHA KABANDA:  It is the same defect for all of them. The laws cannot have the same defect; they gave us the same defect. Only these three have a different remedy, but for the rest of the 10, even the remedy is the same. Is it not procedurally right that, first, when the minister comes to table the Certificate of Financial Implications, he revises these defects? They are not the same and the remedy cannot be the same.Speaking to this one that has been read for the second time, is it not procedurally right for us to go by the – because the chairman has ably talked about the defect. Probably, we should substitute the chairman’s submission on this Bill so that we move on. Otherwise, the defect given by the minister - THE SPEAKER:  By the way, the chairman’s report is informative; it is not – we will look at the clauses one by one. We are going to amend the clauses one by one.MS AISHA KABANDA:  My question, Madam Speaker, is: what do we do to a Bill that is presented to us?THE SPEAKER:  Take what the chairman has given you. What the chairman is giving you is what he is using to amend this Bill.MS AISHA KABANDA:  The Attorney-General can guide us on how to proceed because these are records that will stay even after us. If a person reads a law that existed and they want to -THE SPEAKER:  Okay. Now, sit down for guidance. MR KIWANUKA KIRYOWA: Madam Speaker, we have one common defect in all the laws that are being brought on rationalisation; it is one common defect. It would be wrong for us to say that 10 laws cannot have the same wrong thing. 12034THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024What we are telling you here is that 10 laws brought the same problem: proliferation of agencies, duplication and unnecessary expenditure. In this case, we set out, as Parliament, to make a law for an agency, which was actually superfluous because we have since realised that we continue to operate well without the law.So –(Interjections)-  yes, that is what I am saying. The minister has been operating using the functions under this law. So, what we are saying is that, no, since that is what he has been doing, let the functions be put there so that we continue moving. So, it is the same defect, Members.MS AISHA KABANDA:  For this particular one, Attorney-General, the organisation did not exist at all. How can you say the burden on the Treasury was there when it did not exist?THE SPEAKER:  The organisation existed, but it was not operating. MS AISHA KABANDA:  Then, there was no money spent on it. That is why they are saying we should bring it back to the ministry to stop it from being a stand-alone agency.12.48MR ISAAC OTIMGIW (NRM, Padyere County, Nebbi):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel that we are beginning to debate some of the clauses that are actually being spoken about in this Bill. I would like to suggest that we move to the Committee Stage where most of these issues will actually be elaborated more. We already had some defects in the morning. It is coming to one o’clock and we have not processed any of these Bills because we are still moving on these issues. I would like to suggest that we move to the Committee Stage and discuss some of these clauses further. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, according to rule 204(5) and (6), the Bill should be tabled and given three days. However, we are suspending that rule for us to allow the Bill to be debated and either passed or not. Was there a motion?MR OTIMGIW:  Yes, I had moved a motion.THE SPEAKER:  There is a motion.12.50MR JOHN MAGOLO (NRM, Bungokho County North Mbale):  Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I move a motion that we suspend rule 204(5) and (6) to enable this debate to take place.THE SPEAKER:  Is it seconded? Okay, it has been seconded by Hon. Okiror, Hon. Iddi, Hon. Santa, Hon. Akol, Hon. Opolot, Hon. Oseku, Hon. Aber and Hon. Lee. Thank you. Honourable members, we have suspended rule 204(5) and (6). Do you want to debate? Debate. Is there another motion? (Mr Odur Jonathan rose_)  Please, the motion comes first.12.52MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira):  Madam Speaker, you have not put the motion to vote. If this proposal remains on the record, it can be challenged. Subject it to a vote so that if it carries the day before the suspension is done.THE SPEAKER:  I asked for a secondment. MR ODUR:  Secondment is not voting, but it is okay.THE SPEAKER:  This is why it is good to have Hon. Jonathan in the House. I put the question that rule 204(5) and (6) be suspended in respect to the debate on the National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024. (Question put and agreed to.)Rule 204 (5) and (6) suspended.THE SPEAKER:  There is only one “no” from Hon. Betty. MR ODUR:  No, Madam Speaker, the debate I wanted was to oppose the motion by the honourable member who proposed that we move to Committee Stage. I want to point out this very important –[Mr Kiryowa Kiwanuka]12035THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024THE SPEAKER:  Who moved the motion? He did not. You brought it? MR OTIMGIW:  Madam Speaker, my motion was the first and it was that we move to Committee Stage before my honourable colleague brought the second question. But mine was not brought -THE SPEAKER:  His was overtaken by events. Members, please debate.12.53MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kira Municipality, Wakiso): Madam Speaker, I thank you very much. The Bill we are dealing with - and I want the Attorney-General to pay attention - first, I am giving the Government advise that when you retreat, you need to do a lot of reading of the rules because in the future, when you introduce Government business like you have done - In fact, even the suspension of the rules should be done by you because you want your business processed. You are behaving like a blind person that at every stage, someone must walk you there. You forget that there are rules that must be followed. (Interjections)  - no, I did not mean to offend my colleagues or people with disabilities and I apologise. THE SPEAKER:  Honourable member, let us use parliamentary language. MR SSEMUJJU : I apologise to the people with disabilities. (Laughter)  I want to give you advice because you are making the Government look very shabby. On the –THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, let us have respect for each other. It costs nothing to respect each other. When you say Hon. KK is walking like a blind person, assuming he said the same to you, how would you feel? Remember, you have your voters up here listening to you. So, do not spoil my voters because they are not used to that language. MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, I did withdraw. (Hon. Kiwanuka Kiryowa rose_)THE SPEAKER:  Give him information. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I would like to give my friend, Hon. Ssemujju, information. The Attorney-General is the adviser of the Government, but did not introduce any Bill. The mover of the Bill is the one who would be interested in that. I also noted that the Member who raised it comes from this side, which has Government. So, as Government, we are awake. That is why we raised it. MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, I do not want to continue with that debate. Let me go to the substantial issues that are in the Bills, but specifically the one before us. In this Bill, proliferation of agencies mandate overlaps on issues of salary disparities and money - I want to begin by thanking God that this day has finally come. When the Government was creating the National Identification and Registration Authority (NIRA), I stood here and told the Government that the continued creation of agencies was a vote of no confidence in the Government as it existed. My proposal then, supported by Hon. Kakooza James, was that the functions of NIRA should have been bestowed to the Directorate of Citizenship and Immigration Control of Uganda, but God is good. The Government that was saying, “No, services nearer to the people”, is the same Government saying now that this was a mistake. Maybe you should have started with an apology on behalf of those who processed the Bills at that time. Most importantly, Madam Speaker, I read the policy statement of the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. In the statement, they were talking about rationalisation of MDAs. If you read the report of the Electoral Commission; the two-year strategic plan, they say that at the next elections, there will be 3,000,000 elective positions in Uganda. 12036THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024We have committees of youth, women, people with disability, LCs I, II, III so when you total all of them, there will be 3,000,000 elective positions and the Electoral Commission projects to spend Shs 2 trillion out of which Shs 1.3 trillion will be for organising elections and the rest. The point I make, Madam Speaker, is that as we consider the National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024, the Government needs to be serious about rationalisation. This Parliament has grown; we cannot fit here. A new Chamber has got to be constructed. The same Government will come here with proposals to create constituencies. The Cabinet has grown from what was originally provided in the Constitution of 21 and 25 ministers to about half the population of a secondary school. No wonder, at one time, the President was referring to one of the ministers as “ Nani” . He could not remember his ministers because they have become too many.I use the highways, but almost every now and then, there will be a convoy of ministers with escorts. As I said, when this matter was brought here, I supported rationalisation 100 per cent, but please, do not do it in a piecemeal way to deal with one agency and then go and keep quiet. We need ministries to be merged. (Applause)  I remember when the President was transferring Hon. Syda Bbumba from the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development because of the compensation to Mr Basajjabalaba, he publicly said that “I am removing her from the finance ministry to take her to this useless ministry of women”. That is what the President said; if you want, you can go back to the record. The ministries need to be –THE SPEAKER: Did you say women are useless? (Laughter)MR SSEMUJJU: No, no, no; I did not. I am quoting the President. He said he was removing Hon. Syda Bbumba from the finance ministry and taking her to “this useless ministry”.THE SPEAKER: There is a procedural matter. MR ISIAGI-OPOLOT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedural matter I am raising is in relation to debate of the report. We should be debating the report. Are we proceeding right by going into stories of women and transfer of ministers? MR OTIMGIW: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I concur with my honourable colleague. We should be focusing the debate on the Bill that we have right now. I feel like we are now going sideways. I ask for your guidance. THE SPEAKER: I think there is nothing that Hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju wanted to talk about regarding the Bill. He just wanted to talk about it generally. Based on that, why don’t we go to the – There is a motion here.1.02MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, if you remember from the beginning when the chairman was reading his report, I saw the direction very clearly that we needed to go to Committee Stage. Madam Speaker, I move a motion that debate be suspended and we go for Committee Stage where we will discuss clause by clause.  I beg to move.THE SPEAKER: Is that seconded? It is seconded by the Hon. Lt Col Alanyo, Hon. Oboth, Member from Luuka, Hon. Gabriel Okumu and the whole House. I put the question that the motion on suspension of debate and going directly to Committee Stage be adopted. (Question put and agreed to.)Motion adopted.THE SPEAKER: Yes, point of procedure.[Mr Ssemujju]12037THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024MR ODUR: Madam Speaker, I wanted to oppose the motion, but let me draw your attention; it will help us. THE SPEAKER: I did not see; my eyes did not see you. MR ODUR: Thank you. In the report, the chairperson reported that they consulted the Ministry of Public Service and the department responsible. That is all they did. The only other way that Ugandans can participate is when we allow debate on this matter. I wanted to point out that position, that short of Members of Parliament who are the representatives being given time to debate at this stage the report, then we shall rush into the Committee Stage when the Bills have not been adequately consulted upon. We have not been sent back as MPs to go and consult. The chairperson did not invite the stakeholders like the Uganda Law Society and whoever is affected to come. The only chance to address the issue of public participation would be by allowing debate here. I would like to put this on record so that when we get to the other stage, we do not rush, unless we handle that. THE SPEAKER: I also want to put it on record that this same House constituted a select committee - was it select or ad hoc - the Byanyima Committee, which did extensive consultation on the Bills that we brought. That is what has delayed this rationalisation. We have a report from the committee of the House. Yes, Hon. Oboth -1.05THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE AND VETERAN AFFAIRS (DEFENCE) (Mr Jacob Oboth):  Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I came in a little late from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. Listening to the trend, I think you are guiding and leading us well in this regard. When a Bill is before us for debate and when a Member gets up to speak, they go into what is not in the Bill, that is the debate we need. I think Hon. Odur should have been more specific on this matter. The only way the Speaker can know the interest of Members to debate a Bill is when we speak to the Bill and we are relevant. However, when you are quoting the President who is not a member of this House – these are all matters that you have already ruled on. A motion has been carried; we need to go to Committee Stage. THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, Hon. Oboth is reacting to what Hon. Ssemujju was talking about, not on what Hon. Jonathan Odur was saying and the motion took the day.BILLSCOMMITTEE STAGETHE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024Clause 1THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 1 stands part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 1, agreed to.Clause 2, agreed to.Clause 3, agreed to.Clause 4MR MAPENDUZI OJARA: Madam Chairperson, Clause 4 is on amendment of section 2 of the principal Act. Clause 4 is amended by inserting, immediately after paragraph B, the following:“c) By inserting, immediately after inserting the definition of “minister” the following: “Ministry” means a ministry responsible for public service;12038THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024d) In the definition of “minister” by substituting for the word “the administration of this Act” the words “public service”. Justification (i)  To define a keyword used in the Act; and (ii)  To align the definition of “minister” with the definition of “ministry”.Thank you.THE CHAIRPERSON: Minister -MR MURULI MUKASA: I agree with that amendment.THE CHAIRPERSON: Shadow Attorney-General -MR NIWAGABA: Well, notwithstanding my earlier observation that we should have repealed, I have no objection.THE CHAIRPERSON: Attorney-General -MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA: I have no objection.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that Clause 4 be amended, as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.Clause 5, agreed to.Clause 6, agreed to.Clause 7THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, committee chairperson. MR MAPENDUZI:  Madam Chairperson, clause 7 is on the amendment of section 5 of the Principal Act. Clause 7 is amended by inserting, immediately after Paragraph (b), the following – “(c) by substituting the word ‘Director’ the word, ‘Ministry, and wherever it appears in the principal Act.” The justification is to substitute the word ‘Director’ wherever it appears, the word ‘Ministry’. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Yes, minister. MR MURULI MUKASA:  No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General –MR NIWAGABA: You cannot substitute the word ‘Agency’ with the word ‘Ministry’ and then ‘Director’ with the ‘Ministry’. The best would have been to delete by repealing the provision relating to the director. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  Madam Chairperson, the purpose of that amendment is to move the functions that were originally given to the director to be passed on to the ministry. So, if you delete then there will be no one running that function. We propose that the amendment as proposed by the committee be carried. THE CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Niwagaba, are you - MR NIWAGABA:  Then instead of ‘ministry’ it should be ‘minister’. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Instead of ‘ministry’, it should be ‘minister’. MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  No, this particular one has been moved to the ministry, in which case the ministry will be able to carry out its internal administrative functions to know whether it is a department, directorate, et cetera, so this is to the ministry.MR NIWAGABA:  I concede. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Thank you. I put the question that clause 7, be amended as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)[Mr Mapenduzi]12039THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024Clause 7, as amended, agreed to.Clause 8MR MAPENDUZI:  Madam Chairperson, Clause 8 is on the amendment of the Act of the Principal Act. Clause 8 is deleted.Justification (i) A consequential amendment of Clause 7. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Niwagaba. MR NIWAGABA:  That is the proper position. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister –MR MURULI MUKASA:  I concede. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General –MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  I have no objection. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 8 be deleted as proposed. (Question put and agreed to.)Clause 8, deleted.Clause 9, agreed to.New clauseMR MAPENDUZI:  Insertion of new clause immediately after Clause 9. The Bill is amended by inserting, immediately after clause 9, the following –“Amendment of section 7 of the principal Act. Section 7 of the principal Act is amended by substituting for paragraph (a) the following –(a) ensuring that a senior officer is designated to superintend the action taken in each organ of the State in respect of this Act.”JustificationFor clarity and to ensure that a senior officer is designated for that purpose. THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable minister –MR MURULI MUKASA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Niwagaba –MR NIWAGABA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General –KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the proposed new clause stands as part of the Bill.(Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.Clause 10, agreed to .New clauseMR MAPENDUZI:  Insertion of a new clause immediately after clause 10. The Bill is amended by inserting immediately after clause 10 the following-“Amendment of Section 9 of the Principal Act - section 9 of the Principal Act is amended by substituting for the words ‘Chairpersons of boards’ with the words ‘accounting officers’ The justification is that this for clarity. THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister –MR MURULI MUKASA: No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Niwagaba –MR NIWAGABA:  I think the justification should have been for harmony, but it is okay. 12040THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General –KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  No objection. THE CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that proposed new clause stands as part of the Bill. (Question put and agreed to.)New clause, agreed to.Clause 11, agreed to.Clause 12, agreed to.Clause 13, agreed to .Clause 14MR MAPENDUZI:  Madam Chairperson, my sincere apologies on behalf of the committee. Clause 14 is on the amendment of section 18 of the principal Act - THE CHAIRPERSON:  I did not say that “Ayes” have it because I knew there was an amendment. MR MAPENDUZI:  Thank you, Madam Chairperson.  Clause 14 of the Bill is substituted with the following-“Section 18 of the principal Act is amended-(a)  in subsection (1) by substituting for the words “his or her” the word “its”; (b)  in subsection (3), by substituting for the words “he or she”, the word “it” and for the words “sections 25 and 31”, the words “section 31”. Justification (ii) To remove a repealed cross-reference from the provision and to correct the grammar. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister, it is basically on grammar.MR MURULI MUKASA: No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Hon. Wilfred?MR NIWAGABA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General?KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 14 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 14, as amended, agreed to.Clause 15, agreed to.Clause 16, agreed to.Clause 17MR MAPENDUZI: Amendment of section 31 of the principal Act - Clause 17 of the Bill is substituted with the following-“Section 31 of the principal Act is substituted with the following-“31. RegulationsThe Minister may make regulations prescribing all matters that are required or permitted by this Act to be prescribed or which are necessary or convenient to be prescribed, including the fees to be charged for the supply of copies, the certification of copies, and the provision of other services under this Act, by the Ministry.”  Justification (iii) To specifically provide for the prescription of fees to be charged by the Ministry.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable minister?MR MURULI MUKASA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON : Hon. Wilfred?12041THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024MR NIWAGABA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  Attorney-General?MR KIRYOWA KIWANUKA:  No objection.THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that clause 17 be amended as proposed.(Question put and agreed to.)Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.Clause 18, agreed to.Clause 19, agreed to.Clause 20, agreed to.The title, agreed to.MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME1.21THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE  (Mr Muruli Mukasa):  Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. THE CHAIRPERSON:  I put the question that the House resumes and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. (Question put and agreed to.)(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)THE SPEAKER:  It is fun to have people like Hon. Ssemujju in the House. I would be so bored if I did not have him. Actually, when you go to Mecca, I will be bored here. We should go together. (Laughter)REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE1.22THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE  (Mr Muruli Mukasa): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024” and passed it with some amendments.MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE1.23THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE  (Mr Muruli Mukasa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the Report of the committee of the Whole House be adopted by this House. (Question put and agreed to.)Report adopted.BILLSTHIRD READINGTHE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20241.23THE MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE  (Mr Muruli Mukasa):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be read the third time and do pass.THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the National Records and Archives (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be read the third time and do pass.(Question put and agreed to.)A BILL FOR AN ACT TITLED, “THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2024”THE SPEAKER:  The Title is settled and the Bill has been passed. Congratulations! (Applause) Honourable  Government Chief Whip, I had told you to organise your house. 12042THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20241.25THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP  (Mr Hamson Obua):  Madam Speaker, subject to the provisions of Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure of this House on withdrawal of Bills and subject to the guidance that the House has given, I wish to state, on behalf of Government and also give notice, that the following Bills stand to be withdrawn by the respective sector ministers, sector by sector:i) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Education Sector) Amendment Bill, 2024 – (Interruption)THE SPEAKER: Yes, procedure? MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, while I have no problem with withdrawing and having the Bills properly tabled, I need your guidance as to whether the Government Chief Whip can withdraw Bills that were presented here by individual ministers.THE SPEAKER:  The Government Chief Whip is reporting on behalf of Government and is going to ask individual ministers to withdraw their Bills.MR SSENYONYI:  Madam Speaker, as you are guiding, you are saying that he is going to inform the individual ministers to withdraw. The Government Chief Whip seems to be withdrawing them himself. Maybe, we can have that clarified. THE SPEAKER:  No, he has said that he is going to assign each minister; he is a leader of those ministers and is going to call the sponsors to withdraw. MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, for clarity, let me restate what I started with.THE SPEAKER:  The problem is that you must have gone to the best school.MR OBUA:  No, Madam Speaker. I went to a typical rural primary school in Ajuri County, but here I find myself in the capital city of Uganda and in the temple of legislation. (Laughter)Pursuant to Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and subject to the guidance granted by this House, Government wishes to give notice – (Interruption)MR SSEMUJJU:  Madam Speaker, Rule 140 is very specific. Let me read it for the benefit of the Government Chief Whip: “(1) A Member in charge of a Bill may, at any time, give notice that he or she wishes to withdraw the Bill, subject to the approval of the House.”There is no provision that anonymous notice can be given by anyone. Is the Government Chief Whip in order to misinterpret, deliberately, the rules of this Parliament such that he performs a function that is not bestowed upon him?THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there is what they call “Government”. Government is government; there is a leader of all these ministers and that is the Government Chief Whip, as of now. He is only calling upon his ministers to withdraw their Bills. He is not the one going to withdraw them. Why don’t you wait and see whether Hon. Obua is going to withdraw the Bills himself? Hon. Obua is going to call the ministers to withdraw their Bills. He is giving you a preamble on why the Bills are going to be withdrawn by the specific ministers. MR OBUA:  Madam Speaker, you guided that I also guide the process. Secondly, for us on this side, we operate on the basic principle of collective responsibility. Thirdly, the Government Chief Whip now represents the Leader of Government Business in Parliament. Fourthly, our rules do stop us from anticipating. Allow me to finish and you see whether it is Hon. Obua who is going to withdraw the Bills; I will guide the process. The commanders are here and you can see them assembled and on Standby Class One to proceed. (Laughter)Madam Speaker, the Government wishes, through the respective sector ministers, 12043THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024following the guidance of this House, to withdraw the following Bills – and I hereby give notice that the following Bills will be withdrawn by the respective sector ministers:(i) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Education Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024;(ii) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Trade Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024;(iii) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Works and Transport Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024;(iv) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Social Development Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024; and(v) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Tourism Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024.Madam Speaker, that marks the end of all Bills that were lumped up together, sector by sector. May I, therefore, with your permission, proceed to invite -THE SPEAKER:  Finance sector?MR OBUA:  Our apologies, Madam Speaker. The others are:(i) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Internal Affairs Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024;  (ii) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Finance Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024;  (iii) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Water and Environment Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024; and(iv) The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Agriculture Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024. Those are the sectors that were skipped. May I, therefore, with your guidance, proceed to notify the House and equally invite the respective sector ministers to withdraw the Bills that I have highlighted. Thank you. MR ACHIA:  Madam Speaker, I thank the Government Chief Whip, for the presentation of the Bills to be withdrawn. I am also aware that the Karamoja Development Agency Act is one of those that need to be withdrawn because the certificate before the committee does not, according to us – THE SPEAKER:  Are you the chairperson of the committee? MR ACHIA:  I was a witness before the committee and that was the position of the committee.THE SPEAKER:  Can we, first, have this one withdrawn and then we sort out the other ones? Just like what Hon. Odur said before, if you find it is defective, then, let it come back from the committee chairperson. MR ACHIA:  Madam Speaker, I thought we were doing this harmoniously because it should be according to Section 76 of the Public Finance Management Act that we have read.THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Odur, can you first make the clarification, again? (Laughter)  Can we have the ministers, first, to withdraw and then the rest come. THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (EDUCATION SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20241.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (HIGHER EDUCATION) (Dr John Muyingo): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Education Sector) – amendment of – (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn. I submit. THE SPEAKER:  What have you read? (Laughter) You read it as it is; The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Education Sector -DR MUYINGO:  The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Education Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn. 12044THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Education Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn. (Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (TRADE SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20241.39THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (INDUSTRY) (Mr David Bahati):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Trade Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Trade Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn.(Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE SPEAKER:  Yes, Hon. Betty? MS BETTY NAMBOOZE:  Thank you, Madam Speaker. Whatever we do here is captured by the Hansard . I do not know whether it would be procedurally okay for ministers to start withdrawing Bills without stating the reason why they are withdrawing them. Secondly, Madam Speaker -THE SPEAKER:  The reasons were already stated before you came. (Laughter)  Next?THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (INTERNAL AFFAIRS) (AMENDMENT), BILL 20241.37THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker –(Interruptions)THE SPEAKER:  She is the Leader of Government Business. MS NAKADAMA:  I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Internal Affairs) (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be withdrawn. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Internal Affairs) (Amendment), Bill 2024” be withdrawn. (Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (FINANCIAL SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER: Finance?  (Member rose_) Are you the Shadow Minister for Finance? It is Hon. Ssemujju. 1.38THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Henry Musasizi):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Financial Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be withdrawn. THE SPEAKER:  I put the question that the Bill entitled “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Financial Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be withdrawn. (Question put and agreed to.)THE RATIONALISATION OF GOV’T AGENCIES (INTERNAL AFFAIRS) (AMENDMENT) BILL 202412045THE ELEVENTH PARLIAMENT OF UGANDATUESDAY , 27 FEBRUARY 2024Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (WATER AND ENVIRONMENT SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  The work of Hon. Betty Nambooze is to say “with apologies” after every Bill. So, we have assigned you to say that. (Laughter)THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (WATER AND ENVIRONMENT SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20241.41THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (MS BEATRICE ANYWAR): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Rationalisation of Government -THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, listen. She is saying “rationalisation”.MS BEATRICE ANYWAR: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Water and Environment Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be  withdrawn. I beg to move.THE SPEAKER:  Those in favour of the withdrawal as requested by the minister, say “Aye” and to the contrary say, “Nay”. (Question put and agreed to.)\Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (AGRICULTURE SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Agriculture? The Shadow Minister of Animal Industry and Fisheries wants to withdraw. 1.41THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Agricultural Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn. I beg to move. THE SPEAKER:  Those in favour of the withdrawal as requested by the minister say “Aye” and to the contrary “Nay”. (Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (WORKS AND TRANSPORT SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Works? I saw Gen. Katumba here.1.42THE THIRD DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Ms Rukia Nakadama):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies, (Works and Transport Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024” be withdrawn.THE SPEAKER:  Those in favour of the withdrawal as requested by the minister say “Aye” and to the contrary “Nay”.(Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Gender? Hon. Hellen, you can do it from there.12046THE NATIONAL RECORDS AND ARCHIVES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 20241.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (DISABILITY AFFAIRS) (Ms Hellen Asamo):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Rationalisation of Government Agencies (Social Development Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn. Thank you. THE SPEAKER:  Those in favour of the withdrawal as requested by the minister say “Aye” and to the contrary “Nay”.(Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE RATIONALISATION OF GOVERNMENT AGENCIES (TOURISM SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2024THE SPEAKER:  Tourism? 1.43THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOUR -ISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Martin Mugarra):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Rationalisa -tion of Government Agencies (Tourism Sector) (Amendment) Bill, 2024 be withdrawn.THE SPEAKER:  Those in favour of the withdrawal as requested by the minister say “Aye” and to the contrary “Nay”.(Question put and agreed to.)Bill withdrawn.THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bills have been withdrawn and will wait for the respective ministers to come and re-table them when they are ready. We will wait for the ministers to come and present them. The rest of the committees with the reports should continue and they will advise us on when they are ready.I now adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. (The House rose at 2.44 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 28 February 2024 at 2.00 p.m.)THE RATIONALISATION OF GOV’T AGENCIES (TOURISM SECTOR) (AMENDMENT) BILL 2024