

Wednesday, 13 February 2019

Parliament met at 2.04 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr Jacob Oulanyah, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I will cause some alteration on the Order Paper to accommodate a statement from the Minister of State for Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities, hon. Kiwanda. 

We also need to expeditiously handle item no. 5 so that our partners who have come to listen in on this discussion can be freed to go where they intend to go.

As you may already be aware, the Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze, Bishop Emeritus of Busoga Diocese, passed away on Monday, 11 February 2019 at Uganda Cancer Institute, Mulago. Bishop Bamwoze was the first Bishop of Busoga Diocese of the Church of Uganda, where he presided for over 26 years.

He studied in Kamuli Junior School, Busoga College Mwiri, Bishop Tucker Theological College, Mukono and Makerere University. He also studied at the Lincoln Theological College, Cambridge in the United Kingdom.

Bishop Bamwoze is reported to be a pioneer in the Anglican Church in transforming his diocese through a multi-sectoral, socio-economic development by way of empowering the Church employees and laity as part of Christ’s Gospel. This programme included vaccination of women and children against killer diseases, family planning, protection of spring wells, drilling boreholes, community development, basic hygiene, nutrition and agriculture.
	
Bishop Bamwoze supported improvement in Church- funded primary and secondary schools, tertiary institutions and the establishment of new and different types of educational institutions. He was instrumental in transforming the Bible from English to Lusoga.

Bishop Bamwoze has led an illustrious life and his absence will be greatly felt by the people of Busoga, the Church of Uganda and Uganda at large.

I have received information that His Excellency, the President has directed that a special sitting in honour of Rt Rev. Cyprian Bamwoze be held in Parliament tomorrow Thursday 14, February 2019. 

Accordingly, the Clerk to Parliament will issue the programme to this special sitting. I request you to take note of this special sitting.

On a sad note again, I wish to inform honourable members of the passing on of mother to hon. Godfrey Onzima, Member of Parliament for Aringa North County, Yumbe, which occurred in Yumbe Hospital on Tuesday 12 February 2019. Burial is on Friday 15 February in her ancestral home in Yumbe District.

On behalf of Parliament, I wish to convey our sincere condolence to the bereaved families and pray that the Almighty God may give them peace and comfort during this trying time. Honourable members let us rise for a moment of silence.

(Members observed a moment of silence.)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON ACTION TAKEN TO REINSTATE MR APOLLO KAZUNGU, COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES AND MR GODFREY SASAGAH WANZIRA, DIRECTOR, CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION CONTROL, TO THEIR POSITIONS

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not know but there were some urgent matters. Should we deal with them at this stage or at the end? Let us move them to the end so that we can deal with business first.

Today, honourable members, I expect us to at least finish two Bills. So, we need to brace ourselves because now that we are not sitting tomorrow, this afternoon sitting may take a very long time. I need two Bills done today. Thank you.

Is there a statement from Ministry of Public Service? If it is not there, let us take the statement from hon. Kiwanda.


MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

2.11
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, it was an unfortunate thing that on Wednesday, 6th February, you received some information in the press that were attributed to me.

I was approached by an organisation called Miss Curvy Uganda, a beauty pageant through a letter signed by Mrs Ann Mungoma, the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) of the organisation. Among the objectives the organisers noted are that they wanted to engage into humanitarian activities and focus on the healthy living of women and children.

Mr Speaker, the organisation of beauty pageants in Uganda is not a new activity. You all know that we have been having different beauty pageants in the country such as Miss Tourism, Miss Uganda, Miss Earth and even regional clusters that organise these kinds of pageants and even clubs.
Beauty pageants or contests are a competition that has been traditionally focused on judging and ranking the physical attributes of the contestants. Many of them have evolved on personality traits, intellect and talent depending on the organisers.

Thus, looking at the concept of Miss Curvy Uganda, I compared it with other on-going pageants in the country whilst the rest of the pageants put much emphasis on the eligibility criteria taken. For instance, in Miss Uganda, they concentrate so much on the slim and slender ladies. With Miss Curvy, their point was that some of them cannot compete in this kind of pageant but can compete regarding their size.

Therefore, the only difference between the other pageants that have been taking place and this was the issue of size. These ones are slightly bigger than the usual ones. However, the concept is the same, Mr Speaker. One of the things was that it does not mean that to contest in beauty contests, you must be thin and slim. After the rhetorical questions, I think we now know that beauty pageants are becoming an industry in themselves and it is important to allow anybody, whether big or small, because I could not have said, “you are so big, so you cannot participate in this contest.”

For Ms Tourism that has been organised, even people with disabilities compete. The Albinos compete in Ms Tourism, people who are visually impaired have also been competing, which makes it a bit non-discriminatory but of course, also consider the issue of size.

Ultimately, our focus should be on portraying what we consider as African beauty, defined by ourselves rather than the Bazungu or the Western world. We would like to look at how to consider beauty and we do not want this kind of negativity against one group of people against the other.

All that said, my participation at the launch of Ms Curvy should not at all be misinterpreted since my focus was more in support of beauty standards which is more with our native cultural preferences and not using curvy women as tourist attraction. I have never said that and I will never even think about it.

I too strongly believe that women, just like men, should not be taken as commodities. However, I need to make it distinguishably clear that in marketing or promoting a destination, we do not use people but if there are some activities like Ms Uganda or comedy shows, we can highlight our tourism product to enrich our culture. 

There are some people who have been insinuating that I said tourists would come to see women with curves.  On the contrary, I meant that tourism begins with the people and these are you and me.

Allow me to also make it clear that none of the beauty contests in the country has been organised by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. They are all private initiatives including Miss Uganda. Not even Miss Tourism is organised by our ministry. These are individuals and individual organisations.

I would like us to also put issues of appreciating God in context. If you look at Genesis 1:1-31, whatever God would create, He would appreciate. God Himself would say, “This is good,” to whatever creation he made. He would appreciate. 

The issue of appreciating is not evil in itself. It is only when someone who appreciates has some other motives. Mr Speaker, if you read Genesis 1:1-31, the Bible is clear that after the creation of man and woman, God looked at them and appreciated. He said, “Yes, this is very good.”

We should appreciate the goodness in us and the wonderful land that God has given us; we are gifted by nature. We should also praise God. By doing that, it is another form of worshipping the Almighty God because we appreciate that He has created us as special people. This land is special and we know that – (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. As a woman and a mother, when this issue came up in the press, it raised a lot of concern and it was alleged that the minister alluded to that. He is here to make his statement that he was misquoted, yet the minister is trying to justify what was contained therein; which matter caused a lot of uproar in the public, including myself. 

I would not want to see a woman being paraded as a product. For him to continue justifying what he says was misquoted - is he in order to do so yet most of us are angered by that statement?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I heard the minister saying that he never said that they were going to parade any individuals as tourist attractions, but that just as Miss Uganda and other contests that take place, those activities can attract people and they can use that to sell Uganda. I did not hear him saying that he was quoted in the press. (Applause)

MR KIWANDA: Thank you. I would like to say this before you, honourable members. You know the person before you; I do not mean bad for this country. 

If there is anything, which I believe was misquoted in the press, it was done to portray me as a person who does not respect women. My wife is in the gallery and she can attest to that; I respect women. I respect my mother, my daughter and everyone. 

Therefore, I would like to assure you, as your brother and minister and a person you put in this ministry, that I will not at any one time demean the respect of woman. Thank you. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Next item.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, this is a statement from a minister, which attracts debate. Is it procedurally right for us to proceed to the next item before we give support to hon. Kiwanda’s statement? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: This is a kind of hybrid statement because it is neither a ministerial statement as such nor typically a statement of personal explanation. It is somewhere in between. It is a kind of personal explanation but coming from a minister.

Therefore, I am going to allow some small engagement though very limited. I will limit it to four Members and each Member will take two minutes.

2.23
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kiwanda for clarifying what has been a storm in the public. I think it has just been a storm in the teacup.

What brought problems was the way the media reported because I have tried to watch the footage where hon. Kiwanda appeared on television and read what The Daily Monitor wrote. What the newspaper wrote is not what hon. Kiwanda said.

As Members of Parliament, before we criticise, we need to be thorough and instead of being driven by public sentiments, we should read and find out what exactly the hon. Kiwanda said- (Interjections)- yes, we all have televisions and we watched. Hon. Kiwanda said that tourism involves people and he went graphically to describe the different ways Ugandans dance. At no point did he say that curvy women should be used for tourism. If anybody has that recording, I think he can table it instead of crucifying him.

I just want to caution the media that they should be careful and quote exactly what people have said. I think he was quoted out of context and I just want to urge Members not to blow this out of proportion. I thank hon. Kiwanda for clarifying this. 

We have been with hon. Kiwanda in Parliament for many years, he never appeared as anybody who can insinuate that women should be used –(Member timed out.)

2.25
MR MUHAMMAD KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Thank you, Mr Speaker for this opportunity. For me, the broader issue is not this statement. It is how public officers conduct themselves in public.

When you are a minister, quite often, you are going in an official capacity. We have abandoned the old tradition of having a written statement. It is always a guide on what to say and what to do. In addition, when you write a statement you take a deeper thought into every line that you write down or edit and avoid these kinds of controversies especially at the level of ministers. They should be urged wherever they are going in any public function to have a written statement to refer to.

Even honourable Members of Parliament, we have now adopted a culture that to be smart, you speak off cuff but quite often, you tread very carefully when you do that. That is why most people find themselves many times in controversy because they are speaking off the cuff, they are thinking aloud on serious matters.

My advice to my brother - and he knows he has been my brother for a long time - is that in this world, when you are a minister, have a prepared text most of the times. When you do not, you will invite this kind of debate. You will quote the media wrongly, say, I watched a video footage. The thing is that you refer to your statement. That is the point I would like to make to the honourable Members of Parliament.
Journalists do not misquote you if you have a prepared text. 

The people who trained me in leadership, the likes of Dr Paul Kawanga Ssemwogerere- (Member timed out.)

2.27
MR GAAFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that the honourable minister, hon. Kiwanda, can deny that he never said such a statement that women are going to be paraded as tourist objects. What is the meaning of diversification? That we are going to diversify tourism attraction with women? That we are going to bring different products of tourism attraction - why did you say that? We have a recorded statement.  I would implore hon. Kiwanda to –(Interruption)

MR KIYINGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was hesitant to put my colleague to a point of order. Hon. Mbwatekamwa, you are alleging something that was not written by the honourable minister. Is it in order for you to continue insinuating and putting words in the mouth of the minister who did not put anything in writing, indicating that there is that kind of diversification in the tourism sector? Are you in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You know some of the points of order are really clarification points. Honourable member, it looks like you are not being clear about what you said, so you might have to be clearer. (Laughter)

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Mr Speaker, I think it is better for hon. Kiwanda to apologise and we move on because we have a footage –(Interjections)- Okay, can he try to help me understand the meaning of diversification –(Member timed out.)

2.31
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think this is the right time for us to applaud hon. Kiwanda. From the time he become the Minister of State for Tourism, the number of tourists to this country has increased. From the time he introduced Kampala Rolex Festival, things have moved in the right direction in this country, amidst meagre resources.

Therefore, this is not a time for us to attack hon. Kiwanda but to encourage him. If he made any mistake, we should not be hurrying to crucify him. We should be here to correct him if at all he made any mistake. However, according to me, hon. Kiwanda did not make any mistake.
 
When I was in the Pan African Parliament - and you know how curvy the South African women are - the men there where asking me, “What is wrong with your women? Why are they very small?” They are proud of their curvaceous women. Why can’t we be proud of our women of different sizes? We should be proud of that.

Mr Speaker, in the African culture, the pride is in the size of the ladies; the way she walks in the compound, you must feel the tremor on the ground as she crosses the compound. (Laughter) That is the African culture.

Mr Speaker, I do not want us to be taken up with what the Whites believe in. Africa must also define its destiny. It must define its beauty –(Interruption)

MS BINTU: Mr Speaker, I have listened to hon. Okupa and he is talking about the beauty of a woman walking around and swinging whatever she is swinging. Is hon. Okupa in order to insinuate bad motives amongst the women who are not in that category of swinging? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the honourable member for Kasilo was being very specific about what he likes and what he likes to see in his compound. Therefore, I do not think we can judge him. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If my sister was listening to me, I did not use the word swinging. Those are your words not mine. I never used it, it is on record.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, Africans must define what beauty is. We should not be taken with what the Whites believe in. We must be able to define. That is why I applaud hon. Kiwanda for being innovative. I would like to call upon you to join us to go and watch Miss Curvy.

2.33
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue we are talking about has been long overdue. We have been waiting for the fat and curvy women. You know for many years, in Uganda especially, all the beauty contests have been just for the skinny and small ladies. The fat and curvy women had never been recognised. 

Therefore, hon. Kiwanda being invited by those women and going to attend to their requests was a very good thing. As a Minister of Tourism, if he had not adhered to their request, I do not think they would be happy. Like hon. Okupa said, he has taken tourism to another level. He has done a lot for tourism. We have been seeing him going to run, encouraging people to do local tourism. Now, to be invited by these curvy women and he does not respond to their need would have been a very bad thing. 

Therefore, I would like to encourage him to keep it up and put up competition for these women because there are people who admire fat and curvy women more than the skinny women. Hence, they also need to be recognised. If they are interested, let them participate. It does no harm.  I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

2.35
MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Rubanda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Kiwanda for the good motive he has for the country and the tourism ministry. 

When it comes to issues of women, it is different. When it comes to describing women and you start telling us that a - you are going to start describing them by curves - even when they talk about the beauty of women, they call it a beauty contest. They do not talk about the formation of the legs or the size but they call it a beauty contest. 

Mr Speaker, we would be very happy if the male counterparts, the male Members of Parliament, paraded their wives first so that we can see whether that is what they want. Let hon. Kiwanda bring his wife and we see –(Interruption)

MR PETER LOKII: Mr Speaker, I rise on a point of order. We have all been seeing the kind of descriptions about curvy women in the Red Pepper. There is no single day that the women in this House have risen to object what the Red Pepper describes. Is she, therefore, in order to raise a specific attack on minister Kiwanda, when Miss Curvy has severally been described by the Red Pepper? Is she in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member’s concern is that it should not be described that way. There should just be a general description of a beauty contest but to define people by shapes and – that is what she is objecting to. As for the Red Pepper thing, I do not know whether she has read it. Have you read the Red Pepper? 

MS PROSSY AKAMPULIRA: Mr Speaker, I do not read the Red Pepper and I would not be happy going to the Red Pepper to see how women are described. My concern is, let us respect women and probably look for another name. (Applause) We should clearly come out and use another description. 
Tomorrow, they will say that they want women with big eyes and another day, they will tell us the big legs – will that be tourism? Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the challenge that you face is that the description was not given by the minister. It was given by the ladies who called the minister; so, it was the ladies’ initiative and not the minister’s. 

2.38
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Constitution gives us the right of expression and association. If somebody said, “Asamo is disabled”, that is a fact. If you tell me, I am curvy, it is a fact. I like my big body. 

People have wanted to be Miss Uganda but because they are fat, they are automatically removed. Probably, this time, when we have the big ones also contesting, it gives us pride. I do not think the women who accepted to register had anything wrong with them because it is not the minister who registered them. We hear they are about 350 women already registered. Are we denying them their right? Are we going to stop them? 

How I wish there would be a very a big contest for disabled people. The other month, we had the Miss Albino, East Africa contest. The first runner up comes from Luweero, only that you did not see it. However, you saw these beautiful albinos who looked like Bazungu. I know some men will now be attracted to love us, as women with disabilities, because having seen that character, you will say, “I think if I went for her – “ (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, I know I am a woman but I think there are issues we are hiding under the coat. When we were looking at the Miss Uganda contest and what they go through, a lot of things happen. Why don’t we talk about that? The other day, we were very happy when we had our daughter here and we were clapping. Do we know what goes through those classes? 

As a fat person – people have been saying fat people are –(Member timed out.)

2.40
MR PETER SEMATIMBA (NRM, Busiro County South, Wakiso): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support hon. Kiwanda. I would like to look at it from a Biblical perspective. If we are going to learn anything, let us learn from God. God did not create beauty to be hidden but to be exposed. God did not create beauty to be shunned but he used beauty to make people rich. For example, the Bible tells us that Abraham was a very rich man but how did he become rich? It was because of his beautiful wife Sarah.

When the Kingdom of Israel was going to be destroyed, how did God save it? He got a beautiful girl called Esther and when the King saw her, he asked her what he should do since she was very beautiful. She said, “Save my people” and they were saved.

Therefore, if hon. Kiwanda’s idea is going to save Uganda as far as tourism is concerned, by us showing off the beauty of our beautiful women, the curvaceous ones or otherwise, let it be so. I submit, Mr Speaker –(Interruption) 

MS SANTA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Protect me from hon. Okupa. I rise on a point of order. Hon. Sematimba who was holding the Floor is even a pastor and has quoted the Bible to insinuate that the beauty of women was used by God to save mankind. The point of order I am raising is in this case is that the beauty of women is being used as a source of tourist attraction. 

Mr Speaker, these are daughters and wives of other people, being used as a source of tourist attraction. If the tourists come, demanding for this beauty, will it save Uganda? Will it bring instability and insecurity to the country Uganda? If you invite tourists to come and admire the curves – 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order. 

MS SANTA: Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Sematimba to mention that if tourists come to appreciate the curves, moreover the curves are in the middle – is it in order for him to support the idea of attracting foreigners to the curves of the women, yet in the Bible when man ate the forbidden fruit, which is in the middle, it brought problems to the entire mankind. Is he, therefore, in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On this Biblical and counter quoting of the Bible, the presiding officer might have to be an archbishop not a lay Speaker. (Laughter) If you are going into the Bible verses and others, I am not very competent. However, if you went into the issues of the Constitution in terms of which Article or law, I would be very competent. 

Therefore, let this matter be balanced that way. At an appropriate time, please, go and consult and find out what the Bible actually says. We also have the Koran and I do not know what it says about that.

2.44
MR GERSHOM SIZOMU (FDC, Bungokho County North, Mbale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to submit on this issue but not from a religious perspective. You rightly said you are not a Rabbi and so, I will not bring the Bible here.

I find it okay for Miss Curvy competition to take place but I find it extremely troubling to make our women tourist attractions. (Applause) 

I am a teacher of History. The colonialists paraded women who were more curvaceous than Ugandans in Europe. They put them naked in cages and the English citizens came out to watch naked women because they were curvaceous. We do not want to repeat that. (Applause)

We can keep the dignity of our women by having internal competitions. Our women are beautiful, whether they are big or small but we should not expose our women as tourist attractions. Thank you.

2.47
MS CATHERINE NDAMIRA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think we have gone very far in diminishing the value of a woman. As a country, we stand by our motto: “For God and My Country.” In the Bible, it is written that a woman is supposed to cover herself. 

I do not know where the minster got exposed to the curves of a women, which he is going to expose even to tourists. There are very many curvaceous men but I have never seen any of them exposed. I have seen Miss Uganda, Miss Tourism and others and I think we are being very creative about many things but why use a woman? We need to keep our dignity. I do not support hon. Kiwanda. Thank you.

2.48
MS ANNET NYAKECHO (Independent, Tororo North County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to begin by saying that much as hon. Kiwanda had good intentions for the tourism industry, I highly and strongly believe that, that particular aspect of using women to promote tourism is not well thought out. (Applause)

I would like to ask hon. Kiwanda to explain to this House what yardsticks he is going to use to measure the curvaceous of women. How will you be able to tell? Will you undress them? What are you going to do to tell that someone is more curvaceous than the other? – (Interruption)

MR NSAMBA OSHABE: Mr Speaker, hon. Kiwanda came here and presented a statement, saying it is not his ministry that is organising this beauty pageant. In his statement, he has not mentioned anywhere that he is planning to measure women in this nature or the other. Is the honourable member in order to impute a motive that hon. Kiwanda is the one organising that beauty pageant, yet he explained that among the many beauty pageants we have in this country, Miss Curvy is just one of them?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we should discuss what is before us not what we think should have been said or what we think we should discuss. The minister was clear. He said he was invited by a group of ladies who want to organise a contest and they termed it “Miss Curvy”. He was only invited as the minister to go and preside over this activity and he went. In the course of that, he said that when this activity is taking place, it can even attract other people and they will be able to sell Uganda. That is what the minister said. 

Therefore, please, let us restrict ourselves to what the minister said and not what we think he should have said.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance but we watched the clips and he was emphasising, using even his hands –(Interruption)

MS AKAMPULIRA: The information I would like to give my sister is that hon. Kiwanda should have guided those people who came to consult with him because they looked at him and thought it wise that he was the right person to go to. For that reason, he should have guided them on how to describe the issue of curvaceous women. Thank you.

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the honourable colleague for giving way. What the honourable is talking about is very important, noting that nowadays we have artificial materials that make our women to appear very curvy. (Laughter) What are the criteria the honourable minister –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Gilbert Olanya to start talking about artificial materials, which are not a subject of discussion in this House this afternoon, moreover during a discussion of a matter, which touches the hearts of the women of this country?

Is it in order for him to turn it into a joking issue? He does not even deserve to be addressed as “honourable” when he brings in issues like that. (Laughter) We are saying the statement made by the minister is what he understands and believes in but Ugandan women are not happy with the statement because it demeans women.

Is it in order for him to believe that, for example, hon. Ruth Nankabirwa, who is not curvy, and I am not curvy, does he mean we cannot contribute anything useful to this country? (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I do not want to become a judge of the contest to ask hon. Nankabirwa to show whether she has or does not have. (Laughter) 

Honourable members, I think we should be fair to hon. Olanya. I think what he deserves from us is sympathy because he was sharing an experience – he went for something, which he thought was curvy but it turned out to be artificial. (Laughter) I think he deserves sympathy, that people can be misled just like he was misled. Please, wind up.

MS NYAKECHO: Thank you. As I conclude, Mr Speaker, you can see the debate it has generated. Indeed, we have fake bums and fake curves on the market. However, this Miss Curvy is also promoting discrimination because the less curvy women are also going to begin running for artificial curves. Every woman will assume that they need to grow these things. (Laughter)

MR DAVID MUTEBI: Mr Speaker, we are labouring with a subject, which is not new in this country. For the record, this competition has been held in this country before, organised by Meddie Nsereko, a media Guru with CBS. This one is just being called by a different name. They have existed and many Ugandans, including some that I am seeing in this House, have attended this competition. We are labouring to discuss something on which the minister is only adding value; it has been done before.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to bring this to a close. Honourable minister, I want you to summarise what you want to say in two minutes and we close.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you and I also thank honourable members for their contribution. I know some of the contributions require the organisers. I am not the organiser but I know the organisers have probably been watching what the Members have guided on. 

I would just like to tell you that Miss Curvy has not been organised by the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities. The organisers are Ugandans and they are ladies and they are licensed just like the organisers of Miss Uganda and the other beauty pageants we have in the country. What you have told me, that the minister should go there and guide, is probably the reason I had to be there at its inception to ensure that whatever they were doing would be guided so that it does not destroy –(Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Mr Speaker, we have sectors, which are headed by ministers. The minister speaking in front of us here is from the tourism sector. We also have the ethics and integrity sector, where we have Fr Lokodo. This is a matter between morality and Government policy. (Applause) 

Hon. Fr Lokodo is quoted in the newspaper and I followed him –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You rose on a point of order. Please, raise the point of order.

MR FUNGAROO: Yes, this is where the order is coming from, Mr Speaker. Hon. Lokodo, the person in charge of ethics and morality in Uganda, told us – and he is quoted in the Daily Monitor – that the Miss Curvy idea is scandalous and against the morality of Uganda. (Applause) Is it in order, therefore, for a minister to stand here and contradict his colleague? Is it in order for the Prime Minister and Leader of Government Business who is here with us not to guide us on the issue of morality versus Government policy?

Is it in order for the Prime Minister not to guide people on the position of Cabinet? There are two ministers clashing here. Fr Lokodo said it is scandalous and immoral and I salute Fr Lokodo. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, please, conclude.

MR KIWANDA: The only thing I would like to say is that this guidance will be provided to the organisers. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the public gallery this afternoon, we have a delegation from Wend Africa Organisation. The delegation is led by Ms Jolly Grace Okot Andruvile, a former abductee of the LRA war, Dieudonne and Santa Amber. They are here to observe the proceedings and are interested in the discussion we are going to have in item No. 5, which I am going to ask that we deal with and before we deal with the Bills. There is a particular matter, which we are going to deal with when the Attorney-General comes.

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I have been listening to the debate on the curves or beauty of women and I had anticipated that we would conclude in a manner that unites Uganda and particularly, Parliament. I would have expected the minister to be mindful as a Christian who was honoured by the Born-Again Fellowship on the 31st of December to have acknowledged the fact that the Born Again Christians acknowledged his spirituality and sensitivity to matters that honour God. 

I would have expected that hon. Kiwanda is a Christian – whether he is a Muslim or whatever. I know the Koran that I have read and the Bible that I have read say that my body is the temple of the Holy Ghost. (Applause) 

As the temple of the Holy Ghost, it is very unfortunate that I would use this temple of the Holy Ghost to attract people from outside to come and see my temple. I think that is wrong.

I would have expected the minister to stand up and apologise and withdraw –(Interjections)– I am surprised that the minister - Mr Speaker, the minister must apologise. Otherwise, women are very unhappy about what happened. The minister must apologise to the people of Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I thought you rose on a point of procedure. 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: The procedural matter is that for us to conclude this debate, we must be united as a people as we preserve the values of Africans and the values of Africans are not preserved by going around and attracting people to come and see our country. (Interruption)

DR BARYOMUNSI: Mr Speaker, I rarely rise on points of order but today, I will raise one to my senior sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who came late when hon. Kiwanda had presented his statement.

As a former participant of such a pageant, is it in order - we had a debate and we even listened to women including my woman Member of Parliament for Kanungu and others, who found no problem with the statement of the minister and we concluded this debate. Therefore, is it in order for hon. Cecilia Ogwal, who came late to re-open the debate when we have concluded the item on the agenda?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we heard what was raised yesterday, by the Member of Budaka and a small debate took place. The honourable minister felt it necessary to come and explain what happened, which he has done. I ruled that it is in between a personal statement and ministerial statement and so, I allowed the debate for him to have the explanations captured properly.

Honourable members, the minister’s statement was clear – can I have some order? The minister said he was invited by a group of women who wanted to organise a contest, which they have termed “Miss Curvy”; it was a group of 300 registered women who invited him to go and preside over this and that is where he made the statements from. Therefore, it was not his initiative to organise “Miss Curvy”; it was the initiative of the women, which he supported. That is all that happened. 

In the course of the discussion, he explained, and he concluded by saying that the promoters of this contest are listening and watching, and they will take advice from the discussion that has taken place in Parliament. Otherwise, it does not have anything to do with the minister except the statement he made. The matter has concluded and the next thing that will happen is that the organisers will take considerations of what has transpired in Parliament. 

Honourable members, we have concluded this matter properly.  Next item.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF PARLIAMENT TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL ENTITLED, “THE NATIONAL SOCIAL SECURITY FUND (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2019”


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you recall that we paused this debate on account of a clarification that was supposed to come from the Attorney-General and the ministry on whether actually any instructions have been given to the First Parliamentary Counsel to draft, “The National Social Security Fund (Amendment) Bill, 2019.” We need to see if that happened.

Honourable minister, would you like to give us -

3.08
THE MINISTER OF YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nakiwala Kiyingi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I wish to lay at the Table, as advised yesterday, the letter from Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the First Parliamentary Counsel.

I also wish to lay at the Table the Cabinet extract after the passing of the amendments. 

Thirdly, I beg to lay at the Table, a letter from the First Parliamentary Counsel after the draft that is ready for publication.


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What date is the letter from the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to the First Parliamentary Counsel?

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The letter was dated 5 December 2018.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What about the letter from the First Parliamentary Counsel?

MS NAKIWALA: It was dated 29 January 2019.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Do you have a copy of the draft Bill now?

MS NAKIWALA: Yes, I have it here.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, hon. Sam Lyomoki had brought this issue of seeking leave of Parliament to present this Bill. We stayed the decision on this matter because the minister said they had already discussed this amendment and they had instructed the First Parliamentary Counsel to draft the Bill. The minister has come with the letters and the correspondence to that effect and a copy of the draft Bill.

Can we pause this matter and give the minister a time framework of two weeks to bring the Bill?

MS NAKIWALA: Three weeks, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can we give them three weeks? If it is already drafted, then you do not need three weeks; we will give you one week.

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. We will comply. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will stay the motion. If it does not come in one week, we shall activate hon. Lyomoki’s motion and we shall grant him leave.
	
MS NAKIWALA: Thank you, for your guidance. Let us leave it like that. If in one week, there is no Bill, we will give hon. Lyomoki leave to present the Bill.

Honourable members, please, let us not open the debate. Let us put this to conclusion.

MR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on point of procedure. First of all, the minister has stated that there is a Bill that the ministry is coming up with and they have requested for one week, which is fine and we accept. The only challenge is that in past, we have seen Government attempting to bring Bills that are contrary to what the workers want.

Mr Speaker, it is not a matter of saying that there is a Bill coming. Someone can come with another National Social Security (Amendment), Bill which has different principles to what we have. We have experienced cases where even three or four amendments can be taken on a law -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You are anticipating.

DR LYOMOKI: The minister must make sure that what is coming is in tandem with the principles that we are bringing not contrary. That is what I wanted to make. How do we harmonise that?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the Bill should come for amending the law, you have a right to make other proposals for amendment if they are not accommodated in the Bill. Isn’t that the procedure we normally follow? If there are areas of change that have not been affected but are vital, this House will take that decision, if you move the House to do so. The minister’s Bill will only be a vehicle that you will use to achieve what you want to achieve. 

Honourable minister, we are giving you one week and we come back to this matter. When the Bill comes, it will go to the committee and hon. Sam Lyomoki will be there to see the extent to which it captures what he is interested in.

MR KAMUSIIME: Thank you. I am rising on a point of procedure. Mr Speaker, we are in the budgeting process and there is this matter that has been itching us. We have just concluded the elections of the village council chairpersons, women councillors and the chairpersons of LC III. They have always complained of their facilitation. In fact, LC I had been promised bicycles but majority including my people did not even get them. 

I had an opportunity to meet them last week and I realised they are all needy. I am lucky that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here. As we are in the budgeting process, is it not procedurally right that the minister comes in now and he tells us whether he is going to include facilitation for the local council chairpersons and chairpersons of LC III? Majority of them do not have transport means and yet, we need them to identify challenges in the villages and monitor Government programmes. Is it not procedurally right that at this moment, we consider the matter? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. You see, there are avenues you could have used to address that issue. We have just dealt with the National Budget Framework Paper and the budget is coming. These are areas you could have handled through the committee. However, since you have raised it now and the minister is here, I would like the minister to say something about it. 

3.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): As you have guided, Mr Speaker, it is true we presented the National Budget Framework Paper to this House. It had several issues including remuneration not only for the local councillors but also others, which were raised by Parliament. The budget process is still on until May.

So, I would like to suggest that this matter be handled in the context of the budgeting process rather than in isolation. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think you need to track this within the process. If there are gaps, then you could see how to deal with them in the course of the budgeting process. Thank you.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT URGING GOVERNMENT TO SUPPORT FORMER FEMALE ABDUCTEES (LRA WIVES) AND CHILDREN BORN IN CAPTIVITY DURING THE LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY INSURGENCY IN NORTHERN UGANDA

3.16
MR LYANDRO KOMAKECH (DP, Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Mr Speaker, I rise to move a motion under Rules 55 and 56 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament entitled, “the Resolution of Parliament Urging Government of Uganda to Support Former Female Abductees (LRA Wives) and Children Born in Captivity During the Lords’ Resistance Army Insurgency in Northern Uganda”.

“WHEREAS the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) rebellion, led by Joseph Kony in Northern Uganda inflicted severe suffering on civilians of the greater Northern Uganda through indiscriminate killings, child abductions, property destruction, displacement of thousands and loss of means of production, household assets and other investments;

AND WHEREAS the conflict caused negative effects on abducted girls and women who not only endured tremendous physical and mental suffering during their time in abduction but were also forced to marry LRA combatants resulting into births of several children;

AWARE that the region has experienced a decade of relative peace since the termination of the over twenty-year insurgency and that there have been recovery efforts through rebuilding of social services, infrastructure projects and resettlement and reintegration programmes for the conflict affected communities have been commenced;

FURTHER AWARE that Government has also undertaken a number of programmes to alleviate the economic recovery and the social transformation of Northern Uganda such as the Northern Uganda social Action Fund programme (NUSAF) that continues to provide effective income support and to build the resilience of poor and vulnerable households;

CONCERNED that despite the current Government interventions to address the plight of conflict affected communities, this particular group of victims (former female abductees and children born in captivity) has continued to experience untold suffering through stigmatisation, guilt, ridicule, isolation and rejection by families and communities where they live;

FURTHER CONCERNED that at the time of abduction, these girls were still very young and had not yet accomplished education, hence making it very difficult for such women now to find gainful employment to support themselves and their children born while in captivity;

RECOGNISING that given the above peculiar situation and challenges of the abducted mothers and children born in captivity, there is need for special assistance by Government to address those challenges through the introduction of other alleviation programmes to improve the livelihood of the affected persons;

CONVINCED that the introduction by Government of appropriate special assistance programmes will effectively enhance the welfare of these vulnerable victims;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Government:

    1) Identifies and profiles the affected victims;
    2) Restructures the current Government financing by creating specific financing of former female LRA abductees and their children born in captivity with the view of enhancing their capacity;
    3) Embarks on sensitisation campaigns to closely have joint programmes with cultural institutions to ensure that these victims are socially integrated and protected to avoid stigmatisation and discrimination perpetuated against them; 
    4) Expedites the adoption of the transitional justice policy, which is still with Cabinet to date.”

I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? The motion is seconded by the Members of Parliament for Tochi County, Kalaki County, Bokora County and Woman Representatives for Kitgum, Omoro, Nwoya, Katakwi, Dokolo and Otuke Districts. Would you like to speak to your motion briefly? 

MR KOMAKECH: Mr Speaker, for over a decade now, we continue to enjoy relative peace in Northern Uganda. When you look at the time when the Northern Uganda conflict came to an end in 2006 with the signing of the Juba Peace Accord in which you were a part of the process, there were fundamental issues that Government was to follow. To date, the process has taken too long. 

The female abductees were taken, young as they were, from schools and villages. They lived in captivity through rape. They brought children to life through rape. They became wives of these commanders. 

From 2006 to date when the insurgency ended, Government should have expedited specific programmes that target such kind of victims. You remember the Aboke girls and Barlonyo victims and many other places where the abduction took place. We believe time is running out. If you have experienced trauma of war and it is not dealt with, you - even counselling, which should be immediate is not done to-date. 

So, we received this petition in this Parliament two months ago. Some of the victims are on the way coming to listen to the debate. I think they have been delayed by their means. 

At present, these children these women have given birth to have reached the level of university and the women cannot afford to pay their tuition. They have struggled from primary to senior four and six. Their livelihood is very poor.

Therefore, I believe Government should look at reviewing the entire regions that have been affected by war to see how effective the programmes can be used for implementation because when we talk of NUSAF, what are the categories of people who have benefitted? If you talk of Peace Recovery Development Plan, to what extent are they impacting? Possibly, we may have to make an entire review of some of the support that has been taking place in these areas affected by war.

This motion is in good spirit to ensure that the Office of the Prime Minister that is mandated to oversee implementation of post-conflict programmes restructures some of these programmes to tailor it in such a way that the victims are directly supported.

At present, we are aware that Government, since the end of the Juba peace process, they were mandated to come with a policy for the post conflict programme; the transitional justice policy. We are aware that the President has given a green light to this process.

Cabinet sits every week I believe, these are priorities of those affected by conflict. Why do you want to delay this process to this extent? We should have not be coming here for motion for a resolution for specific programmes. The Government policy on transitional justice should have been in place and implementation should have been in full gear. We need a very comprehensive process to address victims of war.

Northern Uganda is there, western and the entire country, we did a two years study in the book entitled “Compendium of Conflict in Uganda”. If you read this book, that is when you begin to notice that it is important to look at where we are coming from and where we should be going so that this country is kept as one.

For purposes of the record of Parliament, I will lay this book at the Table. It contains views of Ugandans collected for two years in the study we conducted. I urge Members who are here that it is very difficult when you meet children who were born out of situations of conflict. 

They have become young men and they tell you, “if we have opportunity to gather ourselves, we could easily form another rebel group”. These were statements we got from these young people. It is not good for this country to get this kind of thinking going on. As leaders, we must address this issue.

Mr Speaker, this is very serious. I am happy that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is here looking at me at 90 degrees in appreciation of what I am raising. I believe he should together with our minister of reconstruction who is a very hardworking woman, deal with these issues squarely. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. However, honourable, when you tie it to a larger issue of transitional justice policy and yet, this is a specific matter with interventions from Government already, PRDP III and NUSAF III, which are post war interventions, your case is that this category of people is not receiving this particular kind of intervention. 

Your request is that it should be restructured and there be profiles so that they become actual beneficiaries of what is already being funded by Government. If you bring transitional justice, are you not widening it too much for focus?

MR LYANDRO: Mr Speaker, it is good to also catalyse thinking. I thought by bringing this, it would catalyse the minds of the Front Bench to know that they have an obligation before them because this is real. Therefore we expect you to expedite this.

However, in what the English say, in the meantime, we need this restructuring that is geared towards these specific victims as you deal with broader policy agenda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.27
MS SANDRA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to second the motion. The protracted insurgency in Northern Uganda characterised by wide spread abduction and abuse of unknown significant numbers of women and girls has caused untold suffering in the region of the North of this country.

During the insurgency, there were very many girls and women who were abducted. Some were abducted from school; for example, the famous Aboke girls, the Iceme girls and many others. Others were even abducted from the communities. However, up to now, we have a Government but we do not have any clear numbers of those who were abducted, those who died in captivity and those who came back. We do not have those statistics.

Therefore, as I stand to second the motion, it is our prayer that the Government comes up with the statistics of people who have returned; the women and their children who suffered in captivity and have not yet been fully integrated in the communities.

Mr Speaker, the girls and the women who were abducted were forced to carry guns. Not only were they forced to carry guns but they were also forced to become wives to the rebels. In doing that, they had no choice that they would just be tagged to particular commanders and they become their wives without any choice.

Mr Speaker, even during captivity, these women and girls were terribly raped. They were abused as children. They did a lot of child labour and they were forced to do things beyond their conscience. 

As we talk about life in captivity, a lot of unpleasant things happen there. Some of them fortunately came back. As they have come back, we do not see any deliberate effort by the Government through the Office of the Prime Minister and yet we have so many programmes which target Northern Uganda.

These people and formerly abducted mothers came with a lot of stigma, rejection, discrimination and it has led to the crisis of identity. These mothers and their children, for example, in the district I represent, some of them when they returned, their families or fathers only accepted them minus their children. Others were chased away and with their children, they are now living the life of beggars.

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we do not have a programme by the Government to integrate these women and their children. Even at the level of a clan, there is no clan which is willing to absorb these children more especially that they are termed as not “our blood.” I feel this should not go on like this when we have a Government.

I would like to urge Government that it is  high time that these victims of circumstances in the name of formerly abducted girls plus their children; time has come that the Government must come and help these people. Time has come that the Government must put a policy or programme in place to identify the income generating activities to help these women.

Mr Speaker, as women in this country, we do not have the right to inherit land. When these people come back with their children and do not have the right to inherit land yet, the major source of employment more especially at the village level is land. You find that they become stranded and do not have any economic or income generation means to support themselves and their children.

Therefore, it is my humble request to Government, through the Office of the Prime Minister, that let us this time do things differently. Let us put a programme specifically to help these people to get income so that they support the education of their children. These children are out there and they have come of age. If they are not supported, I believe that by hook or crook, they will find a way of survival. Before we reach there, I would urge Government to look within the available means to find a way of supporting these people.

I would like to also note that as a country, there are very many wars, which happen in different parts of Uganda. For this very particular case of the formerly abducted girls and children who were raped and do not have identity, and some who do not remember the fathers of their children, I would like to urge Government, through the Office of the Prime Minister, which is operational in northern Uganda, to put in place a deliberate programme to help these people so that at least they are not completely treated as if they are not Ugandans. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable member, for seconding this motion. The question that I now propose for your debate is that the motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to support former female abductees and children born in captivity during the Lord’s Resistance Army insurgency in northern Uganda be adopted.

Debate starts now and it will take a maximum of 45 minutes because we need to do the Bills also. Going by the numbers who are going to make the contributions, we will limit the time to two minutes for each Member. 

3.35
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to give my support to the report. 

I would like to say that Government has come up with different programmes to support the girl-child in this country under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development, especially on skilling Uganda. I would like to propose that in addition to the programmes that are under the Office of the Prime Minister, we also consider these girls for the programmes under the Skilling Uganda initiative. I know that with what these girls have gone through, it is very difficult to enrol them back into school.

Secondly, sometimes we come up with very good proposals in Parliament, the way we are doing now, but we do not see the reality on the ground. In case this programme is expedited, I would like to call upon the Office of the Prime Minister to have it implemented within the time limits that we have decided as Members of Parliament. Thank you.

3.36
MS CATHERINE LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Omoro): Mr Speaker, I rise in support of the motion that was moved by hon. Lyandro. 

The matter before us is a critical one. I would like to say that since the aftermath of the Lord’s Resistance Army war in northern Uganda, there have been quite a number of Government programmes in the region in all the conflict affected communities. However, there has not been any specific programme deliberately designed by Government targeting this particular group of people. I, therefore, strongly agree with hon. Lyandro Komakech’s motion. 

When you look at all these programmes like Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP) and all the rest, you realise that most of these programmes came in to reinforce or support people who had already got something in place. When you look at the category of people we are talking about, they include children, some of who returned from captivity without parents and they have no relatives or land. Therefore, when they are supported under livelihood programmes under PRDP or the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF), they will not be able to benefit. I, therefore, strongly agree that Government needs a deliberate programme that can address the plight and concerns of these women and children they have returned with from captivity.

Secondly, there are quite a number of programmes that ever though we always decide that they are for war affected communities generally, still they will not realise something for these children. There must be something specifically designed if we are to address the plight of our mothers and children. Thank you.

3.38
MR KENNETH ONGALO-OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support this motion and to request that it be broadened to include not only northern Uganda but all the areas in Uganda where the LRA war took place. 

In Teso, for example, there was an LRA incursion, which resulted in abductions. In my own constituency, Kalaki, Lwala Girls Secondary School lost over 100 girls who were abducted. To date, we do not know the fate of so many of these girls. Most of them who came back have children, and they are traumatized and ostracised by their societies. To this day, the Government has not taken any specific action to address the plight of these girls. Every day when you go to the Speaker’ office, you find them there. It is only the Speaker who has struggled to try and reintegrate these girls of Lwala Girls Secondary School back into society. 

I support this motion but I urge that we look beyond just northern Uganda. The Government should embark on policies, which are aimed at addressing the impact of the LRA incursion wherever and whenever it took place. In Teso, we had so many abductions, even as far as Pallisa. I support the motion but I beg that it be broadened and any Government response should look at the bigger picture and not just northern Uganda. Thank you.

3.40
MS ESTHER ANYAKUN (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the Member who brought this motion. 

I would like to put it on record that there was a gap from the onset by the time the war ended. The Government of Uganda just left these people in the hands of international organisations through their interventions. There is no way the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) were going to be sustainable and keep around to reintegrate these people. There should have been a plan by Government to capture the data of these people and have them in a place so that they know that these are the people who are affected by the war and whose details have been captured.

When you talk about considering other programmes like NUSAF, Northern Uganda Rehabilitation Programme (NUREP) and others, you cannot just categorise these people like other beneficiaries. There should have been a plan to make sure that these people are identified. There is a process. When people have been affected by war and so many other calamities in this world, they have to go through a kind of rehabilitation process where they have to go through trauma and adaptability mechanisms before they are reintegrated. 

Children should have been considered and given some of these scholarships that are given to children from other parts of this country. The skilling of women should have been done and they would now be empowered. If they were zeroed on, they would be empowered. The children we are talking about do not know their parents and they do not know where to resettle. There should have been a mechanism of family tracing. These children should have been known and traced to the nearest relative if both parents were killed during the war.

When these people came back, they just entered and reintegrated themselves in the society. We know that they had a very difficult life in trying to get established in these communities. That is why we are facing this challenge. We shall continue crying for these families because it is a process. The moment these people are not zeroed on and empowered as people of a special category - Their issue was peculiar compared to other issues that people go through in this country. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Can I have the Member for Busongora.

3.34
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I strongly support the motion because Kasese District and the Rwenzori Subregion have equally gone through the same humiliation, torture and suffering that the honourable member was talking about.

My view is that Government needs to reflect majorly on the people who have gone through this particular suffering. We now have two divides in the country; we have those who have never suffered any form of war and those who have been traumatized by war, but all of us are counted as Ugandans. However, we are not at the same level because we have not gone through the same challenges.

Mr Speaker, I just want to pick a leaf from Kasese. The National Army for the Liberation of Uganda (NALU) abducted so many women and children, the Allied Democratic Forces (ADF) came and did the same and the National Resistance Army (NRA) came and did the same. This is too much for areas which have gone through war. How would I be happy that there would be a deliberate way of increasing the budgets of the districts which were going through war and those that have gone through war? 

During war, when they abduct a person from a family, the entire economic activities of such a family almost ground to a halt. This is because they concentrate a lot on trying to trace the person. They also concentrate on making sure that the role the women and children in those families were playing can be compensated for by the few or even none of the members of the families who have remained.

Therefore, I concur with the honourable member for Kalaki that we expand this, and I just want to ask this Parliament to do so. Let us not only limit it to LRA but let us include areas that were hit by ADF and NALU, so that we know that this is a balanced thing. In addition, Government must get a criteria and guidelines on how they are going to identify those to benefit from this, in a fair and free manner. I would like to thank you and ask that Kasese, Bundibugyo, Bunyangabo, Ntoroko and Rubirizi, which were hit by ADF and NALU, also be included.

3.47
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion moved by hon. Komakech. 

Any government has the responsibility to protect it nationals but during war, it become very difficult. Therefore, we cannot be very judgmental on what transpired. Many of these people went into captivity when they were young. They were tortured in captivity and they produced children. Now they are coming back with that trauma and they need a lot of psychological support, and the families as well. The families were angry that the people who had fathered the little ones were enemies of the people because of what they went through. 

Because of that, we know that many of these lost out on education and their siblings. It is, therefore, the responsibility of the Government to make sure that we give support. I know that many organizations came in to support when they returned but we need to give something. Recently, when I was reading the papers, I was touched by the girl who is about 19 who started a skills institution in Gulu. She is lamenting that despite the fact that she has about 80 learners, she does not have the money and so many of them were dropping out. Such people and many others should be supported. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had agreed on two minutes each so that we use the 45 minutes properly, which are quickly running out. 

3.49
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank you for finding time on the Order Paper for this pertinent concern.

Mr Speaker, I came face to face with the bitter realities of the LRA experience when we met some of the women who came here to present their concerns. I was particularly intrigued by the story of one lady who was abducted at seven years old in 1994 and she returned home in 2004 with two children. She told us, “These are children born in the bush to an abducted mother and fathered by a ‘rebel’”. Therefore, back home, they are rejected. Their people cannot even believe that these children are normal. They do not know where these chidden come from and when they are asked about the fathers, they cannot believe them.

Mr Speaker, the thing that touched me was that they have moved from being victims to survivors and now they have become advocates against rebellion but no one believes them. The first rebellion is in their families. They tell their children that there is hope for tomorrow in this country but the children cannot even believe them. Even when they are moving around advocating against rebellion, no one believes them. 

I am speaking particularly for the mothers because I am born of a mother. To see a woman not being able to sleep even when she is now back home to enjoy the comfort of the peace that Government has ushered in because she is thinking about how she will meet the basic necessities of life, how her children will survive tomorrow, is so challenging.

Now to the resolution, I think we should not only include PRDP or NUSAF that we are talking about, we even have programmes like the Student Loan Scheme. We should restructure those to also capture the particular interest of these children of abducted mothers. We also have the Women Entrepreneurship Programme under Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development. How do we take care of these women with peculiar challenges? 

This must not only apply to abducted women who came back but even other victims. For us in West Nile, for example, people were killed. Hon. Etuka together with his two sisters were stopped in the park and they ran way. One of his sisters was eaten by a lion around Ayago Bridge. The other brother ran away and came back almost after seven years and now he has been forced to join the army. I agree with hon. Ongalo-Obote that people from Teso also suffered a catastrophe. Therefore, let us come up with another amendment to the resolution. There should be a particular programme that should look at these particular challenges, Mr Speaker. 

I would like to implore Members; if you have time, let us interface with these women. We should make arrangements and they come here and the minister also listens to them. You cannot fail to cry. I shed tears that day. I went back and posted on my Facebook wall, WhatsApp and so on and narrated how I had met with the bitter realities of what it meant to suffer in captivity under Kony. It is so painful. I would like to thank you, Mr Speaker. 

3.54
MS STELLA KIIZA (Independent, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion concerning the northern Uganda war-ravaged people. Even if it was not that section of people, the whole northern Uganda needs special attention under all sectors of Government, if we are to attain middle-income status. This is because there is an imbalance in the economic social wellbeing of that region as compared to other regions of Uganda. 

We do not need a separate budget, however; it should be a policy that all ministries must allocate some money relevant to that sector to attend to all social requirements of the people living in northern Uganda. I am referring to the common man because some of us have gone above. However, the average man in northern Uganda needs urgent attention if we are to achieve the middle-income status. Thank you very much.

3.55
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I sat here meditating and weeping inside my heart because I also lost relatives. I lost an uncle, who was a regional telecommunications manager in the north; he died during the Kony war. I also lost a brother in Katakwi. He was the officer in charge, mechanical, at the Ministry of Works office in Kotido. 

When we came here to discuss the issue of the nodding disease, Government was hesitant to give support to very innocent children that were suffering. I know my senior brother, hon. Bahati, is here. If we now start soliciting for funds for Butaleja and other places, Government will find a way of giving very little money and say the area is big. I would like to request that this becomes a model. Can we zero it to only the north and we see the impact? 

Look at the inequalities, look at the Primary Leaving Examinations; we would like to request that instead of Members just coming up with motions, can’t ministers sit, especially the one for northern Uganda - Why do you wait for Members to raise this issue? 

I am in total agreement with the motion, but I would like to request Members to first zero down on the north and set aside tangible money so that we see tangible effects. Some of these women were just raped. They have children and cannot be integrated in the community. 

Therefore, I support the motion and I hope this Government, which I belong to, will set aside some tangible money, other than wasting money in this Kampala dishing out to people who may not – I would like to thank you. 

3.59
MR TERRENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. As a country, we should be able to find out why this category of people in northern Uganda was not specifically identified for support within the existing programmes in that region. That was an oversight. 

I now support and appreciate the idea as it comes now from the movers. Much as the NUSAF and PRDP projects were in place, these people were not really getting that adequate support that they deserved to. It is now imperative upon us here to find out what should be done in order to have this happen. 

Can we get approved data so that when we plan, it helps us to know how to support these people? That must be the first prerequisite. We should find out how many these people are and their categories. Thereafter, we can advise the planners of NUSAF and PRDP. Government definitely gives counterpart funding to these programs. We can advise them to get a specific programme within their programmes to address this category of people. 

Participatory planning is another process. We should not assume that they can plan by themselves. We, in northern Uganda, should help them in the planning process by finding out what kind of income generating activities can be substantial and help them come to the level of the rest or even surpass them. That is also very important in the process. 

Therefore, the planning process is key and the data system is very important in order for us to identify how to help this category of people. Thank you very much. 

4.01
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I also thank you for the opportunity you gave me to listen to these victims when they brought their petition to your office. 

As a committee, during consideration of the Budget Framework Paper, we discussed this matter and we came with two recommendations: One, Government should come up with specific mechanisms or strategies in identifying these people. This is because, based on the generality of the strategies through which beneficiaries are identified, you will find that they lose out. Two, we considered the level of the benefits that they get. We concluded that whatever they get cannot benefit a person of this category; for example, people get one goat or one cow and this cannot help. Therefore, we recommended that Government should have a special plan to treat these people differently from other affected people in the region. 

Mr Speaker, in the motion, there has been a lot of emphasis on female victims. However, in my district, there is a man called Iga who was abducted and he came back but up to now, he is homeless. I am thinking instead of restricting ourselves to the girls, let us also look at the boys who were abducted and we can identify them.

Mr Speaker, in the Ninth Parliament, a similar motion on this same matter was brought here and it was debated. I still remember that I contributed to the debate. I would like that Government reports on the implementation of the decisions taken by this House because this is not a new thing in this House. 

Government has also made a lot of statements about the loss of properties, which is one of the issues hinted on in this motion. However, we have also realised that the compensation promised by the Government cannot be realised based on the criteria included in the implementation of these programmes. We also recommended that if Teso is supposed to be compensated, there should be a specific programme but it should not be mixed with programmes like NUSAF; otherwise, how will you identify and differentiate these beneficiaries?

I would like to also recommend that Government does an audit of the NGOs. In northern Uganda, there were many NGOs that started and some moved to this region using the names of these victims. If the intended objectives were achieved, I would believe by now these victims would not be crying. So, who is benefiting from these monies sourced by the NGOs in the names of these victims? Therefore, I would like to propose that we do an audit based on the missions and objectives of many of these mushrooming NGOs. If some have abused and misused the names of these victims, then they should be disciplined because many people are doing fundraisings and at the end, the affected people are not benefiting.

I support the motion. Thank you very much.

4.05
MR NOAH MUTEBI (NRM, Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion because I grew up in Luweero Triangle, particularly in Nakasongola District, where we suffered because of the bush war which brought the National Resistance Movement to power. 

It is very true that such incidents of raping ladies and girls happened. When you listen to what happened to the Aboke girls, it is really unfortunate, but we have been learning from it. There are a number of incidences which happened in this country where war took place, as many people have mentioned; they have mentioned Karamoja, Kasese and I have mentioned Luweero. Government needs to come up with a comprehensive plan to handle such people who suffered and lost property. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to give an example. There are the Baruli from Nakasongola whom I represent in Parliament. They migrated to Lango sometime back. In 1979, there was a conflict and they were chased and they came back to Nakasongola and they lost property. They are also there asking, “What do we do?” 

As Parliament, we need to sit, put our heads together and come up with a comprehensive plan to handle such incidences. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

4.06
MR OSCAR OMONY (NRM, Youth Representative, Northern): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

For the last 20 years, we have seen young mothers and children in northern Uganda suffer. We are now facing a problem in northern Uganda, especially in Gulu. In the last months, you have heard about people committing suicide in northern Uganda. A month ago, there were young children who were beaten up and one person died all because of theft. These are the effects on the young people who came out of the war and have no sense of direction or no parents to look after them. 

I rise to support the motion that has been moved by hon. Lyandro Komakech. I urge the Government of Uganda to look into this issue. It is eating up our population in northern Uganda and we are crying for help. Thank you very much.

4.08
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING)(Mr David Bahati): Mr Speaker, I rise to support my colleague on the motion. This effort informs what Government is already doing and adds value to the work that hon. Grace Kwiyucwiny will be explaining later on, when she is given an opportunity.

The people that we are talking about are people who suffered not by their choice but by circumstances. These are Ugandans that we must support and do something for. As a child, I suffered as an orphan. When I think about somebody who has suffered due to war, I feel touched. I thought I should rise to support the private Member’s initiative and also to assure you that we will be working with the Minister for Northern Uganda to identify resources to support this particular programme.

I agree that we should start with northern Uganda for obvious reasons and see how it moves slowly, in a phased manner, so that the success that we get from northern Uganda can also be duplicated in other areas like Luweero and Rwenzori. Thank you very much for moving this motion –(Interruption)

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, Minister, for giving way. When you look at NUSAF III, there are very many objectives that it is trying to achieve. The monies meant for these objectives are provided for and it is superintended over by Government. 

Honourable minister, I would like to know if you have been following what these monies do and if you are intending to put in more money. What exactly have we found out that we want to address? Wouldn’t you think that if we put this money to the right use, it would address the issues that are meant to be addressed, other than talking about money and generalising issues? 

You should also be looking at bottom-up planning for these affected areas. The specific issue that hon. Lyandro Komakech is talking about would have been addressed if they had been given a chance to participate and really address the critical issues that deserve to be addressed.

MR BAHATI: Can I first respond to this? The intention of the mover of the motion is to address the challenge at hand. Members, I think it is important that we address that challenge and we welcome the move by the private Member. This democracy is a process and at whatever stage you get value addition, you welcome it. Therefore, hon. Lyandro Komakech has identified this particular need of the former abductees who are suffering despite the fact that we have this programme going on. He is saying, can we add in more resources to begin with? It is not only going to be resources but even other programmes that will support the process –(Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to seek for clarification from the honourable minister. Hon. Jesca Ababiku said very clearly that in 2014, Parliament came up with very many resolutions about the LRA war victims - children born in captivity as well as women and men. As a result, the Deputy Speaker, who was chairing the House at the time, appointed three people to extract all the resolutions. Among the people who were appointed were hon. Godfrey Kiwanda, hon. Reagan Okumu and hon. Rosemary Nyakikongoro.

Honourable minister, at that time the Government pledged to identify funds and make sure that what Parliament resolved would be implemented. Up to now, we have never seen anything on the ground. The clarification I would like to seek from you is that you are explaining very well that you are liaising with the minster in charge of northern Uganda to make sure that the funds are got and the resolutions are implemented. If after four years we have never seen any tangible thing being done, I would like to get the assurance from you that following our discussion today, you are committing yourself to making sure that you allocate the resources for these suffering children in northern Uganda.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, before you respond, let me give clarification on that issue. The motion that triggered the appointment of that team of three was for the general victims of the war that had happened in northern Uganda. That got factored into the December resolution that was passed when we passed PRDP III and NUSAF III. That is why there was the shift from general classrooms and everything to social interventions. That is how it was accommodated in the Government policy. The PRDP III and NUSAF III became social livelihood interventions instead of infrastructural and other things. That is why there was that shift. 

However, this motion is specifically about those women who were captured as children and they grew up in the bushes - some were raped and they got children in the bush – but this general intervention is not getting to them. They came to Parliament some time back and they cried in this Parliament and that is why this motion is here. Let us separate the issues so that we can address them. That is why the minster is saying the issue has been brought, let us deal with it.

MS JOY ATIM: Thank you very much, honourable minster, for giving way. As the honourable colleague and the Speaker have said, the abductees came and they were in the gallery. We debated in this House and their plight was categorically discussed here. We discussed how they were being called names, how their children were being rejected in the community, how their children could not go to the same schools with other children because they were called children of Kony, and how the girls were not accepted in their own homes and families. This Parliament resolved that a specific programme be made for them.

Mr Speaker, I do not know why we discuss issues in Parliament and things are just taken lightly like that. We would not be discussing this for the second time because we discussed the same thing in this House. Do we have data about these girls? Do we have data about these children? How old could they be at this time? Some must have got to the streets because people have rejected them in their homes. It is the Government which is deliberately not helping them.

Mr Speaker, issues of the LRA war are enormous in northern Uganda –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Would you like to seek the clarification now?

MS JOY ATIM: Yes, Mr Speaker. Apart from these ones who were taken to the bush, there were others who were raped within their own homes. Barlonyo is another case where every year Government sends a representative but the Government does not put any funds towards Barlonyo victims. Yes, there is a technical school but does it support the women whose husbands were hurt? Does it support the women who were raped? I think Government needs to do something.

I would like to get clarification from the minister. Do you listen to us for the sake of listening or you listen and act and put yourself in our shoes as northern Uganda? Thank you.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, if you allow, I would like to inform Members that actually for most of the issues which are being raised, the minister in charge of northern Uganda is going to respond to them and she has some information. However, the confirmation I would like to give –(Interruption)

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, before the minister sits down –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You cannot talk when he is not sitting down. He has to sit down first.

MS AKURUT: He gave way for me. Mr Speaker, I would like to thank the minster for giving me the opportunity to seek clarification. 

Mr Speaker, you know that the establishment of the Arrow Boys in Teso subregion was because of the LRA incursion in the region. You are also aware that there were abductions in Teso. There were abductions at Lwala Girls, Obalanga and Orungo in Kapelebyong. Actually, our people were in camps because of the LRA war. For us to think we should concentrate this programme in northern Uganda only and leave out Teso that equally suffered because of the LRA incursion is unfair.

We had recommended that we expand this motion to accommodate Teso subregion because there were also abductions there. Since we are talking of LRA, the girls and women of Teso subregion who suffered should be considered as we address this before we move to another issue.

MR AOGON: Mr Speaker, humbly, the information that I would like the House to have is that if you follow the trail of poverty in the country, you will find that it follows exactly where these things happened and one of the places is Teso. The poverty rate in Teso stands at 40.5 per cent and it is because of this issue. The poverty in Busoga is because of the Magamaga war of Lakwena. That is reason enough for us to expand this motion. 

Let us get this entire constituency of people who suffered through the war, including children born out of rape because of Kony. The Arrow Boys defended this country and expunged Kony out of Uganda and if we do not do anything for Teso, it would be unfair. I would rather think that we create a schedule which is comprehensive to deal with the greater north. I am the publicity secretary of the Greater North Parliamentary Forum and it would be very embarrassing for this House to leave out the publicity secretary’s concerns. Mr Speaker, I beg.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close, please.

MR BAHATI: Mr Speaker, today we are debating the issue of former female abductees and children born in captivity during the LRA insurgency in northern Uganda. If it is the wish and position of the House to expand this, we will also look at it because wherever they are, they are Ugandans who need to be helped. 

Before I give time to the former committee member to give me information, the assurance I would like to give to the House is that we will work with the Minister for Northern Uganda, who is in charge of this programme, to make provision in the next financial year within our resource envelope.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, as a former committee member, I just want to give this information. When you selected a team comprising the three of us, we went to Central African Republic and we found many of these families. Actually, when we were interacting with the officers in Central African Republic, they told us that there is a tribe-less tribe in their country; they do not know where those people came from. During that meeting, we also interacted with some members from the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). 

The information I would like to give to the minister is that we should look beyond the boundaries of Uganda because our people went to Central African Republic and DRC. Actually, some of them speak some Acholi. Therefore, this goes to beyond the boundaries of Uganda. Therefore, as we think about this, we should look beyond the borders of Uganda as far as these kids and women are concerned.

4.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (NORTHERN UGANDA) (Ms Grace Kwiyucwiny): Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for this opportunity and thank hon. Komakech for bringing this motion. This is a very sensitive matter that we have to support. I have been handling this matter since I started my work as the Minister of State for Northern Uganda. I have met some of them and I want to refute those who are saying that Government is doing nothing. The Government has tried to do something but we can do more. Mr Speaker, I have met the Lwala girls, formerly abducted girls of Gulu and the War Victims Children’s Network of Acholi region because of the seriousness of this matter.

When I took office, things that have been coming to my desk include nodding syndrome, which we have addressed under NUSAF; we deliberately put funds under NUSAF to support this. As I talk, the districts of Pader, Kitgum, Lamwo and Omoro have already got funds specifically for the nodding syndrome victims. We really try to respond to these issues that come up. Bearing in mind that NUSAF is strictly for livelihood, this is being addressed.

I have issues that have come before me about the rate of suicide in the north. I came to the Floor of this House and said we were going to look into that, including consulting and involving religious and traditional leaders. We have to take this because war took away many lives and there is now peace, but we cannot continue dying because of psychological issues that can be addressed. I have also come on the Floor of this House to say that we are going to look into this.

Mr Speaker, I have had before me war victims. I have met the war victims in northern Uganda. I am going to meet war victims of Tororo because they are already organised. What I would like to put before this Parliament is that these war victims should be organized, otherwise it is difficult to address them individually. If they come together, we can look at the issues they are raising.
	
The other issue that I would like to raise is that some leaders in the communities are misusing these war victims. They talk about them and say they will take them to offices but when you meet them, they say different things; they talk about their own needs in order to survive, like engaging in income generating activities among others. You hear leaders saying, “You ask for a fence for a school.” I was very sad when I met some of the Lwala girls who told me categorically, “We were abducted when we were young and we want to go back to school but the authorities there told us to ask for a school fence”. I asked what the relationship was. How do we support these girls who want to survive?

Mr Speaker, I have met abductees who have asked us to give a vehicle to the paramount chief. What is the relationship? You really need to survive yourself. I met a woman who came back with a child, got married but the husband decided to sleep with the daughter she brought in the house. How do you ask for a vehicle for a traditional chief and a school fence in those circumstances? 

We really need to support these girls by promoting psychosocial support. I have interacted with the chairperson of my committee, the Committee on Presidential Affairs, and said that we need a budget. We need to increase the budget. It is not just restructuring but we need to increase the budget to support this group –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you very much, hon. Kwiyucwiny. I want to confirm that at least you are working and your footsteps are everywhere trying to work. (Applause) I know you are very limited by resources but if only we could empower you –

The prayers of the movers of this motion were three and I would like to find out whether you are implementing the first prayer. If you are not working on it, you could interest yourself in it and make sure that it is done because that will help the process.  
	
Mr Speaker, I am referring to the first prayer that is asking Government to profile and take data of all the war victims. I know it may not be possible to take data of all the victims but I would like to know whether your office is trying to get the data and profile them so that we can know the category of the victims that came with a petition to Parliament. It is very important for us to get the data and disaggregate it according to the different needs so that the ministry can design programmes that can support them.

MS KWIYUCWINY: Thank you very much. I was going to conclude on the prayers made by hon. Komakech and one of them is identifying and profiling the affected victims. I have started working on this. When I meet these groups, I make sure I consult. That is how I knew that the Lwala girls were actually predominantly in Kaberamaido. At first, they came as Soroti girls but when I went down there, that was what I established. 
	
I work closely with the district local governments and I have told the district local governments that these are people in their own areas. I would also like to request my colleagues to help me with this; before they even come to Parliament with a petition, the district local governments should know them. They should consider them under all these other programmes that are coming in the district local government. I have discussed that with them and I will take this further. 

It does not, however, stop me from supporting them because in my office, we have come up with micro project budget support specifically looking at such groups. I do not know the group that the honourable member has referred to, which went to the Speaker’s office. I have never met them and I am willing to meet them so that I can work with them. 

In brief, I have discovered this and I am going to work with it. I have already told the chairperson of my committee that I need an extra budget and I would like you to help me with this. Like hon. Bahati has already said, we are in discussions with him to see how to support these groups as they do not need too much. From the sample they have asked me for, they just want ordinary things to help them survive. They want to do goat rearing, poultry keeping, skills training and petty trade in the market. So we can support them. I beg to submit.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. Honourable members, we need to draw this to a close. We have gone beyond the time I had allotted for this debate. However, to accommodate the concerns of the Member, I do not know whether hon. Komakech would consider removing the last three words after Lord’s Resistance Army insurgency. Remove “in northern Uganda” so that it reads, “Motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to support former female abductees (LRA wives) and children born in captivity during the Lord’s Resistance Army Insurgency” and you stop there. This would mean that wherever they are, they could –

Honourable members, I now put the question to this motion – Please, the rest can be accommodated in the course of this. I put the question to this motion for a resolution of Parliament urging Government to support former female abductees (LRA wives) and children born in captivity during the Lord’s Resistance Army insurgency. I put the question that the motion be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MINIMUM WAGES BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is the honourable member? 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2015

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. Next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA WILDLIFE BILL, 2017

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are we ready with this? Honourable minister, is this your area? You are just throwing your hands in the air. (Laughter)

4.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, I was looking for the chairperson of the committee - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Bill is for Second Reading.

MR KIWANDA: I am ready, Mr Speaker. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017” be read the second time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded?  The motion is seconded by members for Kanungu, Kitgum, Mbarara, Kinkizi and Masaka. Honourable minister, would you like to speak to your motion?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, this Bill is before the committee - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: What is the Bill about?

MR KIWANDA: The Bill is about human-wildlife conflict, which has become a menace especially to communities around the conservation areas. This Bill seeks to mitigate this problem.

Mr Speaker, we have issues to do with compensation and compassion especially for communities around national parks. We have been getting a lot of complaints regarding our compensation exercise, which we have been doing as a ministry. Members of these communities have been agitating for compensation whenever our wildlife have encroached on their land and caused damage to humans and their property. 

This Bill seeks to streamline issues concerning the revenue sharing arrangement between the subcounties, parishes and villages that surround national parks and those that may not necessarily border national parks but experience the negative effects from the wildlife in the parks. There are many parishes and subcounties, which do not necessarily border national parks but are affected by animals that go beyond the borders to attack them. The old law only considers the parishes and villages that border the national parks.

Mr Speaker, this Bill also seeks to revise the penalties that are given to people who have encroached and poached on our wildlife. The old law has some penalties but they are not punitive enough to deter people from poaching on wildlife. Given the changes and sophistication that has come on board, there are very many technologies, which the old Bill does not take into consideration.

Therefore, I would like to urge Members that as we deal with this Bill, we look into all this so that we improve on these areas. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, the motion that I now put for your debate is that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017” be read the second time. Usually, at this stage, to kick-off the debate, we would have a report from the committee responsible for this sector. If the chairperson of the committee is here, let us proceed with the report because it normally guides the debate of the House. However, in the absence of the chairperson of the committee, the House can still debate and take a decision on the Bill. Let us proceed with the debate and discuss the principles of the Bill.

4.41
COL (RTD) FRED MWESIGYE (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you for your guidance, Mr Speaker. Without taking a lot of your time, I would like the minister to “balance the boat”. He talked of penalties for people who live around the park and he is calling for strict penalties. I accept and appreciate that. However, what about the wild animals that invade people’s properties? 

I represent people who live around Lake Mburo National Park and there are also some colleagues here who live around the parks. We have had elephants destroy people’s crops and property, buffaloes and hippopotamus kill people, but we do not see equal treatment of people who live around the park. I would like to assure you, Mr Speaker, that much our people try to live in harmony with officials of the national parks, these officials instead harass the people whenever their cows go to the national parks in search of water and pasture. 

Therefore, I would like the minister to reciprocate the strictness he mentioned or come with a policy that can cause harmony between animals and human beings. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.43
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I appreciate the move by Government to have this Bill enacted because we have been battling the negative effects of managing conflict between human beings and the animals around us.

Adjumani is badly hit. In two subcounties, Arinyapi and Dzaipi, and now the third one, Ciforo, that has come on board, often people have been killed and farms destroyed. The worst is that the gardens that are destroyed often have mature crops and at the end of the day, people do not get food. Therefore, I support this move.

Mr Speaker, many people have died but compensation has been a problem. During Christmas time, we lost a girl who had just sat for her Primary Leaving Examinations in Arinyapi Subcounty. She was scattered into pieces. Her parents asked for compensation but there was nothing much Government could do. They requested the people of Adjumani to make written submissions and this was done. Therefore, this move is going to help many Ugandans in handling issues of compensation.

As we are moving to have this Bill processed into law, I would like to request the Government, through the minister, to tell us about the measures they can put in place to avert such scenarios. As we speak, the animals are there and people are scared; they have devised their own local means to alert the community when these animals come to their homes. Even the staff deployed in those areas are so inadequate and some are poorly facilitated. So, what is the Government going to do because the process of changing this Bill into law is going to be long? Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, we will continue with this debate but let me first do this: A few days or weeks ago, we had Members who were recognised and redecorated. It is our honour to welcome and congratulate them. We have the honourable Lt Gen. Pecos Kutesa. (Applause) We congratulate you upon your accomplishments and the recognition that has been given to you. 

We congratulate Brig. Gen. Felix Kulayigye upon the recognition you have been given. (Applause) It arises from your service to this country and defence of the territorial integrity of this country. We congratulate you. Thank you. 

4.47
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to support the amendment of the Uganda Wildlife Authority Act because -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is not an amendment; it is a whole new law.

MR ODUR: Yes, to repeal. Many communities that live around the parks have been suffering with animals that cause death, destroy crops, and in some instances they also destroy motor vehicles. Even when these animals stray into ungazetted areas, you have seen many lives lost when buses have hit these animals because they have not been controlled.

Personally, I think that the issue of compensation can be addressed. In Lango specifically, we have this issue around Oyam; nearly every one or two months, there are issues concerning stray animals. I think this is the best time to address it.

Secondly, there is a recent report that was released by Uganda Human Rights Commission that states that forces that are aligned to the Uganda Wildlife Authority rank second behind the police in violating human rights. This is also the opportunity for us to address this. There are number of poachers who are got in the parks and are being punished extrajudicially without giving them a fair hearing. It would be a good opportunity for some provisions to be inserted into this law to help us deal with errant officers of the authority. 

Thirdly, I have seen Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) this week circulating pictures of people of Asian origin and most of them are people wanted on allegations of wildlife poaching. They were got with ivory and they have disappeared. However, when you look at the law, even if they had gone to court, they were going to be granted bail at around Shs 500,000 or even imprisonment of less than a year. This is the time that we should look at the penalties and make them more severe and punitive so that we stop these animal poachers.

Lastly, I do not know whether this isn’t the time for us to address the special benefits that should accrue to people who host these parks. There is a percentage of money that is supposed to be remitted but when you visit all the national parks, you find that these monies are never remitted yet the parks are generating revenue through tourism and visitors who come in. Looking at the schools, water facilities and health centres in these communities, you wonder how this can be enforced. 

I would like to call upon colleagues to consider the special benefits that can accrue to these communities. We know that in Bunyoro, for example, there is oil and there is something that has been provided for them. We should also ensure that at this stage, we deal with that. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

4.50
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (NRM, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the motion. I would like to acknowledge the difficulty of debating this motion without the report of the committee. However, we have to proceed and make our submissions.

To start with, I would like to comment on the idea of compensation for people who are killed by wildlife. I would like to disagree with the position of some colleagues who are talking about compensation for people killed by wildlife. I ask myself, how much money would it take for Government to pay for a person who has been –(Interjection)– You will have your opportunity to debate –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The honourable colleague is trying to compare animals with people by saying that compensating lives that are taken by these animals could be very expensive when actually we know that there is a lot of money being misused in other areas - Government money, which could help these people.

Secondly, whenever these people die, their children never go back to school, their families are destroyed because a majority of them are poor. Is he in order to think that Government cannot look for money to compensate these suffering people and imagine that maybe the animals are more important than our people?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, there are rules for compensation in the ordinary procedures of courts in this country. They have awarded compensatory amounts for people who have caused loss of life and Government cannot be an exception. 

There are so many cases with the Uganda Human Rights Commission. So, if it is too expensive, then they should avoid the occurrence of it. In fact, we should make it so expensive that it becomes a prohibition itself for people to go against the law and kill other people. Therefore, honourable member, you are not proceeding properly. 

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker, for your guidance. I am not being callous in saying that. I have also noted many situations where people have gone to fetch water and probably a crocodile comes and grabs them and then we say, let Government compensate in this circumstance. 

Like colleagues have noted, there is widespread poaching of these animals. To get an elephant tusk, for example, you must kill the elephant because there is no way you can get it without the animal dying. Therefore, we need to make it extremely risky for people who poach. Recently, some people were caught with two containers of elephant tusks. Honestly, these people must have killed hundreds of elephants. This must be curtailed by giving stringent punishments to such people.

I get concerned that there are many species of animals, which are disappearing. I grew up in the village and I know that there are different species of animals and birds that you cannot see anymore. Probably, our children will not have an opportunity to see them. I hope this law will provide a mechanism for us to preserve these extinct species for posterity and multiply them so that our children can know the different animal species that have been in existence in our environs.

Lastly, conflict at borders has been a big problem. I hope that this law will provide a solution to this. Many times, proposals have been made, such as digging trenches, using electric wires or using a certain type of plant that deters these animals. I hope that this law will adequately provide a solution to mitigate the conflict between animals and people, especially as far as demarcation of the borders is concerned. Thank you.

4.56
MR DEOGRATIUS KIYINGI (DP, Bukomansimbi County South, Bukomansimbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the motion on the following grounds: 

The issue of mitigating the wildlife-human conflict is very important because it has been here for a long time. If I can recall, this issue came up yesterday from the Member of Parliament from Kanungu.

On the issue of compensation, when this Bill is being enacted, it should categorise compensation for life and compensation for property. There is also the issue of people who have been amputated like in the case of crocodiles that have attacked people. This should also be addressed. 

Mr Speaker, revenue sharing is crucial in local governments that surround parks. However, the most important thing is, when this revenue is given to the local governments, this money is used by the local governments to pay councillors’ allowances instead of addressing the real issues on which this was based.

Endangered species in wildlife are important and penalties in the Bill should be punitive enough to make sure that we deter people from encroaching on wildlife. We have special categories of wildlife that need to be included in the Bill. Recently, somebody approached me complaining that he was engaged in exporting wild birds but Uganda Wildlife Authority stopped his business yet the law does not provide for that. Therefore, in this Bill, we need to address the issue of the type of wildlife that can be traded by private individuals.

Lastly, the Bill should also address the issue of evasive species in the national parks. One of the reasons why wildlife, especially elephants, leave the parks to go and encroach on people’s gardens is because they lack food in the national parks. Therefore, I would urge the minister to make sure that when we discussing this Bill, he addresses this issue. Thank you.

5.00
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me the opportunity to contribute to this motion by the honourable Minister of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities.

This is a pertinent issue, especially for those areas, which border national parks. From my experience, the Government is supposed to protect the lives of the people, but the old Bill had left the people in the hands of animals. That is why I would like to support the minister and thank him for bringing his Bill, which has been long overdue. 

I would like to thank hon. Ababiku who has suggested that we need to have a clear cut decision on the people who die because of these animals. The other week, a person was attacked by a buffalo in her garden while she was digging. As I speak, the woman is rotting. Her relatives were calling for financial help to take her to hospital because there is nobody responsible for that.

I am addressing this to the minister but he is being disturbed by someone. Mr Speaker, the point I am trying to put forward is that this Bill should address compensation of affected persons by wildlife, especially when they come into the communities.

Mr Speaker, what about communities living with these animals? They affect us and we affect them. How do we treat domestic animals that encroach on the national parks? We need to define that symbiotic living so that we draw a balance on how we can harmonise the two.

I would like to draw the attention of the minister to revenue in terms of gate collection. We have been getting only 20 per cent of the gate collections. I think this Bill should really look into the plight of the people by not only looking at the percentage of the gate collections but the total revenue from visitors that come to our national parks. That is when we can have a substantial amount of money to address these issues that would otherwise be a menace to the society.  

Mr Speaker, we also need to know the royalties given to the districts from these national parks. How do we relate the gate collections with the royalties that are in the Local Government Act? How do we utilise these national parks to benefit these districts that are looking after our animals as a Government?

Mr Speaker, the cultures of our people are different; we have diverse cultures. We have people like the Banyabutumbi in Kanungu who depended on the national parks. To get them out of these national parks, there must be a reciprocal action that would cause them to live harmoniously such that they continue living their lives. Banyabutumbi cannot live without eating fish. As I talk, the culprits today are the Banyabutumbi. 

Therefore, honourable minister, how will this Bill address cultural integration? How can we bring in these people who have lost their way of life because we have gazetted some areas to be national parks?

Mr Speaker, speaking of property loss, it is a pity that recently, the President put up a mini-irrigation scheme in Kameme, in Kihihi sub-county but elephants came and trampled on them. The sprinklers were taken away and that was a loss. Mr Speaker, you are the one who was advocating for famine affected families but in that area, famine was caused by animals that went and ate up all the crops. How do we compensate such people? 

I would like this Bill to address such issues so that we live harmoniously with the national parks. I thank the honourable minister for bringing this Bill, which is healthy and timely. Thank you. 

5.06
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill that has been brought by the minister. 

Mr Speaker, quite often we have been dealing with the conflict between animals and human beings. My constituency has had victims that have suffered and lost lives in the hands of crocodiles. We therefore need a law that clearly regulates the relationship -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it in the hands of crocodiles or –

MR DAVID MUTEBI: In the mouth. People have perished because we did not have a proper law. This Bill has addressed the defects within the existing law on the basis of which wildlife and human can live harmoniously.

We know that wildlife is one of the major resources we have; it is one of the biggest tourist attractions that we have. However, wildlife has been at a serious threat of extinction in as far as poaching is concerned. Therefore, this law, which establishes punitive penalties, will have a major role to play in saving wildlife. 

However, much as we are saving the wildlife, the law will also address compensation for people who lose their lives and property when animals encroach. This was not catered for in the existing law and that is why many of the people who have lost their loved ones are now struggling to earn a living.

This law will also help in operationalising the Wildlife Fund. We have established very many funds in this Parliament but they are not operational at the moment because there is no legal framework. We need to know how best we can utilise these resources.

If you consider the Environment Fund, it was established but it is not helping to sustain the environment. We need to see this fund helping to support the sector from which it is generated. Therefore, I would like to support this Bill based on the fact that it has addressed many of the defects within the existing law.

5.08
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this Bill because it will address a number of issues, including what my colleagues have also talked about and particularly the endangered species.

Mr Speaker, you may recall that Arua had a very big hotel called White Rhino Hotel, which was very popular in 1960s up to the 1980s. This was because the Ajai Game Reserve had so many white rhinos. In fact Arua was known as the home of white rhinos but if you go there now, you will not even find one. 

Therefore, as we discuss this Bill, it should address the issue of the welfare of the game rangers and staff who work in these game reserves because most of these endangered species are killed not by the poachers but by staff for survival. 

Secondly, the Bill should address the issue of developing wildlife centres. When you look at Ajai Game Reserve, which was established in the early 1940s, you would think that it is not a game reserve and yet it has so many species of animals. The road in the game reserve is impassable. You cannot really imagine that there is anything useful there.

Therefore, people tend to encroach on it because they see a very huge chunk of land; over 20 kilometres, wasted by the Government and yet it is a very big resource. I think the Bill should address the issue of developing wildlife centres.

Mr Speaker, we have talked about errant officers. Much as we think that some of the staff of the wildlife centres are errant or arrogant, we also have cases where the poachers also kill the game rangers. Why? This is because there is very little community policing. I think this Bill should address the issue of harmony between game rangers or the wildlife staff and the surrounding community. 

Lastly, I would like to say that the Bill should address the issue of involving local leaders in the administration and management of wildlife centres, particularly in taking key decisions when it comes to encroachment and other issues. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

5.12
MR JAMES BABA (NRM, Koboko County, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to support the Bill brought by the honourable minister. 

It is a fact that one of the dividends that peace has brought to the animals is that their numbers have multiplied in all our national parks; we now have many animals. Those of us travelling to the north see very many elephants, giraffes and buffalos crossing the road. It is amazing how quickly they have recovered. This is really a gift from God to our country. We do not feed these animals neither do we treat them but they are a real resource that can bring a lot of revenue and income to our country.  

Having said this, these animals have also brought us problems and my colleagues have pointed out many of them. One problem is that they are now destroying people’s crops, like hon. Ababiku said. In Adjumani, they have invaded farms. I saw elephants crossing and destroying people’s crops and eating their mangoes in Dimu and Nwoya just because their numbers have now become so big and they have to go and look for food, especially during this dry season. 

They are also a source of accidents, which has been mentioned. Those travelling at night have seen that Gaagaa Bus and KK Bus from West Nile have hit elephants and buffalos on numerous times. These buses have over turned, people have been killed and bus owners have lost their property. Therefore, they have also become a hazard to society. 

I therefore hope that the honourable minister can find mitigating measures in this Bill. One measure that was mentioned is to install electric fencing so that these animals do not interfere with or disturb people’s lives. There were proposals for digging trenches so that elephants cannot cross from one side to other. There were proposals to plant hot pepper because elephants and some other animals fear those plants. Therefore, we have to find mitigating measures to protect populations from the marauding forces of these animals. 

The honourable minister has been very energetic with the “Tulambule Campaign” and we appreciate that effort very much. Recently, you ran into trouble with this “curvy” contest. Nevertheless, we appreciate your efforts in promoting tourism in this country. 

However, for the communities living next to the parks, let us have some serious symbols that will be beneficial to them like schools, health centres or even community centres as they will directly benefit from the revenues accrued from tourism coming to our country. 

Arising from these challenges that the animals are presenting, let us have some rescue mechanisms to help people involved in accidents or who are attacked by these animals. Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) should have some manpower with support from the Ministry of Health to help rescue people in such situations. These communities should not be left naked, unprotected and just benefiting from these revenues. 

I would like to support the idea of wildlife centres. The one in Entebbe was built by the colonial Government. When will our Government build our own and replicate it in other national parks so that they become education centres for our students instead of children coming all the way from Kabale and western Uganda to Entebbe or from Kitgum to Entebbe? Let us have these centres adjacent to these major national parks so that young children can appreciate these animals nearer to their localities. I thank you and I support the Bill. 

5.17
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I support this Bill with proposals that a lot of considerations be made to make sure that the cries of the people of Uganda, especially those that live around areas that border wildlife conservation, are taken care of. 

I would like to propose that this Bill takes funding into consideration to allow Government to protect these conservation areas. Mr Speaker, from the contributions of members of Parliament so far, there is a clear indication that there is a lot of conflict between wildlife and human beings. This is true for areas that border national parks such as Agago District. Although we do not touch Kidepo National Park, we live in an area that is very close by. 

I would like to confirm that the minister, hon. Kiwanda, visited Agago District and interacted with victims of animal-human conflict. In Lira-Kaket, he found a child that survived an elephant attack in that village. He was also able to see the number of gardens and crops that were destroyed by elephants that encroach in areas that border the park. 

As such, the interest of people that live around the borders of national parks must really be protected. In addition, the conservation area itself has to be protected to stop the animals from getting into conflict with humans. 

Mr Speaker, the loss that people go through, especially when animals destroy crops, leaves them with a lot of problems such as famine and poverty and yet Government is not able to fully compensate them. I saw a little aspect of compensation in the Bill when I tried to read through it. During Committee Stage, we will definitely make contributions to ensure that we enrich this legislation for a better – (Interruption) 

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Franca Akello for giving way. The issue of compensation must be seriously looked at. We have had very many incidents in Amuru District where elephants come from South Sudan. 

I remember that when I raised this issue on the Floor of Parliament, the minister told us that they have no control over animals that come from other countries. They cross to Amuru and destroy people’s property and crops. They even killed a woman and a child yet as a country, we are saying that we have no control over such animals.

Therefore, what hon. Franca Akello said is very important; we need to look at issues of compensation very seriously. Thank you.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, hon. Gilbert Olanya. The reason I said that is because in the current law, there is no provision for compensation. We also know that no amount of money can compensate for a lost life. However, it is important that when an animal comes into conflict with human life and destroys such a life, Government has to commit itself to give some reasonable compensation other than what we have in the current law, which is called compassion and is not even seen.

Lastly, there was also a lot of concern raised by other members, which I would like to confirm because I come from an area that borders a national park. We run a danger of passing a law that will only benefit communities that border the park. However, we need to take into consideration communities that do not necessarily border the park but get affected by the destruction caused by animals. 

For example, my district of Agago does not border Kidepo and corporate social responsibility activities carried out only benefit communities that immediately border the park. This is despite the fact that Agago also gets affected by these wild animals. In fact, the negative impact of animal destruction is much more. 

Every year in Agago District, we register over 100 elephants. They trespass the border and become comfortable as if that is their home. It is not a conservation area or a reserve for animals but they come and dwell there yet Government says we have to protect such animals. Therefore, it becomes very difficult for human beings to compete with animals because the moment you kill such animals, you also conflict with the law. It is very important that we take into consideration the communities that do not necessarily border national parks. 

Mr Speaker, I will be very glad to take part in the last stage of the formation of this law to make sure that it becomes a good law. Thank you very much.

5.25
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Kasese District is one of the districts, which hosts more than three national parks: Rwenzori, Queen Elizabeth and Kibaale national parks. That excludes the other small conservation areas that Government has earmarked. 

In November, December and January, the communities in Kasese, which stay in the neighbourhood of the national parks, in the areas of Bigando, Bukonjo East and Bukonjo West, have not been sleeping in their houses. During the day, they are in the gardens guarding against the animals. In the night, they are in the gardens making sure that the animals do not come to their gardens.

Therefore, this issue is likely to cause disintegration of family systems because when the men go to guard, the women are not sure that their husbands will come back. Furthermore, when they go to guard, you cannot guard from Monday to Monday without sleep because you are in the garden during the day and also in the night. 

Mr Speaker, families are now exhausted. As a result of exhaustion and all the risks that are involved in working day and night; rain, sunshine and the unpredictable weather, which one may experience, I think that this Bill must be supported. However, hon. Kiwanda, this Bill must be supported in a serious way and this time –(Interruption)

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, my dear colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, in West Moyo County, specifically in Dufile sub-county, the matter is worse. Honourable minister, for your information, the people of Dufile are preparing to trap and poison hippopotamus and elephants because they have wreaked havoc in that area. Socio-economic development in that area has been retarded because of these wild animals. Thank you very much, Member, for giving me way. 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable, for that information. What do I project in this Bill? One, for the communities, which host national parks, there should be deliberate efforts, which should be enshrined within the law. For example, in Kasese, we have local associations and companies, which have been in the tourism sector for many decades like Rwenzori Mountaineering Services and Rwenzori Backpackers. These support the mountaineering service activities. 

What is happening right now is that local associations, groups and companies are being displaced by companies coming from Kampala and other areas to the disadvantage of the local groups, which have been in this sector employing locals. Furthermore, they have been providing guiding services in a professional way because they have been there and in it for quite a long time.

Therefore, in this law, we need to make sure that local groups are supported. Where you think they need training, they should be trained so that we can harness the local initiatives instead of having areas where, for example, the people are regretting why they have no advantage in local and other conservation efforts within the area. 

Secondly, I am also concerned about the misuse of monies, which go to the local communities. Local leaders are misusing this money and they do not use it to benefit the local communities. I was of the view that even within the law, it must be a condition that there must be a clear vetting process through which the local communities, together with Uganda Wildlife Authority, can integrate to make sure that what the local communities propose is what is done instead of having this money going into other activities, even far away from the communities, which are neighbouring the national parks.

Mr Speaker, I have been asking myself why it is that when animals cross to the people, they are more respected by Uganda Wildlife Authority than when people cross into the national parks. I think we must put it clear in this law –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, you need to wind up.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you very much. We must put clear penalties for game rangers who neglect their duties. This is because when they neglect their duties and animals cross to the people, the people try to chase these animals and in the process, they are arrested by the game rangers. It is actually the game rangers who fail to do their work, which lead to wild animals crossing to the communities.

We must put clear fines and penalties for game rangers who do not do their work because as far as I know, game rangers and other wildlife authority officers are supposed to track the movement of animals and alert the communities around the national parks that around such a time, they should expect these animals. They are supposed to make sure that these animals do not even access to the communities. 

However, to the contrary, they never track the animals and they never alert the communities and so the communities are ambushed. When the communities guard themselves, they are shot, killed and some are humiliated. This time round, we must make sure penalties are instituted.

Finally, the other day we passed the law on herbal medicines and we clearly see that given the increase in population, you can only access these herbal medicines from the national parks, especially for communities neighbouring these national parks. We need to put a clear way of how the law that we passed the other week –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. I had already picked the Member for Amudat. However, honourable members, there does not seem to be any opposition to this Bill at this stage. I am going to ask you to make your communication in two minutes – and I mean two minutes – so that we can share the time and see how we can move forward.

5.35
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill is necessary and we need the law. Members have been complaining on the Floor of this House about animal-human conflict where wild animals have been destroying people’s crops, livestock, hurting and sometimes killing people. All this time, what Uganda Wildlife Authority has been doing for these people, especially those who are killed, is to provide compassion. It is good that this Bill is talking about compensation. I think compensation will help solve some of these problems. 

However, the clause that talks about compensation is not very clear about compensation for life. Whereas it is clear about compensation for livestock or crops, which it says will be according to the obtaining market rate, human life cannot be equated to any amount of money. It will be good for compensation for life to be reasonable.

Mr Speaker, it is also good that the Bill is proposing a community wildlife committee, which I think will go a long way to help in sensitising the communities. I think through sensitisation of communities, the human-wildlife conflicts will reduce. In those sensitisations, for example, people are told how to protect themselves through planting red pepper, putting up beehives, which is in itself an economic activity, having vuvuzelas to blow in case – (Member timed out.)

5.37
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for this Bill, which is long awaited. We were thinking that we would pass it in the Ninth Parliament and during our campaigns, this issue affected us a lot, especially me in Kanungu, because of Queen Elizabeth and Bwindi national parks. I am happy that at last it has come.

I would like to say that as we look at the compensation issue, we should look at it in two ways because sometimes when these animals attack people in their gardens, you find that they have killed either the mother or father and the children remain without either of their parents. As such, I would like to suggest that as we discuss this Bill, we should also include the issue of when one or both parents have died. Much as we are saying they should be compensated in monetary terms, if there is an opportunity, we should also give them scholarships because Government has a lot of scholarships. 

Sometimes these people are very poor and do not know where to start from. We should make it automatic that when a parent has died caused by these wild animals, automatically the children should get scholarships, in addition to the monetary compensation.

Secondly, I would like to suggest that regarding the 20 per cent that is given to people surrounding these areas, we should make it 20 per cent of the total amount collected from – (Member timed out.)

5.39
MR GODFREY WATENGA (Independent, Lutseshe County, Bududa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. When I was young, I heard of the importance of forests; as a source of food, medicine and others. I used to go to the forests and get some bamboo shoots. The herbalists would go there and get their local medicines. We would go there and harvest mushrooms as well as vegetables locally called isufa. 

Mr Speaker, currently people have been denied access to these activities, especially along Mt Elgon forest. Uganda and Bugisu in particular, is known for delicious bamboos in the whole world. If we deny these people access to Malewa, then this information will not be found anywhere.

My humble request is that we should find a mechanism of helping the herbalists, bamboo and mushroom collectors and the local –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We will come to this side and start with the Member for Bokora, Oyam, Ora and the Leader of the Opposition.

4.42
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. I am happy this Bill brings out a clarification on the extent of liability of Uganda Wildlife Authority (UWA) in regards to the wildlife induced damages and conservation area land ownership. This is a very key point in this case. 

In order for this to happen, the community wild life committees must be effective; they must exist. If these committees do not exist, then this clarification to the extent to which UWA is liable may not be got by the communities. Therefore, if these committees are effective, they will get all these information and share it with the communities. This will enhance coordination between UWA and the communities as they will be seen to be friends.

What is happening right now is that there is a lot of animosity between the communities and wild life authorities. Why? This is because of lack of communication.  Hence, if there could be very good committees established, the realities will be fair on the ground.

The second issue is the appointment of these committees. The Bill says that the minister will appoint. When you look at the members, the extent to which they can be very close to the people is lacking. I think the most nearest person in the committee could be one member of the district. However, with a very big land conservation area, will they really be near to the people? So, I would like to suggest that at least – (Member timed out.)
	
4.43
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the minister on this Bill. 

Mr Speaker, we needed this Bill yesterday. First, I would like to talk about the issue of compensation. It is true that the human-wildlife conflict has brought a lot of problems. However, I would like to talk specifically about those who are injured. 

In my district, I have a boy who was injured and he needs a specialised treatment, which the family cannot afford. When the Executive Director of UWA went there, he gave the family only Shs 200,000, which is not enough to treat this boy. So, when we talk of compensation, we should compensate the injured up to the point when they have properly healed.

Mr Speaker, the number of game rangers seems not to be enough. For example, in Kamdini Sub-county, they are not even there. I would like to urge that this Bill addresses the problem of the number of rangers. We need a post whereby, if the animals stray, the community knows where to report the matter. Otherwise, as we speak, we have very few of them; it is my hope that this Bill will address the number of the rangers.

Thirdly, I would like to mention something about the boundary conflict. Yes, we dig trenches but the animals have become cleverer than the people, especially the elephants. When the trenches are dug, they come and cover the trenches.  Therefore, honourable minister, I would like to suggest that if it were possible, let us have an electric fence where –(Member timed out.)

5.45
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The focus of the discussion has been a lot on wildlife-human conflict and this will continue because as population increases, there is definitely need for land and so, there are competing demands for wild life, settlement and farming. Therefore, we need to plan our land use so that we cannot get into confrontation with the animals.

That aside, in 1991, Uganda joined the Convention on International Trade (CIT) in Endangered Species, which came into force at that time and we promised that we were going to protect our wildlife.

Mr Speaker, the current problem is the conflict between human and wildlife. While I support this Bill, it should be able to address the issue of the dual management areas between UWA and National Forestry Authority (NFA); these are forests that are managed by the two bodies.

It should also help us, as a country, to negotiate with the parties because these protected areas are protecting the environment and absorbing carbon dioxide, which should be paid for under the REDD+. That means that the ministry responsible for this should help us to use this as a negotiating platform under the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD).

It should also be able to encourage private-sector development in tourism. It should create alternatives for the adjacent communities to the protected areas. In addition, it should help in the trans-boundary dialogues like wild life between Uganda and South Sudan, Congo and Tanzania. There are a lot of migratory wild life species that are crossing and it can be a – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not know what to do. I see Members who were standing - I have noted Kitgum, Moroto, Bukooli and Aringa. But I have already asked the Leader of the Opposition to speak and she will be represented by the Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality; you have two minutes.

5.48
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE BAKIREKE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. In principle, we support this Bill but I want this House to take note of the following important issues.

Mr Speaker, a good law must be informed by a policy and indeed Uganda has the National Conservation Policy, 2014. I have critically looked at this policy specifically, the objective that touches the mitigation of human-wild life conflict, which has 11 points. I beg that you give me time to read through.

One of the objectives says that they will build barriers – this is objective number four, which particularly addresses the points of action Government should undertake to mitigate human and wild life conflict. These include –

    1) building barriers;
    2)  compiling baseline information about human and wildlife conflict;
    3)  increasing and direct revenue sharing with local governments;
    4) coming up with a compensation  scheme for victims;
    5) enhancing local government capacity to handle wildlife; and
    6)  giving national guidelines on animals that are considered to be problems.

Mr Speaker, under this policy, as a country, we undertook to identify the wildlife species and come up with disease control programmes –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS NAMBOOZE: Mr Speaker, if you looked at the definition of the term “wildlife,” you would know that traditionally, it refers to any undomesticated animals and plants. These animals and plants do not only stay in conservation parks yet when you look at this law, it only talks about people around conservation parks. 

If you go to schedule 3, you will realise that the minister came up with a list of hundreds of animals that are considered to be protected species including monkeys and snakes. However, these animals do not live in the national parks alone; they live everywhere including in Mukono. 

Therefore,  if Government is to take responsibility for wildlife and carry out compensation, then they should not only talk about people who are in the neighbourhood of national parks. They also should talk about a farmer in Mukono who gets his gardens destroyed by monkeys. They also should talk about a person in Mukono who can be a victim of a snake bite. 

In Kenya, Mr Speaker, the national budget caters for compensation of people who are victims of snake bites because these are wild animals. 

When you go to schedule 4 and look at the list of the animals which Government has undertaken to give compensation on, they only include elephants, lions, leopards, crocodiles, buffalos, -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Please, wind up.

MS NAMBOOZE: I think it is wrong if you are only undertaking to compensate victims of ten animals out of the hundreds of animals you considered as protected species. That is an area we need to revisit. 

Lastly, as a Muganda, I am highly offended by clause 3, sub-section (6) that provides the ownership of wildlife to the Government of Uganda. Sub-section (6) in particular says, “The minister may, on the advice of the board, by regulation, prescribe measures for the registration and management of species used for cultural purposes by any community.” 

For us Baganda, we are in clans and our totems are either animals or wild plants. So, if you are telling us that the Minister Kiwanda will be the one to either or not register our totems, I find it very offensive. I beg this Parliament to strike out that particular clause; because it offends my culture.

I cannot go to register my totem. I belong to the Kobe Clan. I cannot go to register the Mpologoma. Mr Kiwanda, let us revisit this law and particularly remove this clause that offends our culture. For that very reason, this law needs to be revisited by referring it to the committee once again. It is because I fear most of us have not had the opportunity to read through it. As much as we support it, it is not detailed enough to cater for its purpose and cure the problem we would love to cure as a country. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, the Bill was referred to a committee and the chairperson is not here to report. There is a report though. We cannot keep waiting for the committee chairperson to read the report when we have businesses that we must conduct. We will be able to handle this appropriately. 

I noticed there are five members who would like to speak; I only beg your indulgence that you say what you would like to say in one minute. 

5.55
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Thank you, Mr Speaker -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: By the time you say “thank you” you are already spending your one minute. Just say what you would like to say. 

MR OUMA: I would like to say is that I support the Bill. However, I would like the minister to give me a convincing explanation. He was talking about protected areas and I come from the islands - how are the crocodiles protected? There are areas with rangers but if you go to the game parks, the crocodiles move all over. How is the Bill going to ensure the people on the islands are protected? Even last week, a mother and her child were killed by a crocodile. So, how are we going to do this?

Lastly, on the compensation issue –(Member timed out.)

5.56
MS STELLA ATYANG (NRM, Woman Representative, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Uganda Wildlife Authority has spies that help it to catch poachers. I would like to observe that the spies have mismanaged the responsibility they were given. I sometimes take the spies as aiders of poaching because they actually go and tempt the community to provide for them animal products in exchange for money. Due to the desperation of the community members, they end up getting tempted to poach. This happened in Moroto where somebody was asked to provide a leopard’s skin in preparation of a traditional ceremony. So, this man had to look for the leopard skin but of course he went through a number of people. 

To cut my speech short, I would like to support this Bill but ask that the Bill should have a provision for – (Member timed out.)

5.57
MS MARGRET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mine is so brief. On compensation, it should have come yesterday because we have lost so many people in Kitgum even though we do not touch Kidepo National Park. However, I would like to thank the Wildlife Authority for the sensitisation they have done across the border up to Sudan.
 
Last holiday, I went to Sudan for a visit during Christmas and they were happy. The only unfortunate thing on compensation is that that two per cent is very little. It should maybe go to maybe 20 per cent of the total money collected by the Wildlife Authority to compensate the affected people.

Mr Speaker, last year, the elephants crossed from Kidepo National Park to Orom and drank the only water in the dam, which was protected by the RDC –(Member timed out.)

5.58
MR ELLY ASIKU (NRM, Koboko County North, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am just providing advice. I support this Bill but advise that it is packaged in a way that makes wildlife compensation an attractive business investment both for the private and public sectors. That will address all these issues we are talking about. Once you package it as an attractive business destination, all these issues we are looking at, including compensation will be taken care of. Thank you.

6.00
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable minister, when this Bill is enacted, it will only be effective here in Uganda. Adjumani however, lies in between South Sudan and other protected areas here. Are you going to initiate some talks between authorities in Uganda and the authorities in South Sudan? Most of the animals that are disturbing come from there.

Secondly, sometimes these conflicts between us and this wildlife are fuelled by you people, through the suggestion of wrong solutions like you plant red pepper. You know it is very wide and impossible to plant red pepper. We even get more annoyed than the animals –(Member timed out.)

6.01
MS JANE NABULINDO (Independent, Woman Representative Busia): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. In Busia we do not have or are not near a park. However, we have wild animals like baboons which are there producing day and night. They destroy people’s property and crops. How is this law going to protect us the people of Busia? And we really need compensation because those baboons have been destroying peoples’ lives as well. For example, last year, the baboons fought with a certain boy and they removed one eye from him; we need compensation. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, I will ask the minister to respond. You cannot respond to everything and so, I am giving you two minutes; yes only two.

6.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, most of the issues that have been raised by the Members are enshrined in the Bill. The Bill has answered probably 99 per cent of the issues but I know there are some not incorporated into the Bill. At the committee stage, we shall be able to iron these out like what hon. Betty Nambooze Bakireke has mentioned about the totems; she knows that I am so passionate about that too. We shall deal with it at the committee stage –(Interjection)– yes!

Mr Speaker, I would like to request - because the chairperson of the committee is not here but there are some critical issues that we had agreed on, especially issues of compensation. I find it a bit challenging to move to the committee stage before we look at these critical amendments. I seek your guidance on how best we can move on this.

May I request, Mr Speaker, that before we move to the committee stage we should have aligned some of these amendments between the ministry and the committee. I beg for your guidance on this, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we took a decision here that on the lapse of 45 days, we will proceed with the Bill with or without a committee report. That is what the rules say. Therefore, if the minister is dissatisfied with his own Bill and he is going to propose amendments himself, that brings a lot of issues.

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I am ready with my Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If you are ready then we will proceed. Honourable members, I will put the question to the motion for second reading. I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda Wildlife Bill, 2017” be read the second time?

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, Bills committee stage, we will not proceed with this stage to allow concerns from the committee, to be moved. The committee has some recommendations by way of amendments and as the minister suggested, there are also some changes they are proposing to make the Bill better. Therefore, we will not be able to go to committee stage at this time. However, we have another Bill that we could receive.

On the Bill that we have just dealt with, at the next sitting of Parliament it will be dealt with and finished. That will be Tuesday next week.

MR KIWANDA: Most obliged, Mr Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It also gives you, Members, more time. However, all amendments must be circulated and shared before they come. We will not entertain amendments to be suggested on the Floor. That is the standard procedure now because those confuse debate and are not interrogated but just come anyhow and sometimes we end up getting it wrong.

Therefore, if you have any amendments that you would like to propose, propose them now and by some point they will have some time so that by the time we come to deal with it, we all have the amendments and we just proceed and deal with the Bill. Thank you. (Members rose_) Can we deal with this Bill please? These procedures are becoming too many.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE SEXUAL OFFENCES BILL, 2015

6.05
MS MONICA AMODING (NRM, Woman Representative, Kumi): Mr Speaker, the Sexual Offences Bill was sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and as a private member, I am waiting for the report to be tabled by the chairperson who I do not see in the -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, we proceeded with the Bill in the previous item without a report of the committee. Proceed with your motion and secondment of the Bill.

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I have no copy of the Bill but I am ready to proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Proceed. Move your motion for second reading.

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015” be read for the second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is the motion seconded? It is seconded by hon. Baba Diri, hon. Anywar, hon. Kajungu, hon. Mugeni, hon. Nabulindo, hon. Alum, hon. Komakech and hon. Abala. Would you like to speak to your motion?

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, I moved the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015 on behalf of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association but as a Private Member’s Bill. This Bill was moved in 2015 but saved in the last Parliament and forwarded to this Parliament. It was greatly seconded by the House before being sent to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny and report back.

Mr Speaker, I am aware that this Bill has already been considered by the committee and a report has been prepared. I do not know if it has -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No. You are the one who proposed the Bill. What does it say? It was not proposed by the committee; it is yours.

MS AMODING: The object of the Bill is to first of all, consolidate laws relating to sexual offences. There are series of Bills that we have but they are in bit and pieces in different law books.

Therefore, the purpose of this Bill, first and foremost, is to consolidate all these laws into one Bill that will be called the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015. We also intend, through this Bill, to provide punishment for perpetrators of sexual offences.

Some of the areas provided for in the current legislations are not punitive and very strong enough, in terms of punishment for offences that have been in existence but also offences that have emerged or that have not been addressed in the current legislations. 

We also intend, in this Bill, to provide for procedural and evidential requirements during trial because some of those requirements are not well strengthened in the current legislations on sexual offences. 

Of course there are other related matters in there that we propose and I beg that the House looks into this Bill and consider the various proposals that are made therein and come up with possible added provisions because I know we did not comprehensively address some of the issues. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to draw the attention of the House to the report that is coming up from the select committee that Parliament instituted to investigate issues of sexual offences across the country especially in higher institutions of learning.

There are some issues that are not captured in this current Bill but need to be addressed in our country. One of them and which I would like to draw your attention to is what is happening in institutions of higher learning. There is sexual harassment and also harassment of our children by guardians in schools. This comes at the time when we had cases from St Lawrence Schools - that you remember and a lot of issues that need to be addressed. 

I beg that the House looks at this Bill and crafts solutions to address issues relating to sexual offences in higher institutions of learning and generally in our community today.
I would like to move that this Bill be read for the second time and also be considered and passed by this august House. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the motion that I propose for your debate is that the Sexual Offences Bill, 2015 be read the second time. That means we kick off the discussion on the principles of the Bill. Usually, we start by a presentation of the report of the committee to give us some guidelines on what they understand about the principles of the Bill but in its absence we will proceed with the general debate and see how far we go.

However, in the gallery this afternoon we have a group of people. I think this is the one the mover of the other motion was referring to; a delegation of former abductees of the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) war. They are:

    1) Ms Stella Angie Lanum
    2) Ms Harriet Olanya
    3) Ms Grace Milly Akello 
    4) Ms Amber Santa
    5) Ms Florence Amito 
    6) Ms Grace Akello 
    7) Ms Brenda Angom 
    8) Mr Patrick Ochen Odinya
    9) Mr Jimmy Wamimbi
    10) Ms Dieudonne Maganya.

They had come to observe the proceedings of our debate on the other motion but they were delayed. They are now here and I recognise some of them. You rare welcome; your matter has been handled and the motion has been passed. The minister has made undertakings to deal with your matter in terms of raising money to handle that particular concern. Thank you.

Debate starts now; three minutes only for each.

6.13
MR JONATHAN ODUR (UPC, Erute County South, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to render my support to this Bill. I am particularly interested in about three or four aspects of it. 

First, there is the issue of compensation to victims of sexual offences. Currently in our laws, once a person is convicted, the victims are basically left to go alone. 

In this Bill, there is a proposal that courts should find, within their discretion, ways to order for compensation in addition to the imprisonment or any other punishment that is provided in the law. This will help a lot because when I was still working with the civil society, I encountered a number of cases where children, especially the girls, had been left with their sexual organs damaged but with no one being responsible for that curing that damage and supporting them to access medical support. I think that when we have this provision, the courts can then impose additional sentences or fine so that they have money to help in rehabilitation.

Secondly, many cases that go to court fail because of the nature of evidence that is required by our criminal justice system. For example, it is very difficult for one to succeed in prosecuting sexual offences without a medical report from a medical doctor. They have recently modified it to a clinical officer but most courts consider a competent medical doctor to be the one to provide the report on how the offence occurred. 

Yet, there are instances where we have witnesses that have seen and when you go to court even when there is a witness, in the absence of the medical report you can hardly secure a conviction. I think that re-evaluating evidence and setting the standards of evidence that can be admitted in court would help much in these circumstances.

The other aspect I am interested in is how children, especially those that have been victims, are treated when they come to the police station. The questions they are asked and the type of cross examination they are subjected to – I know the provisions of the Children’s Act try to protect them a bit; but when it comes to the women, some of the modalities of cross examination especially to old women who have been raped are very disturbing.

In one of the most famous cases, I do not remember the parties, a woman had been raped but the lawyer was asking, “Can you tell us how exactly you were raped. What tool was used?” For the woman, it was obvious that if you are raped it is in a certain way but in court –(Member timed out.)

6.16
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for tabling this Bill.

Sex is a secret thing done by those who are old enough and on consent. However, people have taken it like anything for playing around with. It ranges from touching breasts and different parts of the body of the woman and from defilement to rape, but with impunity. Women are taken as sex objects, which is not true. We have our right and it is our duty to say, “Yes, I want or I do not want.”

Therefore, when one touches me anyhow, especially my body parts, which I do not want you to, that should be an offence. When one defiles a young girl and destroys her when she is not yet mature, that should be an offence. When one rapes me, it should be a big offence. It requires a punishment, it deserves. That is why we feel we need to have this separate Act so that those who think women are sex objects can be put into book.

If you take children who are defiled to court, they cannot defend themselves. When the young children go for justice, they cannot provide it because the procedures are too long. They are asked too many questions, which a child cannot answer so we need young children to be protected. We need women who are raped to be compensated and the person who raped must be punished. That is why this Bill is very important. 

In developed countries, if one touched a breast, they have already assaulted. Even if they are a minister, they may be asked to resign their position because they will have offended a woman. That is why we are here. 

The Bill has all the recommendations, which are written in our report; when the time comes, we shall support it. Please rise and support so that people treat women with dignity. Thank you.

6.19
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I strongly support this Bill; it should have come yesterday. I am very concerned about the extent of sexual harassment in this country especially at work places because we do not have a law that clearly defines what constitutes sexual harassment. 

Many women and men have suffered and their careers are at stake just because it is so hard to prove sexual harassment at workplaces. We also know that women do not develop and keep under there just because someone is interested in them.

In addition, because in this country we have a culture of silence it is very hard for the young women, I do not know if the adults also fear, to come out and confront their bosses on sexual harassment issues. 

Therefore, I would like to thank the mover of this Bill for having brought it so that we can consolidate the various laws to protect women and girls especially our youth.

We have very many cases of sexual harassments in religious institutions. In some countries, when the youth join universities they are taken through what constitute sexual harassment because these sexual offenses come as process and by the time someone realizes, it has been going on for a long time. That is my interest in this Bill and I call upon Members to support it.

There is also the issue of defilement when both the girl and the boy are below 18 years. That is not clear in the current legislations. It is as if people assume it is the boy who has defiled and the girl is the victim yet in this case both the boy and the girl are below 18 years. We also need to address that issue. How should we handle when both the boy and the girl are below 18 years?

The honourable colleague talked about the intimidating -(Member timed out.)

6.22
MR GILBERT OLANYA (FDC, Kilak County South, Amuru): Thank you, Mr Speaker. This Bill is very important because it will protect both men and women. When we look at prostitutes, now days, young boys cannot move along some streets in Kampala. We have so many prostitutes who attack and rape men on the streets –(Interjections)– yes, we have heard and this is one of the reasons that make this Bill very important.

Mr Speaker, it is unfortunate that we tend to sympathise with the women not knowing that there are other women out there who are torturing our men. We need this Bill to protect the young boys who are in school.

Mr Speaker, it is true we have ever had cases where you find someone who is HIV positive intentionally infecting young girls. Therefore, it is very important to have this Bill. Not only men but we also have sugar mummies who are infected but lure young boys with gifts and turn them into husbands and end up infecting them –(Interruption)

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information I would like to give you is that there are even people who are bringing young girls - not studying - from villages to come and work as maids, others to work in bars, hotels and lodges. When night comes, they look for men for these girls and the money taken by them. The girls just go there and serve and the people who brought them take the money. It is unfortunate. We should beat them with this law well.

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, this Bill will help both boys and girls. If you look at pornography in schools, we recently had cases in one of the schools within Kampala where young girls and boys were involved in pornography. There are children watching sex videos in dormitories, classroom. Therefore, it lures the children into having sex. I support this Bill to protect the image of this country both morally and physically. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (LANDS) (Ms Persis Namuganza): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this Bill because it has been long overdue. When you look at the sexual offences today and their punishments, like the mover of the Bill has mentioned, they do not categorise these sexual offenses.

Much as we are calling all of them sexual offenses, they are not the same. I think honourable members might have noticed that incest is on the rise, where parents especially the men, are raping their own daughters or even defiling the young ones. This is something so disturbing. When they are presented before courts of law, they just say they have committed a sexual offence without categorising them. This is a father defiling his own daughter! It is really too much.

Therefore, as we debate this Bill, some of these offences which are committed by relatives should be considered in a different manner. The punishment, much as they are all sexual offences, if it is done by a relative, a father or someone else defiling, after the general punishment which may, for example, be a seven year sentence, there should be an additional punishment for such cases if it is proved that the person who has defiled was a relative.

Mr Speaker, the other thing is about pornography that hon. Olanya talked about. In the land laws, for example, on eviction, the law does not only punish the persons who wrongfully evict others, but even those who help in the eviction.

Therefore, people who are promoting pornography should even be given heavier punishments. As the honourable member mentioned, there are schools that are clearly aware that children watch pornography. They even go and lock themselves somewhere and the teachers and management knows - I raised this issue with some school here and said how could this happen? They told me that the father of that child who brought the blue movie was a big person and such big people - you cannot just go –(Member timed out.)

6.29
MS NOELINE KISEMBO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. Mr Speaker, sexual offences are real and are on the rise and one of the reasons is that the punishments to the sexual offenders are not deterrent enough.

We have sexual offences on the rise in our schools; our young girls are getting defiled and get difficulties. Like my colleagues have said, there is promotion of sexual abuse. In some schools, they are promoting weird dances, which seduce young girls and boys into sexual activities thus spoiling the chances, especially of the young girls to advance with education. 

Therefore, we need to support this Bill and to have in place deterrent punishments that will deter the offenders from these practices. 

Just like the honourable minister has said, I feel so bad that we witness parents, especially men, defiling their own daughters. This is getting too much and this Bill will go a long way to settle all this. Therefore, I support the Bill. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

MS NAKIWALA: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg your guidance on whether we are proceeding well. When I looked at the Bill and the information that is coming out, I realise that it involves proposals that are already taken care by our laws here. For example, most of the laws concerning children such as child to child sex are in the Penal Code Act and in the Children’s Act. We have remand homes where we remand, penalise and take action against this. Therefore, are we proceeding well if we are to look at these proposals as new laws in the country? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: We are proceeding very well. 

6.33
MR JULIUS ACON (NRM, Otuke County, Otuke): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for tabling this Bill. The rate of sexual abuse is so high in our country. 

As hon. Baba Diri said, sex is meant for two people in a secret corner at the right age and at the right time. For example, in one of my primary schools or institution, teachers defile these young girls in exchange for grades. This happened in Otuke last year where a teacher called one of the students to exchange sex for grades. The student got pregnant and had a baby but the teacher denied fathering the child.  Therefore, I advise that we come up with a DNA testing machine to ensure that these fathers support the child or children they produce. 

When these young girls are looking for jobs, the managing directors or the bosses may first want to “sample” them. These are the kinds of things that we need to regulate using this law. Once one gets a child with a young person, they must support him/her until a certain age. Otherwise, without control, sexual abuse will continue happening in our country. I would like to thank you so much. 

6.34
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you so much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the honourable member for this Bill. I fully support the Bill. Yesterday’s New Vision had a headline, “Man kills 60-year old lover.” The one of today has a story with a headline, “30-year old man kills a 72-year old lover.” These are problems that we must secure and this law will actually go a long way in addressing such challenges that our women are facing. 

The Bible does not support sexual offences. In Deuteronomy 22:23-24, God condemns this type of thing. If God in heaven condemns sexual abuse, how about us the human beings and members of Parliament? The Bible says God is everywhere; in heaven and here. Since God does not support it, I too, do not support it. 

As members of Parliament, we must pass this law as early as now so that we are sure that our people are protected and will be safe.  

Finally –(Interruption) 

MS EGUNYU: Thank you very much. You have given an example in the Bible and I would like to thank the mover of the motion. However, I would like the mover to include this: from the 10 commandments, it is obscene and it is an offence to admire someone’s wife. This should be included in the Bill because they keep on admiring people’s wives and in the process, action takes place. We should find a way of including it in the Bill. 

MR ABALA: Mr Speaker, I would like to thank hon. Egunyu. She is actually “our” wife. She comes from Ngora and I am happy because she has rightly mentioned –(Member timed out.) 

6.38
MR ASHRAF OLEGA (NRM, Aringa County, Yumbe): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I support this Bill and like the mover mentioned, there are some areas that need to be addressed so that we have a complete set of laws that can protect our young ones from abuse by people with bad intentions. Some of these people could even have HIV/AIDS, as was mentioned. Therefore, this law has come at the right time. 

However, let us address the lacunas that still exist in this law because if we rush this law, we may also make more mistakes. I know these laws actually exist in our country but our problem in Uganda is implementation. These laws are there but we do not implement them and that is why we have problems in this country. My prayer is that once we come up with laws here, we should implement them to protect Ugandans.

Mr Speaker, I also have a concern, which the movers of the Bill need to address; and that is rape in marriage. I do not know how it comes about because it is a tricky issue. I think once this law is passed, we should try to see and understand how rape can be handled in marriage. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Where is that in the law? 

MR OLEGA: I am seeking clarification from the movers because my worry is that it can easily be misused by some people. Mr Speaker, this Bill has been around for a long time and it has been causing problems in this country and that is why it was not passed. Therefore, let us be careful; we should not be tricked. My prayer is that we should have this law clearly interpreted by all Ugandans so that they are able to implement it. 

The last point is about sensitisation. From now onwards, let us sensitise our young people in schools to understand that rape and these other sexual offences are not allowed in our communities. My prayer is that once we come up with such laws, let us put the element of sensitization of people so that they know that rape and other sexual offences are not the right things to do in our societies. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

6.40
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also stand to support the Bill. Defilement is a thorn in our throats. Police officers who have been settling cases of defilement and uniting parents in most areas, especially where I have worked - Busia, Pallisa and even in Kakumiro where I represent, usually settle cases of defilement in a bid to get money.

I wonder –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable, are you a Member of the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs?

MS NABBANJA: Yes, think from recently, in December. (Laughter) However, allow me to make this point because it is very necessary.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MS NABBANJA: You realise that police officers have been abetting this crime. Therefore, we need to see how best we can handle police officers or even parents and LCs who have been abetting defilement so that we curtail that practice. 

6.42
MS ROSE MUTONYI (NRM, Bubulo County West, Manafwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill. One thing that perturbs me in the villages is marrying off children for the sake of getting money yet they do not get it.

As hon. Robinah Nabbanja said, parents marry off their children as the LCs and policemen look on. When you tell the policemen, they say, the parents have accepted. Don’t these policemen know these laws? It is perturbing and painful to see a young girl being marrying off. When you mention it they say, “We shall see you at the next election.” Mr Speaker, it is very serious in the countryside.

I wish we could have stringent punishments for these LCs also whose people marry off these children when they are looking on. I think LCs should also be involved. We also have the relatives and even the parents; when a son rapes or defiles a child, the parent will say, “but they are ours, what do we do?” 

When an outsider comes –(Interruption)

6.45
MS FRANCA AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Agago): Thank you very much, hon. Rose Mutonyi, for giving way for me to give you information. I would like to give you an example of a case which just happened in my district and it is perturbing. 

Last week, on 4 February 2019, a boy defiled a 14-year-old girl and the case was reported to police. The police demanded for Shs 60,000 to transport the officer to the scene of crime to look for the suspect and take him to the police station. 

The complainants produced the money and the police arrested the suspect. The parents of the girl were asked for Shs 20,000 for medical examination, which they did. They produced the boy the following day and they asked the complainants to go back after three or four days - on a Friday. They told them to go back on Friday when the suspect would be produced in court. The complainants reported on Friday but the police had released the suspect on Wednesday. 

I got interested in this matter and did investigations including engaging the district police commander over the matter. It was discovered that one of the officers who participated in the arrest had connived with the suspect. The suspect paid Shs 700,000 to the police officer. The police officer then helped the suspect by not producing him to court; he just released him.

Therefore, what you are talking about is real and if the law can help us, as Parliament, let us do our part. It is very important that we do our part and leave –(Member timed out.)

6.47
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I think the surest way to move with this Bill is to critically look at the originators of the sex offences. One of the originators is the parenting aspect. There is a lady who got married at an early stage but later divorced. She came to Kampala. After about 30 years, her son also came to Kampala but they had never met in the30 years.

The boy accidently got interested in the lady and he did not know he was his mother. The boy wanted to introduce the lady to his parents. He took the lady to his home only to shock everybody and they said, “This is your mother.” 

Mr Speaker, I think this particular Bill should address the aspect of parenting on both the mother and father’s sides. The children must know their father and mother because at the end of the day, you find such scenarios of incest which other Members have talked about appearing because the level of interaction between the family members has been limited.

The second aspect is the example from our Muslims colleagues. Muslims dress decently. In Islamic countries, women dress decently. When you go to Muslim communities, you see women dressed decently and that reduces the level of temptations. 

Therefore, the mover of this Bill - I think there must be a deliberate effort to ensure that women also dress decently –(Member timed out.)

6.50
MS ROSEMARY NAUWAT (Independent, Woman Representative, Amudat): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also like to thank the mover of this Bill. Sexual offences including rape, aggravated rape and defilement, are becoming common in Uganda. These are inhuman acts. Imagine a young man raping a 70-year-old woman and a man defiling a five-year-old child.

Mr Speaker, there was a story in the media some few months ago of a 70-year-old woman who was raped and she was lucky that she managed to get the rapist’s wallet, which contained his identity card that was used to pin him down. There was another story of a six-year-old girl who was defiled by her own father. These are rare cases but many similar cases go unreported.

Therefore, I think it is important that people are encouraged to report cases. There are men who defile girls well aware that they are HIV-positive or have sexually transmitted diseases (STDs). Therefore, they need to be heavily punished.

On the issue of evidence, people are being intimidated but I think it is important that people are sensitised about the importance of providing evidence because the law is there to protect and help them.

Vulnerable people like children, PWDs and the elderly need to be helped. They need to be supported to bring their tormentors to book. For example, some of them are not able to go on with prolonged court cases. They may go to court and the court is adjourned and they are told to return another time. With all the financial implications it has, they get disappointed and the perpetrators get off the hook. I think this vulnerable category of Ugandans needs to be helped. When their cases go to court, they should be handled quickly so that the perpetrators are brought to book. Thank you.

6.52
MR HOOD KATURAMU (Independent, PWD Representative, Western): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the chairperson and members of the committee for this Bill. We know that we have laws in our judicial system that should punish perpetrators of these heinous crimes but they are either outdated or ineffective. Therefore, the rationale is to consolidate all the laws and cure this problem.

Mr Speaker, we know that there has been moral decadence in our society and that is why sexual offences differ in form and degree. Let us look at the offence of incest that is committed within families; it is abominable. It is concealed and many times you cannot have the required evidence to prosecute the offenders. 

For a sexual offence involving an offender defiling a child of two years, how do we – in our judicial system – get evidence from a tot of two years to come to court? Even the lawyer representing this child cannot give the true evidence from this child. These are the challenges that we want to address in this Bill. There should be proportional punishment depending on the intensity of the sexual offence that has been committed.

Mr Speaker, we know that our judicial system has now entrenched plea-bargaining as one of the methods to reduce the case backlogs which we have. We would implore that in this Bill, sexual abuse and assault should not be entertained and integrated in plea-bargaining because this would defeat the aim of passing this Bill –(Member time out.)

6.55
MS GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill. I would like to take it up from the moral aspect. Like my colleague has said, there is a lot of moral decadence in this country and that is why there are many types of sexual offences. Parents have abdicated their responsibilities; they are not educating the children and are not good examples to their children. 

I have moved around my constituency and when you try to discuss this topic, most parents will talk about the children’s rights, which they are really misinterpreting. They do not touch or talk to the children but leave the children to go night and day unchecked. Most of these children are now into drugs and illicit drinks and they commit some of these offences – children-to-children – under the influence of drugs and illicit drinks. 

Therefore, I support and suggest that the Bill should take into consideration the aspect of sensitisation of our communities on correct parenting and conduct of children. Otherwise, the family is in dire need of moral rehabilitation.

Secondly, I pray that this Bill will strengthen the justice system and in particular, like my colleague said, the police. Most times when parents report cases of defilement and rape of their children, the police make it very difficult and frustrating. They ask parents to provide money for medical checkups, which they cannot afford. These Government medical facilities should do some of these things free. They make it hard and parents get frustrated. 
	 
Secondly, they advise parents to go and sort it out with the boy’s family, insinuating that the pregnant girl should be married off - and this promotes teenage marriages.

I have just talked about our children taking drugs and committing these offences. I would like to suggest that this Bill should take into account the aspect of rehabilitation of these offenders. Otherwise, it will be a waste of time to take them to prisons for seven years and then they come out when they are not rehabilitated. Thank you.

6.58
MR TOM ALERO (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I also thank the sponsor of the Bill. I am going to talk about the issue of culture. Colleagues, the issue of culture has brought about moral decadence. There are some societies where the dances are very obscene and provocative. 

In eastern Uganda, there is the Kadodi dance, which is very provocative. In northern Uganda, there is the courtship dance. When you come to central Ugandan, there is the shaking and waving of the waist - (Laughter) - some of these cultural practices are very dangerous to our society. They are sexually provocative and encourage immoral activities. 

Mr Speaker, I do not want to mention any tribe here but among some tribes, after circumcision, a boy is requested to go and test and try whether he is a man – (Interruption)

MR OLANYA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our colleague mentioned that there is a dance in northern Uganda, which is very provocative and it introduces people to immoral acts and provokes them into sexual intercourse.

Mr Speaker, the dance that we have especially within the Acholi –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, no one talked about the Acholi. (Laughter)

MR OLANYA: I am giving an example of northern Uganda. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: There is a saying that when dogs are mating and you throw a stone, the one that yells is that one that has been caught by the stone.

MR OLANYA: Mr Speaker, the kind of dances we have in northern Uganda are very smart and they are supposed to be performed by mature people, not by the young people. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to insinuate that there are dances that introduce someone into sexual immorality?
	
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Member was not very specific about the kind of dances you are referring to. I do not know why you are bringing yourself within the firing line and making everyone think that you are the one. (Laughter)

MR ALERO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Loose and reckless lifestyles characterised by alcoholism, drugs and substances like Marijuana, Mairungi, indecent dressing among others, encourage youth to indulge in acts like fornication, abortion etcetera.
		
As someone alluded to here, as parents, we should try to be very strict on our children so that they can grow into children who are properly –(Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, can we reduce the time to one minute so that we can all contribute? If we use two minutes, we shall not be able to finish on time. I am giving each one of you one minute and I will start with the workers’ representative.
	
7.03
MS AGNES KUNIHIRA (NRM, Workers Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support this Bill. This Bill will go a long way in curbing violence against women and girls. 

Mr Speaker, you are aware that girls are harassed everywhere - they are harassed at home and at school. At the work places, women are harassed and sometimes they are forced to give in because they need these jobs. Therefore, I pray that we pass this Bill so that it can be able to protect women and girls. Thank you.

7.03
MR DONONZIO KAHONDA (NRM, Ruhinda County, Mitooma): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support this Bill. However, there are some key issues I would like to talk about like facilitating the medical check-ups.

We have had challenges at the police, especially when a child is raped or defiled; the police ask for money to facilitate the medical check-ups. Mr Speaker, I think we need to quickly address this issue.
	
The second issue is on detention centres for juveniles. I have been facilitating this in my district but the police is not facilitated and neither is the community service department to provide security, transport – (Member timed out.)

7.04
MR ISAAC ETUKA (NRM, Upper Madi Okollo County, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the Bill. However, I would like to observe that according to our Constitution, someone below the age of 18 is still a child.
	
When you look at child-to-child sex - the Bill is talking about sex between children of ages 12. Is the Bill suggesting that we look at a child the age of 12 years?
	
Mr Speaker, this reminds of a case where a child was raped by someone below the age of 18 and both of them were Muslims. What overruled was that they used the sharia law, which makes a girl who begins to menstruate –(Member timed out.)

7.05
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to support the Bill at this time when sexual offences have reached an unprecedented scale in the country.

I would like to address three of the offences; defilement, rape and incest. Within this particular Bill, we ought to classify those offences as “serious crimes” carrying punitive sentences. 

For that matter, sentencing people for life imprisonment - clearly stating natural life - not the 20 years that are provided for by the Prisons Act, as far as incest, defilement and rape are concerned.
	
Incest is a very abominable act –(Member timed out.)

7.06	
MR FRED ANGELLA (NRM, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to restrict my submission to two issues.

A member raised an issue of culture. It is true that in some cultures, there are certain practices that are taken to be normal - like rape. In Karamoja, people who are in courtship are –(Interruption)

MS AMODING: Mr Speaker, the Constitution clearly states that any cultures that are inconsistent with the rights of women should be abolished in this country or at least improved. Culture is not static and so, is the honourable member in order to justify one of the worst human rights abuses – rape - and to say that it should be allowed?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I did not hear that. It is your Bill, please let us be supportive. The Member said there are other cultural practices like in Karamoja, which other people consider to be rape. He was now going to explain what it means but you rose on a point of order.

MR ANGELLA: Mr Speaker, I fully support the Bill and there is no doubt about that. However, we are not going to sit here and make a Bill for only certain parts of the country; we should also consider other cultures.

There is also an issue of indecent dressing and pornography. We should not reduce pornography only to people who show sexual activities. Women dress indecently, Mr Speaker. You find a woman dressed indecently and she does not mind about what others think –(Interruption)

MR JONATHAN ODUR: Mr Speaker, for purpose of clarity, I would like to seek clarification from my brother on what amounts to indecent dressing and those things that women do that may make them vulnerable to sexual abuse.

MR ANGELLA: We are not going to bury our heads in the sand. Wearing short skirts –(Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you. The Member of Parliament for Moroto Municipality is speaking as if he does not know that this Parliament passed a law regarding indecent dressing.

Secondly, the Member of Parliament made a statement, which I would like to beg your guidance to allow him withdraw. He said, “Mr Speaker, women dress indecently.” That means all women dress indecently. Therefore, is he in order to insinuate that every woman in this country dresses indecently? Does he really want to say the women seated in this Parliament are indecently dressed? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is that what you meant? 

MR ANGELLA: Mr Speaker, I said, “some women dress indecently.” I did not say “all women”. So, we should also consider outlawing that –(Member timed out.)  

7.11
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you. I would like to thank the mover of this Bill. I have three recommendations for the Bill. The first one is that we should emphasise, in this Bill, sensitisation of our communities especially on the roles of the LCI. I can assure you that in most of our communities, LCIs are handling capital offences. They do not know the difference between the offences they are supposed to handle and those that are supposed to be forwarded to the police or courts. 

Therefore, there is need to sensitise our communities and local councils in terms of their roles so that the cases of defilement are pushed to police and courts.

My second recommendation is facilitation to the police to bring these people to courts, hospitals – (Member timed out.)

7.12
MR ANGEL MARK DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you. I am aware that both the victim and the offender require legal services. In this particular area, however, we should move a step ahead. There are cases where, instead of lawyers helping us out of situations, they complicate matters. They are the people who go to the police and to the doctor who carries out the medical examination.

In most cases, the victims are helpless to the extent that they cannot even afford lawyers. In reality, you can see that the person who carried out the –(Interruption)

MS AKURUT: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. The information –(Member timed out.)

7.13
MS MARGARET LAMWAKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to add my voice in support of the Bill. I would like to, however, tell my sister that when I read the Bill, I did not see any clause that deals with rape of a person with disability. As I speak, I am keeping a child of three months who was fathered by an able man but the mother is mentally disturbed. I wish you could add that, honourable chairperson.

Then, it is true that the level of prostitution is rising today, where our daughters are even –(Member timed out.)

7.14
MR GEORGE OUMA (NRM, Bukooli Island County, Namayingo): Mr Speaker, there is a very serious issue and that is child neglect. Child neglect is a major cause of defilement and prostitution. The Bill must make sure that parents who neglect their children are brought before the courts of law. I have seen needy children being neglected and exposed to temptations. Therefore, I appeal that this Bill must make sure that the people who neglect their children are seriously punished. Thank you.

7.14
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I support the Bill. While in Nairobi for a benchmarking trip, we found out that Kenya has gone an extra mile to set up a rehabilitation centre for the affected persons, especially the women and the young girls. I think we also need to introduce such centres in Uganda so that we take care of those who are tormented because of such actions.

Secondly, we must take punitive measures against the perpetrators who connive with parents. In the villages, parents do not understand the meaning of this Bill. As Members of Parliament, I would like to implore you that while at functions and burials, let us take on the mantle of sensitising our communities. Talk about these things openly to make sure this Bill is understood by everybody. Thank you.

7.15
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to appreciate my Woman Member of Parliament for being strong. My concern, however, is that this Bill is like a double edged sword. Most governments around the world use these sexual offences to bully political opponents. Therefore, when we go to the next stage, we should make sure we pin our eyes on the details, particularly on:

    1. Attempt to commit rape;
    2. Sexual harassment;
    3. Attempted defilement.

I am saying so because I know it is not just about our Government but governments all over the world. Therefore, we have to pay attention to detail because you can easily be trapped. One day, you would be jogging in the morning but because you have a short jogging outfit, they will say you are attempting to expose your thighs. Then, you will be in trouble. 

7.17
MR JOHN BAGOOLE (Independent, Luuka North County, Luuka): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I do not support this Bill in its current form. I got some time off and I went through the entire Bill. I realised we need to do more surgery to it. If I can use the current language that you normally use outside Parliament; “the boat is not balanced”. 

When you look at all the clauses, you will realise that the most affected creature is the male. For example, lately, there are many old women who are raping young boys. That one is not catered for in this Bill. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon the movers of the Bill to take my request that we go back and balance the boat. That is when I will come back here and support the Bill. Thank you.

7.18
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the Bill and I would like to start from where my honourable colleague has just ended. There are also very many young men who are raping very old women. Some of these men are so greedy to the extent that they leave wives at home and then they go at night and attack these old women and rape them.

Personally, I think the “boat is balanced”. We only need to reach committee stage and we get a way of “balancing the boat”. 

Talk about the indecent dressing - I usually see men dressed indecently so much that they even –(Interjection)– yes. They wear very tight –(Member time out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable members. We have come to the conclusion of this debate on the general principles of the Bill. The discussion has been good. Can I put the question to the motion for second reading?

Honourable members, I now put the question that the Bill entitled, “The Sexual Offences Bill, 2015” be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Like the other Bill, we will not be able to go to committee stage at this time because the time is now gone. However, use this time, if you have any proposal; it should go through the processes that it is shared before we come back.

Therefore, any amendment that is not circulated and shared with the Speaker and all Members concerned will not be entertained at committee stage. Please heed to this so that we can process this thing in a way that makes us understand clearly what we are passing; instead of being surprised later and ask, “how did we this” because it will have come at a time when we have not looked at it properly in the framework of the whole law.

Honourable members, as said earlier, tomorrow we will not have a normal sitting of Parliament. We will have a special sitting. However, before we started this session, there were Members that had some urgent matters to raise. I do not know whether we still have time to accommodate them because some of the matters are very urgent. We can have them and then see how to proceed. 

7.21
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Yesterday I made a commitment that I was going to have a meeting with the ministers regarding a matter which was raised by hon. Elizabeth Karungi. I would like to let you know, Mr Speaker and the entire House that we sat and we have a report. 

Therefore, if Parliament allows, the minister can make a small statement. If we do not have time, then we can make a statement at an appropriate time. However, the work was done as promised.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay. How do we deal with this? This was a response under Rule 46; response to a question that was asked yesterday. I hope it is a brief response and not a statement that will complicate issues.

7.22
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, the matter was raised here yesterday by hon. Elizabeth Karungi, the Woman Representative of Kanungu District. She raised a concern that affects my ministry and the department of Uganda Wildlife Authority in carrying out massive evictions of the people occupying land allegedly belonging to Queen Elizabeth National Park; on account that they have encroached on it.

She further stated that there are affected people who have lived on this land since 1934 and now threatened with hunger and starvation and are under urgent need of Government intervention.

Mr Speaker, this is the response - we constituted a committee which was formed by the Government Chief Whip and the following ministers attended: The Chief Whip was our chairperson, Dr Baryomunsi, hon. Jennifer Namuyangu and I.

Mr Speaker and honourable members; the following have been gathered;  –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have also said that you had a teleconferencing with the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) of Kanungu District. That is important.

MR KIWANDA: Yes. The meeting was also addressed through a teleconference by the Resident District Commissioner of Kanungu District that provided information on the current situation on the ground.

The following facts have been gathered on this matter;
    1. The area under contestation is a stretch of land along the boundary of Queen Elizabeth National Park comprising of three villages of Matanda, Kinyamutongo and Kameme in Kibimbi Parish, Kabongo Sub-county, Kanungu District. It is described on the Queen Elizabeth National Park boundary plan as Kazinga Channel, which is referred to here. Queen Elizabeth Park was gazetted in 1954 by the colonial Government.

    2. That in 2006, the Uganda Wildlife Authority opened and marked the boundaries of Queen Elizabeth National Park. This area was not demarcated as it was defined by Kazinga Channel on the boundary of description. The channel was still there and that used to act as a natural border for the national park and the communities.

    3. Over the three years, due to climate change and persistent drought, the Kazinga Channel dried up and this facilitated encroachment by way of cultivation and tree planting by the local communities from the three villages mentioned above. The encroachment was also facilitated by some local leaders; some of whom acquired and owned parts of land in the contested area. 

    4. There are, however, no settlements in the park other than cultivation and tree plantations. In 2016, in an effort to contain encroachment, the Uganda Wildlife Authority engaged Government surveyors to open the boundary of the park on this area. However the community contested this move and with help of the RDC of Kanungu District, they agreed to use a district surveyor who was perceived to be a neutral person.

    5. The RDC of Kanungu District, together with the Uganda Wildlife Authority engaged the communities to sensitise them on the survey and demarcation of the boundary prior to the boundary survey.

    6. The district surveyor obtained the necessary coordinates and maps from the survey departments in Entebbe and undertook the survey of the boundary of the contested area in August 2018.

    7. This exercise was also carried out with participation of the communities and all the three local council chairpersons of the three affected villages.

    8. During the survey, it was established that there was encroachment on the park in form of cultivation and planting of eucalyptus trees, to be specific.

    9. The affected communities requested the Uganda Wildlife Authority, through the RDC, to be allowed to harvest their crops and they were granted permission up to December 2018 to do so. Thereafter, the Uganda Wildlife Authority would proceed to plant the boundary pillars.

    10. In January 2019, after realising that the new RDC had been posted to Kanungu, many of the encroachers reopened the new gardens against the Uganda Wildlife Authority’s advice. During the same period, the new RDC of Kanungu District commissioned the exercise of planting the boundary pillars along the surveyed boundary. This commissioning was also attended by the LCV vice chairperson of Kanungu District Local Government, who also doubles as the area councillor.

    11. The LCIII Chairperson and the all the three chairpersons attended this sensitisation.

    12. The Uganda Wildlife Authority has since the launching – the launching was also done together with the sensitisation. I have photographs to prove this meeting. The Uganda Wildlife Authority has since commenced planting of the boundary pillars and the exercise is still on-going.

    13. On realising that the Uganda Wildlife Authority was serious about planting the boundary pillars, some of the encroachers sold the pieces of land inside the park to rich businessmen in Kihihi town. Therefore, it is the section of the sellers and buyers of land inside the national park that have petitioned the members of Parliament to raise the matter in Parliament. They hoped for de-gazettement.

In conclusion, there are no evictions whatsoever by the Uganda Wildlife Authority in this area as there was no settlement and there is no need for Government to provide relief.

The Uganda Wildlife Authority is handling the matter together with the district local government. I promise to work together with the area members of Parliament to always give them information, especially concerning the borders with the national parks.

I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in your paragraph 1 of “the following facts have been gathered” and paragraph 3, you state that there are three villages affected. My understanding is that villages are for human management not animals. How do you have villages in the game park to manage animals? You say that there are three villages, which means they are recognised as so. How could they be in the game park?

MR KIWANDA: Mr Speaker, I was referring to the three villages that touch the borders of the national park. They only extended cultivation.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member is entitled to a supplementary question.

MS KARUNGI: Thank you, Mr Speaker. First of all, the affected area is not Kabuga Parish. It is Rushoroza Parish, for your information.

Secondly, Matanda is not among the villages affected. There are five affected villages, not only three. There are no rich people who bought land there. It is only hon. Kaberuka who recently bought land there. 

The eucalyptus trees they are talking about have been there for a long time. The owners are the children of that area. Perhaps you wish to say that after growing too much rice, the boys got money, bought land in Kihiihi Town and they now have money; but they have been there. That is their home area. 

Therefore, it is not clear. Unfortunately, our Resident District Commissioner (RDC) is new. I think it would be good, honourable minister and your team, that we go down and meet the people. This is not enough. 

We do not need the relief now. What I said yesterday was that if they are evicted and they are not allowed to cultivate their land, we shall have no food for them because that was the area that was – (Member timed out.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is clear that the information is not matching. As the honourable member is proposing, you may have to first go and check this land because telephones do not have eyes. Sometimes you rely on information but when you go you there, you may find that there are variations. Therefore, it might be a good idea for you to arrange with the concerned Members and check it out then you might be better advised on how to come and brief us. 

There were some Members who had raised issues with me that they want to raise now. Let me start in the order in which they were brought. Some are not here so I will start with the Member of Parliament for Buikwe South.

7.32
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance regarding the imposition of a ban on the smoking of fish as a method of fish preservation. 

If you recall, yesterday, there was a big group composed of mostly women representing others who could not come here. They came to seek the assistance of this Parliament after the Uganda People’s Defence Forces (UPDF) operatives imposed an arbitrary ban on smoking fish, which is their main source of livelihood. Many of these women came from Senyi, Kiyindi Landing Site and others from Buvuma.

The preservation of fish using smoking has existed long before we were born and it has never been outlawed. The arbitrary imposition has left those people with no source of livelihood. We have discussed this matter here before and we expected that serious action would be taken but now they have been left jobless. This is affecting their lives and they are being deprived of their right to economic activity.

My prayer, therefore, is that the ministry – there are two ministries in charge of this operation; the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Ministry of Defence and Veteran Affairs. I am, therefore, seeking their indulgence to issue an order restraining the UPDF from banning this activity that has not been outlawed.

Secondly, we need the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to give us strategic direction on how best they want these people to carry out this activity in a manner that is acceptable to the ministry.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Government Chief Whip, this matter came and it was explained. The law, as it is, allows smoking of fish but does not allow dealing in immature fish. Smoking of fish is a legal method of preservation of fish. What is going on now? We have had these discussions before. Why do we do things that will end up angering the public and affecting them?

7.35
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, you are absolutely correct. I think we will have to write to the enforcement officers instructing them to lift the ban. The ban is put on immature fish. 
I know that the UPDF maybe thought about the dangers of cutting trees in search for firewood to smoke fish but without an alternative, banning smoking mature fish cannot be an answer –

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It is actually illegal to do that because the law permits preservation of fish through smoking.

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Unless the statutory instrument No.32 is amended, it is illegal. The minister in charge of the enforcers – this is UPDF – is hereby instructed to write to the UPDF to lift the ban. I am going to communicate to him.

7.37
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman Representative, Katakwi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance. On Sunday, 10 February 2019 at about 10 o’clock, we had an incident in my district where Mzee Lawrence Oceba aged 65, who had taken his animals for herding in a swamp was attacked by a buffalo. His abdomen was ripped and the intestines came out. 

When David Okila came to rescue him, the same happened to him. The buffalo jumped on him, tore his buttocks into pieces and the situation was only rescued by the police who put the animal out of action. The two were rushed to hospital. They are in critical condition. They were referred to Soroti.

We have been reading in the newspapers for the last two days about the situation of water scarcity in Katakwi, which is quite alarming. It is what has caused this. The wild animals have also strayed to look for pasture and water yet our communities are looking for the same for their animals. Such incidents are happening including snake bites. This was reported in yesterday’s paper. The boreholes that are available in the district have dried up. The dams and wells have also dried up.

My prayer is both to the Ministry of Tourism and the Ministry of Water and Environment. First, I pray that the ministry of tourism responds to the situation that has just happened. The previous day, buffalos were again cited within that area of Ongongoja Sub County. Therefore, the ministry needs to take that up.

We also pray that you compensate these persons adequately for the loss that they have incurred. In addition, the bills that they are incurring in hospitals should be paid by the Uganda Wildlife Authority - it is good that the Bill has already come to Parliament.

Mr Speaker, I also make a prayer to the Ministry of Water and Environment that we need boreholes drilled in Katakwi if the situation is to be responded to. In addition, some of the dams need to be de-silted so that our animals have water.

Currently, animals are sharing with the communities the few boreholes that are functional. They give animals water in turns. If your animals took water today, they won’t take tomorrow because most of the boreholes have actually dried up. Therefore, we appeal to the Ministry of Water and Environment that we need more boreholes drilled in the district and dams dug and de-silted.

7.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Mr Godfrey Kiwanda): Mr Speaker, I received this information and responded immediately. Hon. Peter Ogwang and the Woman Member of Parliament called me. We had an issue with one of the victims and the biggest problem we was about blood group O, which was not in Soroti. We rushed to Mbale Referral Hospital and got the units of blood that were needed and rushed them to Soroti. We hope his life is going to be saved.

I also deployed my team on the ground. I called my Director Conservation, Mr John Makombo, to deploy heavily in the region because most of these buffalos come from Kidepo National Park and not from Pian Upe. We are now in charge of the situation and as I speak, my team is on the ground to see how we can contain the situation. However, it is very unfortunate but we pray that these lives are saved.

On the issues of the bills, my Executive Director is on ground over this. I will be in touch with the leadership to see how best we can work with the families to make sure that we save the lives and to cater for some of the hospital bills.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you. Anything on the waterside?

7.41
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, in the last budget, Shs 10 billion was appropriated to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries for de-silting dams. The ministry is doing it but that is little money. What we are doing now in this coming budget is to look for money so that we cluster regions, buy equipment to help de-silt the dams at regional level because the equipment might not be enough.

It is not only Katakwi; the whole country is suffering. Water has reduced, streams have dried up and de-silting can be an answer because once it rains, then we would be sure that dams have got water.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you can see the benefit of having ministers in the House. The honourable minister’s response on the situation of the victims is very clear and these are urgent matters; they should be responded to urgently so that we know what is going on. This is the way it should be.

7.43
MS ROBINAH NABBANJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kakumiro): Mr Speaker, we have critical human resource issues in my district. Maternal, new-born and child health in my district - we have lost close to 38 women because we lack critical staff. Anaesthetic officers - we have two operational health centre IVs but being aided by IDI. Saving Mothers Giving Life (SMGL) pulled out a year ago and the district cannot afford to recruit the officers who were being supported by that programme.

Therefore, we have two health center IVs - Kakumiro and Kakendo. There are a few doctors who can operate on women especially the pregnant mothers who cannot deliver normally. Now because of lack of these anaesthetic officers, the poor mothers who cannot afford to go to Hoima or Mubende have been sacrificed.

We also lack theatre nurses. Out of the four that we need, we only have one in Kakumiro. We also need 10 midwives and if we could be helped with three medical officers.

Mr Speaker, I got a delegation on Monday in my office in Kakumiro and it is appalling; it is a shame. It is becoming too political. If we are to be helped with these critical staff members, we need about Shs 340 million so that we can recruit 3 medical officers at Shs 167 million per year, anaesthetic officer at Shs 64 million -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, but those are not urgent matters. Would you like to deal with the urgent ones?

MS NABBANJA: Yes, I already told you that I led a delegation to the Permanent Secretary last year in January when these people were threatening to leave. I went with the LCV, my colleague hon. Onesimus Twinamasiko, the Chief Administrative Officer and these other people. We told them that Kakumiro is a new district but we cannot afford to recruit these people because our wage bill is small. Nothing has happened and now mothers are dying - 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see, when you talk about budgetary matters, that stops being urgent.

MS NABBANJA: Yes, they told us -

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable, I am guiding you. When you start talking about budgetary matters, they stop being urgent because you are dealing with the budget. Let us deal with the urgent matter that is affecting the people. What intervention is required right now?

MS NABBANJA: Right now, the Ministry should go down - (Interjection) - I do not know, that is why I have come to Parliament because we are stuck.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I am guiding you on what you can do with Parliament.

MS NABBANJA: I would like Parliament to prevail over the Ministry of Health to help us and urgently post some staff there that can help us do the needful – maybe have a supplementary budget like they did with the Nodding Disease.

7.48
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Mr Speaker, it is sad and absurd to hear stories of mothers losing their lives. I am going to interact first with the Ministry of Health to make sure that they at least find staff and post them there temporarily to curb the problem.

However, the Ministry of Public Service also needs to be engaged so that they can accept to lift the cap for a few staff to be recruited. I hope that we can do it so that they are catered for in this budget in order for them to be sure of their salary. Those are the two things that I think must happen. I am going to talk to the ministers of Health and Public Service.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, let those responses be done right now so that it can help the situation in Kakumiro.

Honourable members, as I said, this Parliament will have a special sitting tomorrow to pay tribute to Bishop Cyprian Bamwoze, who passed on Monday. The President has agreed that we accord this tribute; so, tomorrow, the ordinary sitting of Parliament will not take place. 

The body will come here at 12.30 p.m. and I will be receiving it. Then, at 2 o’clock, the tribute motion will be debated. Bishop Bamwoze served for a very long time; over 20 years as Bishop. That is very rare because they have limitations on how much period they can serve. 

However, he started young and therefore, had a lot of time to deal with issues in Busoga - the faith, spiritual and development issues that I enumerated at the beginning. 
Therefore, tomorrow, we will be giving him this tribute, as Parliament. 

I encourage you, honourable members, to come and participate in that debate tomorrow. The normal sitting of Parliament is now adjourned to Tuesday at 2 o’clock. 

(The House rose at 7.50 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 19 February 2019 at 2.00 p.m.) 
