Friday, 8 January 2016

Parliament met at 11.16 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to welcome you to today’s sitting and again thank you for coming to perform your national duty. We hope to work expeditiously so that we do not keep you beyond 2 p.m. Thank you

11.19
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of great public importance. When this Parliament was considering the Parliamentary Election (Amendment) Bill, No.2 in regard to interest groups, we made strong recommendations particularly in respect to the representation of the army in this House, to include gender equality amongst the representatives.  It also included amongst the Members to be elected in this House, the rank and file of UPDF; it also included all armed forces to be represented in this House.

Madam Speaker, as we seem to be ending this year and elections are due to take place, it is important we get communication as to what steps have been taken by Government on the matter of special representation, particularly with the armed forces and whether the Clerk could be directed to communicate this position to Government so that once the elections take place, this can be reflected as per Parliamentary resolutions that were adopted by this House.

Madam Speaker, can we get a comment or commitment from Government on what steps they have taken towards the realisation of the Parliamentary resolutions on the matter of special representation, particularly with the armed forces?

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Office of the Prime Minister. We sent you those texts.

11.20
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The elections of special representatives like UPDF are obviously organised by the same Independent Electoral Commission. At least, I have witnessed two or three for defence.

I believe at that time a communication regarding the issues that hon. Ssekikubo has raised will be handy, if the Electoral Commission is informed, so that when they are organising this particular election they consider what Parliament passed.

I want to support hon. Ssekikubo on the proposal that the Clerk should officially inform the Electoral Commission because they are the ones in charge of organising these elections through that college. That is all I can say. Otherwise, if Parliament passed the law and the Electoral Commission does not follow it then that would be an anomaly which -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Thank you. The point we are raising is that there was an extensive debate in Parliament and if I recall, I was one of those who were saying that the representation of the armed forces in this House should not only be limited to UPDF. 

We talked about other special interest groups in this House like representativeS of the police and prisons. We wanted the minister to be specific. We know the UPDF is already here, they have their mechanism of organising elections. However, the challenge we threw to Government is that how can we make it possible sooner than later that these other shades of opinion like medical doctors can also be specifically represented in this House - especially prisons and police.

MS NANKABIRWA: Hon. Odonga Otto, you know very well that representation in this House is backed by a legal provision. What does the law that we are practicing say? There must be a legal backing, an Act of Parliament, and we are here to do that. We have ever seen Bills presented by private Members; such efforts have been exhibited here on the Floor of Parliament.

However, regarding the existing law which allows Members of UPDF to be represented here; there were specific requests made that when the UPDF is choosing their representatives, they must bear in mind issues like gender, rank and so forth. That is all I can say.

11.25
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I do not think we need to open up this debate. Parliament had an opportunity to debate the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee report and made recommendations. 

If I understood hon. Ssekikubo well, he is raising the issue of communicating the recommendations of this House to the relevant departments of Government - to say, these are the recommendations. The request is not to go back into the debate but to communicate the recommendations of this House which were adopted by both the ministers of Justice and Defence. We did our job, it is now the matter of communicating the decision of this House from the Clerk or the House.

THE SPEAKER: Now it is routine for the Clerk to inform Government of the decisions of this House. Most likely it was done.

11. 26
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise on a very serious issue of national importance. I was so disturbed over the festive period when I went out with my family to a few places to have a merry Christmas and Happy New Year.

To my dismay, I have been talking to so many Members in this House that contrary to the provisions of the Penal Code Act, there are very many bars and night clubs in Uganda that offer nude dancing to clients; the so called ekimansulo.

It is so disappointing that after midnight, in Ntinda, Natete, Bwaise, Luwero, Muyenga and many places around Kampala, people, even senior one students, who are on holiday, pay peanut fees of Shs 1000 and get into these seemingly normal bars; after midnight, they have nude performances on stage where some young girls in their teens are compelled to go to the stage to perform strip dances in the presence of over 1000 people.   The Minister of Internal Affairs is here. This is totally unacceptable for a country to be run in such a manner. 

The Police’s statistics of sexual assault is increasing countrywide, yet we have very many bars in this country - Kampala alone is operating many mini-brothels and nude shows without any form of regulation or licensing.

The question I am posing to the Minister of Internal Affairs is, are you aware that there are very many bars in Kampala and Uganda doing these illegal acts which are prohibited by the Penal Code? What interventions, through you Madam Speaker, can we make as a country to save –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much for giving way. The information I would like to give to hon. Otto is that it is not only strip dancing taking place in city bars and other areas, but there are even areas where homosexuality is openly practised here in Kampala. Those areas are known by security operatives. On Acacia Road from City Oil up to Garden City, some of those busy pubs practice homosexuality and many of our children go there and have been enrolled into that practice.

Mr ODONGA OTTO: The humble question I am posing to the Minister of Internal Affairs is, what interventions –(Interruption)

MS KIIZA: Madam Speaker, as the minister comes, we should also be told what interventions the country has to limit the excessive consumption of alcohol, especially the alcohol that is packaged in kaveera –(Interjection)- call it “Kasese”, but I mean the one that is packed in sachets. It is becoming too much that even when a parent sends a child to go and buy something from the market they can be able to leave small amounts like Shs 200 which can enable a child to buy the liquor and consume it. 

I can imagine, as a result, that is how our young people end up in strip dancing because they are under the influence of this alcohol. I also wanted to give that information and find out what remedy the country has put in place to control this vice.

11.29
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to empathise with my colleagues over this matter; it is very unfortunate. These are immoral activities that are promoted by people who know that it is illegal and maybe that is the reason they do it after midnight. This is not good for the future of our country and of course for our children.

To address these immoral and illegal acts, I am going to give instructions. I will instruct the police to go where these bars and brothels are; in Ntinda, Bwaise – I understand there are also brothels in Luwero and they are definitely not licensed. I would like to instruct the DPCs, and I am going to put it in writing, to make sure they make swoop and do spot checks until this vice is brought under control. This is one of the actions I am going to take.

In addition, honourable colleagues, where we see these actions are being promoted, let us try to be law keepers. Let us call the police and immediately arrest those people who perpetuate those acts.  My colleague will answer the issue of alcohol in kaveera. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in relation to that I would like to ask the Prime Minister’s Office to follow up with the President on the law on lotteries and betting. There is a big outcry in the population about those machines – where you put Shs 500 - people have lost money. They have sold their property. We made the law and we want the President to assent to it as quickly as possible. The police do not have any law to use.

11.31
MR EPHRAIM BIRARO (NRM, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to raise a matter of great national importance and of economic nature. 

Recently, there has been a racket of people who use big names from State House or even of the Rt Hon. Speaker. They call and say that they have jobs and want to connect people. Many of our colleagues and jobseekers have lost money.

During the political season, these conmen use the idea of transmitting campaign materials. They use names such as that of Hassan Galiwango from the NRM Secretariat and Samuel Katukunda from Kiruhura. There is also someone called Tayebwa. Those names have been used often and people have lost a lot of money through this scum. These conmen ask for people to transmit money so that they can offer them services.

Madam Speaker, I am calling upon the Ministry of Information Communication and Technology, which I think can check how money is transmitted and who gets the money at the end. I also call upon the Ministry of Internal Affairs to step up efforts to investigate these criminals. For some of them, we have their numbers. Many colleagues here can testify to it; they give you numbers to use and they later disappear. I think if the registration of phones can be followed up, these criminals can be found. Otherwise, the state has lost money –(Interruption)

MS MUTONYI: Madam Speaker, I witnessed one incident which targeted us the candidates in Manafwa District. Someone called us and said they were trying to ship T-shirts, caps and umbrellas of our presidential candidate –(Interjection)- not Go-Forward; that is not my side. 

He said his only problem was that he was trying to contact Dr Galiwango to send the money. They said they were at Y.Y. Coaches and there was no money to send the shipment. We put our heads together -(Laughter)- I think they made sure that Dr Galiwango’s phone was not on. When we tried to call Dr Galiwango, the phone was off. We tried to call other people in the secretariat and the numbers were off. 

We tried to put our heads together to send the money, but it was late in the night and we could not send the money. They said there are four packages. They asked, “Aren’t you four candidates”? We said, yes; it is for the LC Chairman candidate, MP candidates for Bubulo East and Bubulo West, and the District Woman MP. Fortunately for us, it was very late in the night and we could not send the money. 

He told us that, “If, you would like to deal with the person who is shipping, he is at Y.Y. Coaches office and this is his number”. We used the other number which he used to call. When we went to MTN, we found out that the two numbers of Airtel and MTN were registered in the same name. Therefore, we were dealing with one person who had two numbers. Therefore, honourable members be careful. There are conmen all over the place-

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have other work to do, wind up.

MR BIRARO: Madam Speaker, from what I have gathered, the major victims are jobseekers, politicians and business people. Therefore, I think we are serving a caution and appealing to the Government to pounce on those criminals. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Wouldn’t it be better if you formally put it down. How will the minister know which telephone numbers were used? Write to the minister and give them the numbers which you know so that they have somewhere to begin from. Otherwise, you are sending her on a wild goose chase.

11.35
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Madam Speaker, we are lawmakers and I think we know that some of these actions are definitely very illegal. We also know that we have law enforcers within our communities. Therefore, my request to Members is that whenever you are accosted by such people, find ways to calmly take them to the nearby police station and then you introduce the matter to the police so that they are apprehended.

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Minister of Environment on waragi. In one minute, say something very quickly on that.

11.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Munaba): Madam Speaker, we have had a challenge with the law on Kaveera and we are making efforts to amend it because only small portions pertaining to microns of a certain size were banned by the law. Therefore, the rest of these Buveeras like the ones for waragi and medicine are still allowed. We are trying to find ways to gather them. We cannot stop them until we have made a law to ban them.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO SPECIAL DRAWING RIGHTS 106,400,000 WHICH IS AN EQUIVALENT OF $150 MILLION FROM THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION (IDA) OF THE WORLD BANK GROUP TO SUPPORT THE AGRICULTURAL CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (ACDP) 

11.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FINANCE PLANNING AND ECONMIC DEVELOPMENT  (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to move a motion on the proposal to borrow up to SDR 106,400,000 equivalent to $150 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank Group to support the Agricultural Cluster Development Project.

Madam Speaker, this is an important loan. The objective of this project for which money is sought is to raise on farm productivity, production and marketable volumes of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographical clusters and there are 12 clusters.

This loan will go to a cluster of districts which were selected due to their high potential for increased productivity in the five chosen commodities.

Madam Speaker, the four components of this loan include: 

    1. Support for intensification of on-farm production;
    2. Preparation for agriculture and water management investment;
    3. Market linkages, post–harvest handling storage and value addition; and
    4. Project management, policy regulatory and ICT functions of the Ministry of Agriculture

Madam Speaker, this loan has been considered by the Committee on National Economy; many interactions were made and questions answered. I beg that the House supports this borrowing and authorises us to acquire this money in order for the country to benefit in terms of farm productivity, production and marketable volumes of these agricultural commodities. The Committee on National Economy will, therefore, present a detailed report. I beg to move.

11.41
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow Special Drawing Right 106,400,000, an equivalent of US$150 million, from the International Development Association of the World Bank group to support the Agriculture Cluster Development Project.

Madam Speaker, I have the committee’s report, the brief by the minister to Parliament, negotiation minutes, the draft financing agreement and the project appraisal.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to lay them on Table. I also beg to lay on Table the committee’s minutes on the same project.

Madam Speaker, this proposal was presented to this House by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 16 December 2015 and accordingly, referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with rule 166(2)(b) of our Rules of Procedure.

The committee accordingly considered and scrutinised the proposal and now I beg to report. With your permission, Madam Speaker, I will go to the project objectives on page 2. 

The objective of the project is to raise on-farm productivity, production and marketable volumes of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographical clusters.

Project Beneficiaries 

The third clusters of districts were selected due to their high potentials for increased productivity in the five chosen commodities and these clusters of districts are:

Cluster 1: Comprising of Masaka, Mpigi and Rakai districts
Cluster 2: Comprising of Iganga, Bugiri and Namutumba districts
Cluster 3: Comprising of Pallisa, Tororo and Butaleja districts
Cluster 4: Comprising of Kapchorwa, Bukwo and Mbale districts
Cluster 5: Comprising of Soroti and Serere districts
Cluster 6: Comprising of Amuru, Nwoya and Gulu districts
Cluster 7: comprising of Apac, Oyam, Lira, Kole and Dokolo districts
Cluster 8: Comprising of Kabarole, Kamwenge and Kasese districts
Cluster 9: Comprising of Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa, Mubende and Kibaale districts
Cluster 10: Comprising of Hoima, Masindi and Kiryandongo districts
Cluster 11: Comprising of Ntungamo, Kabale, Bushenyi and Isingiro districts
Cluster 12: Comprising of Nebbi, Arua, Marahca and Yumbe districts.

Madam Speaker, the project will have the following components:

    1. Support for intensification of On-Farm Production which will take US$155 million. 
    2. Preparation for Agricultural Water Management Investment, of which International Development Association (IDA) financing is $5 million. 
    3. Marketing linkages, post-harvest handling, storage and value addition at US$78 million of which International Development Association (IDA) is financing $ 45 million. 
    4. Project Management and Policy Regulatory, and ICT of Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) of which IDA is financing US$15 million.

Madam Speaker, the loan’s terms and conditions: 

    1. The loan amount is SDR 106.4 million which is an equivalent of US$150 million.
    2. The maturity period is 38 years, including a grace period of 6 years.
    3. Commitment charge of  five per cent on unwithdrawn Financing Balance per annum
    4. Service charge is 0.75 per cent on withdrawn and outstanding Credit  Balance per annum 

Observations and Recommendations

Packaging of the loan

Madam Speaker, the committee observes that, although the proposal would have been good in boosting the agricultural sector, the loan request was not well packaged. A lot of emphasis was put on aspects that do not add value to the current agricultural setting.

Recommendations

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should re-package the proposal to improve agricultural systems and productions countrywide.

Regional Balance

The committee noted further that the regions are not well distributed given that some regions were completely left out. 

Recommendations

Government should re-package the loan in an equitable way in order to reach farmers in all regions. 

Project Coverage

The committee observed that some of the targeted project beneficiary districts clustered have already benefited from similar projects in the agricultural sector. The committee also noted that the project leaves out some agricultural districts that would have been enabled in the agricultural activities. 

Recommendation

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should re-design the project while giving priority to those districts that have not benefited or those that have benefited from similar projects in the past. 

Number of Beneficiaries

The committee observed that while the project will involve a large amount of funds, the targeted beneficiaries are few. 

Recommendation

The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should ensure that the number of project beneficiaries is in tandem with the funds allocated to it. 

Conclusion

After thorough scrutiny of the proposal by Government to borrow up to SDR 106.4 million  an equivalent of US$150 million from IDA to support the Agricultural Cluster Development Project, the committee recommends that Government re-packages this proposal while taking into consideration the above observations and recommendations. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

11.47
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I am at a loss with where to start debating this report. This is because the chairperson in the recommendations and the conclusion seemed to suggest that they are imploring Government to first go and re-package the loan. Then come back and present it. Is that the position? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not think we should wait. The committee is saying that they are not satisfied with the design or the packaging. They want the Government to reformulate and come back. 

11.49
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have asked Government that in order for us to have integrated development in line with our National Development Plan (NDP), we should move away from project-related programmes. This was the position of Government. This is because it leads to duplication, corruption and even creates tension for us the Members of Parliament.

This is because in this, some districts are named while others are not. We agreed when we were designing the NDP that all loans will be budget support. This is channelled through the structured civil service system that we have. If it is a loan for agriculture, it is structured within that sector. However, Government has continued to bring loans here which are project- based. 

Madam Speaker, this has created corruption in the entire civil service. This is because people bribe to be part of the projects and they abandon the ordinary civil service. 

Therefore, I would like to request the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to please stick to the Vision 2040 and the National Development Plan.  The development partners agreed that they will give us the assistance on budget support. Project support has been abandoned. It is not the best model of development and transformation in the world. 

11.51
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (AGRICULTURE) (Mr Vincent Ssempijja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. What has been mentioned by the chairperson here is that the ministry has to go back and re-package the loan. 

I would like to say that sometimes you cut your cloth according to size; hon. Katuntu says that always. First of all, I would like to inform the Members that this sector has always been on both sides. I have had support from you, Members, to have enough funding for the sector.

As you have said, honourable members, there is no way we are going to target exports and be sure of food security and income in homesteads unless we go into this clustering. 

Madam Speaker, the 12 clusters that you have mentioned cover the whole country. Let us accept to go back, re-package and look at what the committee wants us to do. 

However, I would like to beg the House that agriculture is underfunded and we really want this loan to pass as soon as possible. Let us go and do exactly that. When we come back, I think this will be the first item on the Speaker’s desk.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable members, the question is that this motion be deferred to permit reformulation of the designs and the re-packaging.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO US$76,700,000 FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (ADB) FOR FINANCING THE FARM INCOME ENHANCEMENT AND FOREST CONSERVATION PROJECT 2 (FIEFOC 2)

11.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING & ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to US$76,700,000 from the African Development Bank for financing  the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project 2 (FIEFOC 2).

This is a follow-up project of the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project 1 (FIEFOC 1). This Project is a flagship project under the National Development Programme 2 that will contribute to the achievement of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household incomes, generate employment, develop infrastructure and increase access to quality social services.

This project will be implemented in five irrigation schemes spread in five districts of Nebbi, Oyam, Butaleja, Kween and Kasese. In addition to these five core districts, the project’s natural resources management activities and agri-business development activities will cover 34 districts.

The project comprises of three major components:

    i. Agriculture Infrastructure Development,
    ii. Agri-Business Development, 
    iii. Integrated Natural Resources Management, and 
    iv. Project Management.

This loan has been scrutinised by the committee on National Economy and a number of consultations have been made with the stakeholders. I beg that this House supports this loan so that we are able to achieve the National Development Programme Objectives that we associated with it. I beg to move.

11.56
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have the report of the committee, the brief by the minister, the project appraisal report, the negotiated draft financing agreement, together with the minutes of the committee. I beg to lay them on the Table.

This proposal was presented to this august House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, on 16 December 2015. It was accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with rule 166(2)b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. The committee considered and scrutinised the proposal and we now beg to report.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to move to page 6 which has the objective and the beneficiaries. 

Project Objective

The programme development goal and objective is to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth, through enhanced productivity and commercialisation of agriculture. 

The specific objective is to improve household incomes, food security and –(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, bearing in mind the business we have to cover today and bearing in mind that these reports have been with us for some time, is it not procedurally right that the chairman reads the conclusion rather than going through the entire report so that we can expedite the business of today.

THE SPEAKER: He was heading to the observations and recommendations. He is not going to read the whole report.

MR SSEKIKUBO: I am finding it difficult to comprehend the intent and purpose of the minister’s intervention. We have been here all the time. We are ready to listen and to make informed choices. The minister should be sensitive to the fact that Parliament should also be taken with some regard.

For Parliament to just rise up and say, “Aye”. Hon. Kasaija, why do you take us down that road? Allow us to listen to our committee report, the observations and the recommendations and then we proceed together. Why the hurry now?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, the committee performs delegated functions on our behalf. Therefore, let our work be recorded, not in entirety but the highlights. I think that is what the chairperson was doing.

MR KYOOMA: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. Page 6, project beneficiaries. The project will be implemented over a five-year period in five districts where the proposed irrigation schemes are located, namely, Nebbi, Oyam, Butaleja, Kween and Kasese. The target population in those districts is about 1.816,756 million of which 51.7 per cent are women and comprising 386,543.8 households. 

Observations  

Government Counterpart Funding 

The committee noted that among the lessons learnt from the implementation of projects especially those financed by externally borrowed funds is, the untimely release of Government counterpart funding and the low absorption capacities of project executing agencies.

Recommendation

The committee recommended that Government should ensure that adequate counterpart funds for this project are timely integrated into the National Budget Framework Paper during the project implementation period.

Fulfilment of Loan Conditions 

The committee noted that the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project experienced delays in start-up of its implementation due to delay in ratification of the project. The project lost about two years from the date of the loan and grant signature.

Recommendation

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should ensure the speedy fulfilment of the conditions of the financing agreement for this loan in order for the committed funds to be released by the ADB on time to guarantee the timely implementation of this project.

Performance of Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project 1

The annual report of the Auditor-General for the year ended 30 June 2014 noted that by 30 June 2014, Shs 911,108,559 and Shs 337,799,685 from the African Development Bank and the NORDIC Development Fund respectively, had not been absorbed. Therefore, the amounts were refunded as financing requirements provided for a refund of any funds not absorbed.

As a result, planned activities such as capacity building of farmer-based organisations for efficient management of Doho, Mubuku and Agoro irrigation schemes and establishment of contour hedgerows on 10,000 kilometres of slopes were not undertaken. The under absorption was attributed to civil works delays while the irrigation component was under the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Recommendation

The committee recommended that the Ministry of Water and Environment should ensure that critical existing bottlenecks to the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project 2 implementation are timely resolved so as to ensure timely and proper implementation and thus improved funds absorption of this project.

During the first phase of the project, the budget faced significant implementation challenges and to some extent, it did not meet the expected targets as mentioned in the report due to inadequate staff at the district to oversee the project.

Late payment of contractors’ certificates which affected the contractors’ pace of work in Olweny Irrigation Scheme; lack of office equipment like computers in some districts; limited resources for the local governments to carry out effective training and mobilisation of farmers in prior tree planting. 
As a result, in the financial year 2014/2015, as an example, there has been a notable weak link between budgetary resources and output where, the project spent 99 per cent of the realised funds to achieve only 25 per cent of the targeted output.

The committee, therefore, recommended that the district should plan to mobilise and sensitise farmers early enough in tree- planting to avoid wastage of planting material. The timely delivery of tree planting materials should also be adhered to.

The project should increase facilitation to ease the routine monitoring and training of farmers. The Ministry of Water and Environment should provide means of transport to ease monitoring processes. The District Local Government should recruit staff in the forestry department, right from sub county level for effective monitoring and implementation.

Climate Change, Mitigation and Adaptation

The committee noted that the project significantly contributed to the country’s mitigation and adaptation to climate change at an estimated acreage of woodlots and plantation totalling to 46,295.6 ha significantly accumulating carbon in the biomass of the planted trees and the soils where the trees are growing.

On the other hand, emerging issues and pertinent forestry problems leading to continued loss of forest cover and thus not only threatening livelihoods but also reducing the watershed functions.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment should ensure that over 50 per cent of the established forests under the project programme do survive as this will provide a substantial amount of carbon that will be contributed by the country to the global climate mitigation from the forest sector.

Limited Staffing for Beneficiary Districts

The committee noted that the implementation of project I was constrained by limited staffing at district level subjected by the districts being split and delay to start up activities such as sensitization, identification of target farmers or communities and backstopping planning and implementation of on-farm level activities.

The local government sectors of forestry and entomology across all the districts in the country have limited staffing capacities and are still poorly facilitated. Their activeness, especially providing extension services to farmers, relies more on project support which is not sustainable.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should fast-track its commitment of addressing the staffing gaps that exist in key local government sectors. For this particular project 2, the existing staffing gaps in the beneficiary districts should be expeditiously addressed to ease the timely implementation of this project.

Sustainability of Project Interventions among the Beneficiaries

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that farmers who received support towards establishing the project investments required financial support to maintain or manage them to the required standards. For example, farmers who establish woodlots or plantations on more than a hectare required financial support to maintain them to the required standards. As a result, most of the investments remain poorly managed because of limited technical support and finances.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Water and Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries should explore a pragmatic approach involving local authorities in overseeing or monitoring of the fate or project investment among individual beneficiaries, especially that of supplied planting materials.

Debt Sustainability

Current debt sustainability analysis conducted by Government as at October 2015 indicates that whereas Uganda’s debt is sustainable, there are increased risks and vulnerabilities that have emerged, implying the importance of good economic management and prudent accumulation of the debt. 

The present value of external public debt to GDP is projected to double from 10.7 per cent in the financial year 2014/2015 to 23.2 per cent in the financial year 2019/2020. This highlights the need for Government to opt for a cautious approach to debt accumulation.

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should opt for non-concessional financing to projects that generate financial returns in the short-medium term.  

Concessionality of the Loan

The loan is non-concessional adding to the stock of non-concessional financing already contracted. However, of recent, that is at October 2015, Uganda was downgraded from strong to medium performer based on Country Policy and Institutional Assessment, hence lowering the thresholds of the external debt indicators, and increasing the risk of breach. This downgrade underscores the importance of improving governance, transparency and financial management. 

The committee recommends that during the implementation of the project, Government should ensure improved absorption of funds and improved governance and financial management. This will contribute towards improved returns on investments from the project to repay the non-concessional financing.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to US$76,700,000 from the African Development Bank (ADB) for financing the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Programme Project 2 be approved subject to the recommendations above. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Committee on National Economy. The report has been signed by more than one third of the Members and you are free to debate.

12.11
MR MICHAEL MAWANDA (NRM, Igara County East, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for their report. I have only one concern. You will recall that last year, Government came and stampeded Parliament that we pass a loan for SACCOs. We had actually refused to pass that loan saying that they should first bring a law regulating Tier 4s. Government argued and we passed the loan. Madam Speaker, up to now, Government has not provided its counterpart funding and the project has stalled. How is Government sure now that with all these loans they have lined up, they are ready to play their part? I thank you very much.

12.13
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker and honourable members, thank you very much. I thank the committee for the work they have done. But I note there are some practices that Government is enhancing which undermine Government itself. 

When you look at this loan, we are talking about agriculture. However, this loan is now under the Ministry of Water and Environment and we are talking about tree planting yet we have the National Forest Authority (NFA), which is mandated to manage tree planting and forest conservation. What is their role and input? We see Government having agencies and then undermining agencies which are supposed to do their work? Could the committee tell us what the role of the NFA will be? What will be the role of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, and their input, because from the objectives, they say, “Agriculture infrastructure development, agri-business development, integrated national resources and project management?”

If this is the work of the Ministry of Water and Environment, is it the right home for this loan? I would be pleased if the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development harmonised and did the right thing. Otherwise, unless those issues are addressed, I am ready to oppose it and I am the Chairperson of the Committee on Natural Resources. We see that this loan is in a wrong place and it may not serve their interests, because those people have no mandate, capacity and skill. That is why the Auditor-General questioned the first loan - the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project 1 (FIEFOC 1) - it had a lot of queries because the ministry did not have the capacity to implement it. I thank you.

12.15
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The amount of money that we want to borrow - US$76 million - to be injected, first and foremost, in the agricultural sector. For me supporting agriculture is very critical in as far as development of our country is concerned, given the fact that many Ugandans earn their livelihood through agriculture. Therefore, any process or idea that is geared towards ensuring that agriculture is supported, needs to be supported.

However, my concern is this: When you talk about farm-income Enhancement, what comes to mind is supporting the farmers in our various constituencies. But when you go deep into what the loan is going to do, it does not really bring out that gist because to me, by saying “farm-income enhancement”, I will take it that we are going to support our farmers by, say, providing agricultural equipment, tractors or ensuring that their homestead income improves as a result of improved methods of farming, but this does not bring it out well.

Secondly, we have a tendency that when we get these loans, a very big portion is taken by what we call “capacity building” workshops and seminars yet what is on the ground does not reflect the amount of money that we have injected in this kind of arrangement. Therefore, I believe and request that if we are to support agriculture, let us support it directly by ensuring that our farmers in our various constituencies get some benefits out of this kind of support –(Interruption) 

MR RUTH NANKABIRWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is very easy to think that when you talk about supporting farmers, you are talking about provision of fertilisers, feeds, quality seeds and so forth. However, we have been having programmes like Community Agriculture Infrastructure Improvement Programmes (CAIIP), where you see milk coolers and feeder roads being worked on, and a feeder road is not being considered as a project that helps farmers.

Therefore, the clarification that I am seeking from “Hajji” today on a Friday is whether he does not think that if you helped a farmer to work on forest cover – because we know that we need rain and rain comes from forests – that you will not be helping farmers. As debate is going on, we are trying to focus on the fertilisers, quality seeds and all that, yet there are other agricultural infrastructure, which when worked on will end up helping the farmers.

MR SSEBAGALA: Thank you very much. I also want to inform you that other agricultural infrastructure not only help farmers but benefits everybody else. If there are roads, it is not only farmers that use them. However, if we are talking about “farm-income enhancement”, I want to see how that can really impact possibly your farmer in Kyankwanzi or in Kiboga – that is what we are talking about.

We believe that water is critical as far as agriculture is concerned but we have got many loans in various sectors and they tell us these loans are also geared towards supporting farmers. However, on the ground, I am an urban constituency representative but when I move in villages in your various constituencies, that kind of impact is not visible. You cannot see that farmers are being supported by the various loans that we have acquired.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on the selection, I have heard time and again that whenever loans are brought here in Parliament for consideration, there are some selected areas for pilot study. But when you look at some of these selected areas, you get “Loan A” and “Loan B” but the beneficiary districts selected for both loans are the same.

 My request to Government is that when bringing these loans, let them try to see which districts benefited from the previous loans so that the districts which did not benefit can be catered for in the next loan. Thank you.

12.22.
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to the statement on page 11 that says that, “….because of poor absorption, money amounting to about Shs 1.2 billion which was meant for works on Doho, Agoro, Mubuku irrigation schemes had to be refunded to the financiers”. The issue of absorption is a very serious one that has bedevilled the ministry. 

However, also from the methodology given by the committee, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries does not appear in the picture, but here is a name of a loan that is, in my opinion, a misnomer: “farm income enhancement”. Like colleagues have observed, this would ordinarily involve Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries as a major stakeholder but it was never even consulted when the committee was scrutinising this loan request.

If you look at the components on page 7, agriculture infrastructure development takes the biggest chunk of the money (US$68.46 million) then agri-business, which involves development of smart livelihood aquaculture – that is the fisheries, apiculture – most of those subcomponents are really a docket of agriculture, which was in the first place not consulted. 

In my opinion, as Shadow Minister for Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, I would be the last person to object to this loan request, but I have serious issues. Like a colleague observed, lack of counterpart funding, you find that money is borrowed and Government does not deliver on her part. At the end of the day, Ugandans end up paying penalties for loans unspent or refunding monies which have not been absorbed.

Madam Speaker, one time, while presenting the Opposition’s statement on the ministerial policy statement from the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Husbandry and Fisheries, I decided to quote statements of the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries in line with these irrigation schemes: Mubuku, Doho, Olweny – I can assure you that there was a “cut and paste” arrangement from about six previous financial years. Like here now, we want to borrow another big chunk of money US$68.4 million for the same irrigation schemes over which we refunded unabsorbed funds. We are moving in circles; when shall we try to address the exact needs? 

Like my colleague has observed, we would be happier to promote those technologies that help to improve productivity. Fertiliser use in Uganda – we are at less than two kilogrammes per hectare, yet we are here dashing to borrow money for irrigation schemes for which we keep refunding unspent moneys year-in and year-out. Since 2001, we have been talking about the same irrigation schemes; when shall we ever deliver? 

Madam Speaker, I beg to ask the Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Water and Environment to harmonise these issues of water for production. Otherwise, you cannot misuse a name of a farmer for borrowing money meant for something else –(Member timed out.)

12.26
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to calm the nerves of hon.  Kajara by telling him that everything is fine. However, I will need to seek clarification from the minister and the chairperson of the committee. 

On page 8 of the report, table 7 shows the terms and conditions of the loan; it shows that the interest charged is based on the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), plus a funding margin of minus 1 plus 60 bps. It should also be noted that the interest rate will be varying depending on the prevailing six-month LIBOR rate on the market and funding cost margin. From this, what is the interest charged on this loan?

12.27
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work that they have done. A project like this, according to what the committee chairperson and the minister have told us, is very good. A project geared towards increasing household income, providing employment and offering several services to the community is a good one. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to first of all start by addressing myself to the conditions of the loan, which are listed on page 11. One of the conditions says, “Provision to ABD a letter of comfort stating that the land where the project infrastructure is to be constructed is free of encumbrances and belong to the communities and/or Government who have consented to project activities.” Can the minister or the committee assure us that this land stated in condition No.16(b) is free of encumbrances and that due diligence was done? 

In my district, the communities around these project areas were asking us, the leaders, about what is going on. This even almost led to the death of the LCIII chairperson. I would like the committee to clarify whether the communities along this project area were really consulted. If not, what is the way forward? This is a very serious matter and yet this is a very important project that is supposed to go on.

Secondly, we have borrowed a lot of money through this Parliament for the same -(Member timed out.)

12.28
MR WILLIAM KWEMARA (NRM, Kyaka County, Kyegegwa): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I have three observations to make about this project.

One, the project has got a strong bias on intensification of farm production. In my view, when we are talking of income enhancement and we are looking largely at on-farm production, we may be doing the project a disservice. We know very well that when you are talking about income enhancement, you cannot separate income from prices of agricultural commodities. A lot of money, amounting to $58 million, is just put into production. I would like to suggest that much more should be put into improving agricultural prices. 

What is failing us in agriculture is basic economics – the cobweb theory of the forces of demand and supply - and the poor relations between traders and farmers. Farmers need to be helped to market their produce very well. We need to stabilise the prices, quality and standards so that they are able to compete.  We need to help them with post-harvest handling and farm-level storage. To me, I think that component is important.

Lastly, there is the issue of forest conservation –(Interruption)

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker and colleagues, as I said yesterday when we were talking about agriculture as a sector, we should not look at it in isolation. We must see it as part and parcel of the economy. There are many other sectors that are worked on in order to support the farmer. My colleague has talked about the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement Project (CAIIP). In this programme, much of the money was for rural roads because one of the biggest bottlenecks in agriculture, since most of these farms are based in rural areas, is transportation of both inputs and the final products to the market.

Coming to prices, we operate a free economy for the time being, and it is not the Government that determines the prices but it is a question of market forces. The only thing that the Government can do is to help the farmers reduce their costs so that they can be competitive with other farmers in other areas and other parts of the world. There is no way that the Government can come and fix a price for any commodity in Uganda because we operate an open market where the market forces of supply and demand play a role. I thought that I should give this information.

MR KWEMARA: I thank you, honourable minister, for that information. My argument was not that the Government should fix prices, but they should create an enabling environment, for example, with the use of ICT; if we just used the mobile phone to give market information to the farmer so that they can know what the current price is in Owino on a daily basis, that is enough. In that way, you are not fixing a price but you are –(Member timed out.)

12.30
MR BOAZ KAFUDA (NRM, Busongora County South, Kasese): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for the good report.

My main concern is about selective service delivery to the public. Year in, year out, especially when we are talking about improving irrigation schemes, we normally talk about Doho, Mubuku and Agoro, leaving out other small irrigation schemes that we need to improve. I will give an example from Kasese where we have two irrigation schemes; we have the Mubuku and Muhokya irrigation schemes but when irrigation schemes are being funded, Government only funds Mubuku and they leave out Muhokya Irrigation Scheme and yet it serves thousands of people.

The other issue is about the money that was refunded to the Treasury according to the Auditor-General’s report. I think they got Shs 911 million from the African Development Bank and Shs 337 million from the Nordic Development Fund, totalling to almost Shs 1.2 billion. That money was not utilised, it was not absorbed and it went back to the Treasury. Sincerely, I know we are trying to improve the agricultural sector as the backbone of our economy, but how can such an amount of money be taken back to the Treasury because it is not utilised and we go ahead to keep borrowing. If the ministry cannot come up with a very well organised plan, then why should we borrow? This money attracts interest – (Interruption)

MS NABUGERE: The ministry has learnt lessons from the past and this time round, counterpart funding has already been integrated in the 2016/2017 budget. Therefore, there will be no need to return any monies for lack of activities.

MR KAFUDA: That is what we wanted – an assurance from the minister –(Member timed out.)

MR KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, this issue of counterpart funding has been coming up now and again. I want to assure this House that at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we have taken a decision that we will not borrow money where there is need for counterpart funding until we are sure of the counterpart funding.

One of the reasons why there has been low absorption is that at times we have been having problems - we cut money provided for counterpart funding to do other things because, as you know, we get a lot of pressure on the budget. However, I want to assure you that no loan request will pass through my hands to come here unless I am sure that there is money for counterpart funding. I thought I should give this assurance to this House.

12.28
MS LYDIA CHEKWEL (NRM, Woman Representative, Kween): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for their report and to thank the ministry for this loan request.

I stand to support the motion but most specifically, I will talk about the issue of Kween. This is a project that we have been waiting for, for so long. This area, specifically Ngenge subcounty, is a very dry area and it has been affected by drought. Rainfall reliability is not possible in this area. Therefore, a project like this, where we are going to bring irrigation, will really enhance the incomes of this population and the country at large. 

I know that we have issues with loans, especially concerning what the minister has just assured us on. However, I think this is so good and I want to commend them, especially when they talk about counterpart funding to specifically fund issues like capacity building, salaries of Government officials and the rest on page 10. I think that is the way to move. We should be borrowing to invest in areas that will benefit mainly the community. I am so grateful about that and I would really like to support this loan request. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at where this loan is actually going to be invested, I see a greater percentage going to irrigation. I think that is the major component of this loan - (Member timed out.)

12.40
MR TERENCE ACHIA (NRM, Bokora County, Napak): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support the motion that we pass this loan request but there are some aspects, which should be noted by the ministry or by those who initiate these kinds of loans. 

When you look at the first farm management project - this is the second one - there should be lessons learnt. One lesson is what has been talked about here, which is the counterpart funding and there are also others. When you start a project, you must formulate objectives stating what you are going to achieve. Before we start on the second project, we should have already known how successful the first one was. There should be some reports about what successes we realised in the first one.

Regarding those communities, which were targeted in the first project, for example, what have they realised? Have they realised increased incomes? Is there anything that tells us whether we are getting on well, rather than going on to the second one without getting some information about what happened in the first one? (Interruption)

MR AYENA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for allowing me to inform my brother. 

In respect to some of those who are affected by some of these projects, I have serious issues with a project called Tochi in my constituency. Tochi is one of those areas where the implementing agencies, ministries and departments have not done sufficient sensitisation and consultation both with the political heads and the communities responsible. I am sure they are aware that they are going to get very serious resistance in Oyam over this matter of implementing the irrigation scheme there. 

This is one of the best projects in my conception; unfortunately, like the proverbial saying mentioned by my sister, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, it is about how you market your good stuff. She once said, “However good your meat is, if you allow a leper to market it, nobody will buy it”. This is the same thing that is about to happen in respect to this irrigation scheme in Oyam. 

Therefore, I support what you are saying that there has not been sufficient consultation with the communities that are supposed to benefit from this. I do not know why the ministries, departments and implementing agencies never take into account the –(Interruption)- I am giving information.

THE SPEAKER: But you are now making a lengthy submission. Please, conclude.

MR TERENCE ACHIA: Thank you very much for that information. That is exactly what I want to impress upon the implementers. The lesson, which you should be able to learn from here, is that we should be able to know how we have achieved, what we expect -(Member timed out.)

12.44
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I would like to make an honest appeal to the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. A project like this, within the objectives of our National Development Plan, would be good for the farmer and for the conservation of our natural resources. However, when you read a report that says in 2014 more than Shs 1.2 billion had to be returned to the Treasury, when you read a report that says in 2014/2015, 90 per cent of the budget was used to achieve 12 per cent of the outputs, you really get concerned. 

These management and implementation challenges you have pointed out, like a project which is basically agricultural being implemented in environment, I think, for me, means there is a serious issue of capacity. Honourable minister, local government staff are under the Ministry of Public Service but I see that under component No. 4, there is nothing provided for recruitment. I would like to make an appeal that before this project is implemented, - these are only five districts - could you please work with the Ministry of Public Service so that adequate trained  staff are in place, so that we avoid the kind of report like we had in the first project. 

Sincerely, the performance on project No. 1 was quite discouraging. If we are to follow that, it would be difficult to defend project No. 2. We need strong capacity in terms of extension staff and in terms of the necessary technical manpower in those five districts. I hope the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development will ensure that this is done in those five districts where the project is being implemented. Otherwise, I think it has good objectives and I stand to support the motion.

12.46
MR ROBERT KASULE (NRM, Kyadondo County North, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also add my voice in support of the loan request. 

I think that by the next Parliament, what should be done is that when the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development brings a loan request, the sector ministry should stand up to justify the loan. I can see the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development trying to justify and yet the ministers from the mother ministry are just seated at the sides watching as if they are not bothered. I know that the bulk of water engineers are in the Ministry of Water and Environment. Therefore, the question of where this loan should be domiciled should not come to the Floor because the water engineers in the Ministry of Water and Environment deal with dams and irrigation. I think this was decided in this Parliament. I remember when the Minister of Agriculture then, hon. Specioza Kazibwe, was overseeing dams they were transferred from the Ministry of Agriculture to the Ministry of Water and Environment.

Madam Speaker, we should support this loan request. Much as one of the area MPs was expressing displeasure about Tochi and Doho II, I think the devil is in the details. In this brief that they have given us, under agricultural infrastructure development they have mentioned Doho II, – that is for expansion - Tochi, Ngenge and Mubuku II.  I think they are trying to expand on the already existing irrigation schemes to help Uganda save on the dollars that we earn. We should help this country by helping -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, other than the proposals for improvement, I see general support.

12.48
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Hon. Abdu Katuntu sought clarification about the London Interbank Offered Rate and the 60bps. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, the interest rate charged is a serious issue. The LIBOR, plus funding margin of minus 1, plus 60bps need to be understood. This is because at the end of it, we need to know what interest rate we are going to pay over a given period of time. Below that, we have a commitment fee of 0.5 per cent on undisbursed amounts. Therefore, immediately the House passes a resolution, a letter is sent to the African Development Bank and the bank starts charging. 

However, we do not know the LIBOR rate. According to information available around the world - You recall that initially, when Aga Khan took over the construction of Bujagali, the rate of the construction of that dam doubled because they applied the London Interbank Offered Rate. There have been scandals with LIBOR in Barclays Bank Uganda, African Development Bank and banks in the UK. The information is on your iPad; you can read it. Even the African Development Bank chief executive now recommends that countries that are borrowing should have the rate fixed so that it is not based on LIBOR because LIBOR has had serious scandals. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the chairman whether they are aware of these scandals. If so, why should we continue applying a rate, which has even caused a problem here in Uganda?

12.20
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to briefly comment on the report of the committee because I understand that you had almost closed the debate. 

I would like to talk about the way we use some of these projects, which are intended for the benefit of the community, but at the end of the day they become a cost to society and they do not benefit the people they intended to benefit. Through the Forum on Food Security, we have been traversing this country trying to see how well food security can be enhanced. We visited, among other districts, Otuke District. In this district, a dam for irrigation was constructed at about Shs 6 billion by the Ministry of Water and Environment and this dam was intended for agricultural purposes. However, the local government was not aware what this dam was meant for. By the time we went there, the dam had lasted for about five years and nothing was being done with this water. The dam is there; Shs 6 billion was spent but it was not being used for the intended purpose.

Madam Speaker, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has talked about lowering the cost of production hence increasing income. Honestly, honourable minister, if we are talking about income enhancement and not about marketing of the produce - we are not talking about export promotion or cooperatives - I really think that there is a whole lot of components that have been left out. If the purpose is to enhance the income of a farmer, we must, at the same time, have addressed issues of how the produce should be marketed. We should not have left out the issue of cooperative farming from this. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Colleague, we cannot handle all things at the same time; it is not possible. There is a time for everything, as you know what the Bible says. We are now handling the environment in which a farmer can enhance his income. I know the market is very important and even the question of prices - I understand that very well - but we cannot handle all things at the same time. I thought I should give you that information.

Talking about LIBOR, this is a technical financial issue but easy to understand. It simply means the London Interbank Offered Rate - the rate at which London banks would offer on average. Currently, LIBOR is at 0.85 per cent. There is also this issue of the margin, if you look at that table. The margin simply means the funding margin or the cost of obtaining money from the market. As we speak, the margin is 0.59 per cent, which means as we are debating now, the interest rate is 1.44 per cent per annum. That is what LIBOR and all that jargon comes to. These are technical issues, but as laymen, it simply means the interest rate that you will be charged if this loan were to become effective - (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the minister is reading from the notes they are sending him, but when you read literature on the internet, LIBOR is calculated through submission of interest rates by major banks in London. What we are saying is that the interest rate is not fixed. As we are borrowing, it is 1.44 per cent but this means that at a particular point in time, once those banks submit another rate, the rate will fluctuate as per the factors there.

What we are saying is: What would happen if tomorrow the rate rose from 1.44 per cent to 7 per cent or 10 per cent? We would be bound by what we appended our signature to. Why don’t we fix it so that we know that we are capping at that?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, colleague. This is the market place and in a market place, prices are not normally fixed. There is also a possibility that it can go down - it has happened before - but there is also a possibility that it can go up. We are in a market looking for a product called money and we cannot avoid the forces of supply and demand. 

Therefore, I agree with you entirely that it is fluctuating; it is not fixed. It can go up but it can also go down. However, as we speak, it stands at 1.44 per cent per annum. Tomorrow, it could come down maybe to 1.1 per cent, the other day it could go maybe to 1.50 per cent or 1.60 per cent or even to 2 per cent. (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, the African Development Bank has a different model of charging interest rates. Why did you go for LIBOR, which as I told you has made the cost of building Bujagali dam double? It has very many scandals. In fact, colleagues, if you are able to read the information from the iPad which was given to you by the Speaker, you would really stand up to object to this, so that maybe we have a fixed rate like we have had for the other loans that we have been borrowing. For this one, even Barclays Bank Uganda is a culprit. There is a lot of fraud and Barclays Bank Uganda has paid $1.5 billion in fines.

Honourable minister, it is unfortunate that sometimes you are very busy and you leave some of this information to other people. This is a rate that is manipulated based on the interest of the venture capitalists in the market. As a country, we need to protect our interests and have a rate that we know will not be manipulated because we do not have the capacity to deal with financial fraudsters around the world.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I think the gist of the Member’s concern is that the minister is making our economy susceptible to the vagaries and negative impacts of the global market. As a country, why don’t we have pre-determined rates, which we are sure of and when we are planning, we plan accordingly? You are now planning for Uganda and at the same time planning for effects in outside financial markets. This is very dangerous. Uganda is such a tiny market for you to put it at par with other countries.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give to this House is that we had a problem of interest rates when it came to mortgages and it was this Parliament, which fixed the interest rate for mortgages and left out interest rates for other loans, which we get from the banks. If you get a mortgage, the interest is fixed but if you leave it to this fluctuation, it can cause a problem. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this issue of the interest rate is important. I would like to propose that when we resume in February, we have a specific motion and debate it with detailed information and statistics so that we can have a resolution, including one about transacting in dollars.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I have more information, Madam Speaker. First of all, once you go to the market to borrow and you say that it must be at a fixed rate, - I would like to warn you on this - the chance is that they will put it higher and in the end, you will also lose in case it goes down. I am being informed here, and I would like to share this information with the House, that LIBOR is fixed at the time of disbursement; once disbursement takes place, that is the rate that is charged. 

I would also like to tell you, having been in finance and in markets, that you cannot determine the rate. When you are in a market where the forces of demand and supply are interplaying and you say, “I want a fixed rate” chances are that the rate that will be offered to you will definitely be much higher than what is normal in order for the business people to pocket their interest.

MR MAWANDA: The honourable minister has said that LIBOR is determined at the time of disbursement. However, before the money is disbursed, don’t you sign an agreement for the loan? In that agreement, what is reflected as the interest rate?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Of course it is there and that is one of the conditions when we sign the agreement. What we are saying is that it is fixed in the contract, which we sign with them – (Interjection)- Hon. Mawanda, can you listen to me please? 

If we passed this loan today, for example, definitely disbursement would take place depending on how quickly we sign all the papers. Actually, what is being waited for is your resolution. Once you pass your resolution, the rest of the papers will be signed and disbursement will begin. As I said, the rate will be what I have stated - 1.44 per cent per annum.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the loan as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO UA5 MILLION FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND (ADF) TO SUPPORT THE MULTINATIONAL LAKES EDWARD AND ALBERT INTERGRATED FISHERIES AND WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PROJECT (LEAF II)

1.04
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by the Government to borrow up to UA 5 million from the African Development Fund to support the Multinational Lakes Edward and Albert Integrated Fisheries and Water Resources Management Project (LEAF II).

Madam Speaker, this loan is meant to support a regional project that covers Lake Edward and Lake Albert basins, which are part of a series of the Rift Valley lakes shared between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda. This project is designed within the Fourth East African Community Development Strategy, which will contribute to the vision of the Lake Victoria basin to build a prosperous population living in a healthy environment. 

Madam Speaker, this loan has three components: project management and coordination; integrated water resources management; and fisheries resources development and management. The money for this project may be little, but it is a follow-up to the ADB grant which financed Lakes Edward and Albert Fisheries Pilot Project termed as LEAF I, which aims at reducing socio-economic and environmental constraints and fighting fragility along the lake communities.

Madam Speaker, this loan request has been discussed by the Committee on National Economy and the report is ready. I beg that the House do support this motion. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Honourable chairperson, give us the report.

1.06
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have a copy of the committee report, a brief by the minister to this august House, the draft loan agreement, the project appraisal document, the progress report for LEAF I and the negotiations minutes. I beg to lay all these on the Table. I also beg to lay on the Table the committee’s minutes.

Madam Speaker, this proposal was presented to this House by the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 18 August 2015 and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with rule 166(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure. We have considered and scrutinised the proposal and now we beg to report to this House.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to move to page 4 - project objectives. The project objective is to ensure sustainable utilisation of fisheries and allied natural resources of lakes Edward and Albert basins through harmonised legal frameworks and policies. The sector goal of this project is poverty reduction and sustainable livelihoods for men and women in the local fishing communities, and global environmental benefits in sustainable management of natural resources.

Project Beneficiaries

The project will benefit about 400,000 people in the riparian communities of the two lakes in the two countries, most of whom are living below the poverty level, by improving their households, food security and access to basic social and economic infrastructure. 

In addition to job creation for local communities in the lake regions, about 5000 jobs will be directly created while another 20,000 will be indirectly created, with 50 per cent of those benefiting women. The project will also improve regional and local consultation or co-operation for integrated natural resources management and intra-regional trade in fish products as well as address the social dimensions of resilience, which will, in the long run, reduce potential sources of local conflicts.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to report on the loan terms and conditions on page 8. The African Development Bank will make available a UA5 million loan, which is approximately $7.32 million, to finance the Water Supply and Sanitation Program Phase II (WSSP II) under the terms shown in the table below. In this case, the maturity period is 40 years, including a repayment period of 30 years and a grace period of 10 years. The service charge or interest rate is 0.75 per cent per annum on loan disbursed and outstanding, while the commitment fee is 0.5 per cent per annum on loan undisbursed.

Madam Speaker, with your permission, I beg to go to the observations and recommendations of the committee:

Budgetary Provision of the Project

The committee noted that this project is neither included in the approved budget for the financial year 2015/2016 nor in the proposed external financing in the medium term and the NDP II. The committee recommends that the Government should finance projects that are planned in NDP II, consistent with financing programmes over the medium term.

Environmental Problems as Impediments to Development

The committee noted that the major environmental challenges faced by lakes are related to indiscriminate pollution of water and degradation of the natural forests and the catchment area that is utilised for the smoking of fish products. A degraded watershed causes reduced agricultural productivity, greater erosion and subsequently, higher levels of poverty which in turn adds more pressure on the natural resources of the watersheds as well as fisheries resources in the lake, thereby resulting in conflicts on the use of natural resources.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should fast-track the implementation of a livelihood-based watershed management approach across all major water bodies in the country as a major priority in order to address environmental degradation and poverty.

Oil Extraction

The committee noted that substantial oil deposits have been discovered near the eastern shore of Lake Albert and are now being developed. Development of oil reserves beneath Lake Albert will require new infrastructure such as additional wells to draw on subsurface oil and construction of transmission pipelines. Massive construction could alter waterways and drainage patterns, which could lead to flooding during the rainy season, pollution of water sources through waste runoff and the spread of diseases, which can destroy agrarian and fishing livelihoods and infringe on the right to adequate living conditions.

The committee recommends that although a bilateral framework on mining and exploration exists between DRC and Uganda, the Government should ensure that it is strengthened to take into consideration the management of natural resources across sectors at transboundary level. In addition, the Government should undertake deliberate actions that will enable the country to identify the capacity, expertise and technical information that are needed, particularly in the relevant public sector and local government institutions, to address the specific issues and potential impacts of oil extraction on water related ecosystems.

Limited Knowledge

The committee noted that water resources or transboundary river basins in the project area are insufficiently known and increasingly threatened by a rising demand for water, adverse effects of hydrological viability/climate change, and degradation of water quality due to pollution from various sources. Lack of reliable information on past and present hydro-meteorological conditions and future climate change makes it very difficult for the Government and water managers to assess suitable adaptation options and to develop guidelines and standards for planning and water management purposes.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should allocate adequate amounts of funds in the national budget for building the capacity of water managers on hydro-meteorological issues.

Low Institutional Capacity 

The committee noted that there are many legal instruments for water and environmental management, but these are poorly enforced at national level. Moreover, the institutional framework is facing serious problems of limited technical capacity and lack of essential tools for ecological and socio-economic monitoring to support decision-making in basin management.

The committee recommends that the Government fast-tracks the enforcement of the legal instruments and further develops the technical capacity for ecological and social monitoring.

Fulfilment of Loan Conditions

The committee also observed that the Government has been slow in the fulfilment of loan effective conditions upon signing of loan agreements in order to trigger the disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt finance projects. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government ensures the speedy fulfilment of effectiveness conditions of the financing agreement for this loan in order for the committed funds to be released by the ADB on time to guarantee the timely implementation of this project.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the committee recommends that subject to the recommendations above, the proposal by the Government to borrow units of accounts 5 million, an equivalent of $7.32 million, from ADF to support Multinational Lakes Edward and Albert Integrated Fisheries and Water Resources Management Project be approved. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank the chairperson and the members of the Committee on National Economy. The report has been signed by the necessary number - more than one-third minimum.  

1.15
MR SIMON MULONGO (NRM, Bubulo County East, Manafwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the good report. I just have two issues to seek clarification on.

One, whereas the project is considering strengthening the capacity of the fishing communities along these lakes, we are not given information as to how fish as a resource is going to be sustainably exploited. How are you going to regenerate the stocks of fish as a resource in the lakes? We are looking at the consumption side but what about the supply side?

Secondly, we are talking about shared resources along international borders and this basically looks at how Uganda is going to do her part. However, we have very little control when it comes to the side of DRC; we do not have a regional integration programme with them as we do with the other EAC partner states. What we have with them are loose arrangements. How do we make sure that from the DRC side, there is compliance to ensure that this project is successful? 

Finally, we have new developments of the gas and oil resource programme along Lake Albert; how is this factored into this project? Is there anything feeding into these two or are we looking at it as if it is in isolation of the new developments, which are very major when it comes to the oil and gas programmes that we are going to implement in that area? 

1.17
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the job the committee has done. I only have one issue to raise and once I am comforted, I will have no problem with the request.

In the preamble by the chairperson, he mentioned that this particular request does not appear anywhere in the budget neither does it appear in the NDP; so, are we talking about a disaster? Are we talking about money being borrowed in haste? How then does it really work into the absorptive capacity of the user department of this facility when it does not appear anywhere in their plans? Are they now going to stampede the user department and try and find a way of absorbing the loan? This is a problem for me. 

Once you said that it is not part of our plan but somehow we need it, I hesitated. I need to be comforted that actually, this is not simply picked up and passed. That is what the chairperson reported when he said that it does not appear in the budget and it is not in the NDP. What are we discussing having passed the National Budget Framework Paper just a few days ago? 

1.19
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion, but also to seek some clarification from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

When these loan requests are forwarded to Parliament to approve, do we have the powers to amend the terms and make proposals or is our part just to agree? If the answer is in the affirmative, since we have passed the loan request we have just dealt with – Looking at the calculations of this loan, I think the terms of the other loan from the multinational banks was purely in their interest. In this one, they are even giving us a grant of around $8 million, meaning that from the calculations, there was a benefit accruing. I would, therefore, implore you that whereas we have passed the other one, we should adjust those terms so that the other lending rate is fixed. 

If you look at this loan and the other one, they are all from the same bank but it is the lending rates that are packaged in a different way. I do not want to waste a lot of time on this loan but I just implore you as the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that in the interest of the country, you should find a way of handling it. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the minister to respond?  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Let me make sure that I understand the question. Are you saying that after Parliament has approved, does the Government of Uganda have leverage to negotiate the terms of the loan? I do not know whether that was your question. Did I get you very well?

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and the honourable minister. The point I am making is that this is a proposal to Parliament and what we have done is to approve the borrowing, and of course you will go ahead and sign the documentation. I was just seeking your indulgence as a minister since we are getting these loans from the same bank, but they are applying different rates. With this loan, they have even courteously made a provision for a grant of $8 million. I am only saying that now that you have got the approval of the House, at the level of signing, can you negotiate so that we use the same rate in the other loan as in this one? Thank you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, each financial institution has its own approved lending policies and these policies are set; take an example of the African Development Bank of which we are part and parcel. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is the governor; so you go and set policies as countries who own that financial institution. We are also governors and shareholders of PTA; so we go and fix those lending conditions and they are not subject to negotiation by an individual borrower. I thought I should make that very clear. 

Therefore, after we have set those conditions, the best we can do when we are negotiating a loan is to make a request to the bank under preferred circumstances. It is the board that would then agree and tell us to proceed. Once that is fixed, there is no way we can renegotiate; you have to go according to what has been set down as a matter of policy. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, there was a question from hon. Mpuuga. He asked how this will fit in when it is not provided for in the budget or in the National Development Plan.  

MR MATIA KASAIJA: That is a nice question, Madam Speaker. Once we have approved, it becomes a priority and the Government must find the money in order to do what is necessary in case there is counterpart funding. The only way I can be able to do that job is to come to this Parliament to seek for a supplementary, if it is not in the budget already. The other option is that since we have not finalised the budget, once you have approved we can see how to fit it in our priorities for the new budget. 

MR MPUUGA: Madam Speaker, I would like to seek further clarification on the same. I am not worried about borrowing per se. The NDP is for five years and looking at the report, it is not captured. I am reading the report of the committee; it is not in there. The minister is reporting that once we approve, he is going to find somewhere to fix it and then plan backwards. That creates serious planning challenges. I need comfort from the minister that the committee is wrongly reporting and this particular project is in the NDP. If it is not in the budget, I can perhaps understand because the budget is for the next 12 months, but if it is not in the NDP then I have a problem.

MR SSEMPIJJA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, this fits in very well with the Fourth East African Community Strategy and also the Lake Victoria vision, which you know about and which we share. Therefore, it is not coming from nowhere. The chairman and the committee have it. 

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, this project has been on for quite some time. Fish is one of the 10 key commodities that were identified by the Development Strategy and Investment Plan (DSIP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and the Development Strategy and Investment Plan (DSIP) is aligned with the National Development Plan, which is aligned with the vision. Therefore, if there is an anomaly in capturing the correct information, let it be corrected so that hon. Mpuuga is satisfied. However, what he is raising is actually a concern for us. Anybody would be concerned if we passed something, which is not going to be backed by our NDP. 

I would like to tell you, Madam Speaker and colleagues, that the fisheries sector has been marginalised for a very long time within the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. We have been looking for an opportunity to view fish as a commodity. I would like to request that we support the loan request but the records must be set right.

1.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Nabugere): Madam Speaker, I rise to respond to the issue of how the DRC can be controlled when the project is coming from Uganda. 

This project aims at harmonising the legal regimes of the two sister countries, among other things. It is not easy to use the Ugandan legal regime or the DRC legal regime alone. Once we have harmonised, we shall be establishing an institutional framework to jointly regulate activities and operations over the lake between the two countries. It will be supported by the Nile Basin Initiative, which is already in existence, and there are already supporting systems and mechanisms.

The other thing that I need to respond to is the issue on why this project is not supported in the NDP. Because of what has been going on recently - we have experienced flooding of River Nyamwamba annually, destruction of property, community developments and livelihoods in Kasese - this is very important. We also have had conflicts and the killing of Ugandans who travel and fish on Lake Edward and Lake Albert from groups coming from DRC, thereby affecting lake-dependent communities. 

There have also been conflicts over the use of River Semiliki between Uganda and DRC, arising from the changes in the course of the river. There were also concerns about the increased risk of pollution of Lake Edward and Lake Albert from the oil, gas and other economic activities.

All these have necessitated the development of this programme and the soliciting of funds to mitigate the risks even though the activities have not been included in the NDP.

MR MWIRU: Honourable minister, my understanding of the way we operate in this country is that we have the Vision 2040 and then we develop the National Development Plan, the Strategic Investment Plan and then the budgets from the ministries. That is what the Government Chief Whip had explained. However, from your explanation, you seem to suggest that whenever there is something around and there is necessity, we come and budget for it. (Laughter) Can we take it that way?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question now be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: The question is that this House do approve this loan request.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO $84,979,502.54 FROM THE EXPORT IMPORT (EXIM) BANK OF CHINA, FOR FINANCING FOUR INDUSTRIAL PARKS SUB-STATIONS AND TRANSMISSION LINES PROJECT

1.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by the Government to borrow up to $84,979,502.54 from the Export Import (EXIM) Bank of China for financing four industrial parks substations and transmission lines project.

This is an important loan for us as Government because the project, which is supported, seeks to establish four substations to support four industrial parks: one in Luzira, one in Namanve, one in Mukono and the fourth in Iganga. These substations are meant to support the big projects located in those industrial zones. The project also entails the extension of the backbone of the national electricity grid to support the evacuation of power into those substations.

This loan request has also been discussed by the Committee on National Economy and a report has been made. My prayer, therefore, is to seek the support of honourable Members of Parliament so that this motion is passed and the project is achieved. I beg to move.

1.33
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg that we handle the next item because it appears that when the staff were compiling the report, they did not include some pages. The part which has the conclusion is missing but I remember that we had recommended that the loan be approved. 

THE SPEAKER: Would you like to go to the next item? 

MR KYOOMA: Yes; I would like to go to the next item as I try to get the other pages. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Are your minutes here?  Can’t we just use them?

MR KYOOMA: Yes, we have the minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Don’t you have the conclusion in your minutes? I do not know if Members would mind. If it is in your minutes, you will just read that conclusion in your minutes and then we move on.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is a committee report on the Government’s proposal to borrow up to $84,979,502.54 from the Export Import Bank of China for financing four industrial parks substations and transmission lines. I have the original report of the committee, the brief by the minister, the draft loan agreement and the negotiation minutes. I beg to lay them on the Table. I also have the committee minutes but I request that I use them first. Let me lay them on the Table but I request you to allow me to use them as part of my submission. 

This loan request was brought to Parliament by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and referred to the Committee on National Economy and we have handled it. The components of the project are given on page 4 and the terms are listed under paragraph 11. I beg to go to the observations and recommendations: 

Loan Application Procedure for Funding of the Projects

The committee observed that under the preferential export buyer’s line of credit, the China EXIM loan application procedure requires that a commercial contract is concluded between the borrowing country and a Chinese contractor prior to loan negotiations. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Minerals should take full responsibility of ensuring that the contractor delivers these projects on time.

Parliament should further ensure the timely monitoring of the implementation of these projects through its relevant parliamentary committees.

Madam Speaker, from the recommendations and minutes, it is clear that the committee was giving positive recommendation to this august House that this loan be approved. I beg to report, Madam Speaker.

1.36
MR GEOFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the chairperson and the minister. However, I would like to remind the House that the Public Finance Management Act gives us responsibility. We are excited and we have approved several loans, but these loans will not see the light of the day unless we look at the Public Finance Management Act. We should ensure that during appropriation, we provide for all the necessary supportive funding in the budget in terms of the local financing and staffing system for the loans to be implemented. 

We should ensure that the bank accounts are open, project managers are appointed and there is money in the budget for it. Therefore, the relevant sectoral committees should go back and do a lot of work because for some of these loans the project documents are not complete and yet, no loan or project – let me just read on page 43, “All expenditure to be incurred by Government on projects, which are externally financed in a financial year, shall be appropriated by Parliament.”

However, if in the coming financial year we do not provide the necessary funds to make the unit operational, these loans will not take off and yet, in this one which we are going to pass, there is 0.7 per cent interest for loan disbursed and 0.5 for loan undsibursed. 

In this year’s budget, the Chairperson of the Budget Committee stated that the local revenue collection has increased by Shs 750 billion; the discretionary fund as a Government that we have is only Shs 350 billion. Now, if you inbuilt all these interests, service and commitment fees on undisbursed, we may be left with only about Shs 100 billion, because all will be going to debt servicing and yet, there will be nothing on the ground. We have approved it. The work has just started; you should go back and prepare to ensure that the system is in place so that we do not incur costs and there is nothing on the ground. I beg to support.

1.38
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the motion but I would like to make an appeal to Government that let this one not be like Namanve because when the Namanve Industrial Park was approved and put in place, many people were moving around in town with titles selling that land, yet it was intended to be for the investors. That makes investments very expensive. 

When these industrial parks are created, let the purpose be met so that the actual people who are supposed to help in investment in this place are the same people who will go ahead to utilise these parks. Otherwise, I support the loan. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think there is general support for the hydropower project and transmission lines. The motion is that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that this House do approve the loan as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UP TO EURO 45 MILLION FROM THE FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT (AFD) AND EURO 40 MILLION FROM KREDITANSTALT  FUR  WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) THE GERMAN DEVELOPMENT BANK TO FINANCE THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE 44.7 MW MUZIZI HYDROPOWER PROJECT AND THE ASSOCIATED TRANSMISSION LINE

1.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by Government to borrow up to Euro 45 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) and Euro 40 million from Kreditanstalt Fur Wiederaufbau (KFW), the German Development Bank, to finance the construction of the 44.7 MW Muzizi Hydropower project and the associated transmission line.

We are aware that Uganda is still power deficient and this borrowing will be moving towards construction of another facility that will enhance our power in the country and, therefore, needs to be supported. This will also attract transmission lines meant to evacuate power from the dam but also to assist the other power stations, which are under construction, to evacuate and distribute the power.

Madam Speaker, this loan has been discussed by the Committee on National Economy when it was forwarded to it by this Parliament and they have made a report. My prayer, therefore, is for this House to support this loan so that our power generation capacity as a country is enhanced. I beg to move.

1.44
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to present the report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal to borrow up to Euro 45 million from the French Agency for Development (AFD) and Euro 40 million from Kreditanstalt Fur Wiederaufbau (KFW), the German Development Bank, to finance the construction of the 44.7 MW Muzizi Hydropower Project and the associated transmission line.

Allow me to lay on the Table the report of the committee, the brief to Parliament, the loan agreement, the minutes of the negotiations and those of the committee meetings. I beg to lay.

The Committee on National Economy considered the above request in accordance with rule 166 (2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure.

The committee considered and scrutinised the request and now begs to report. We have the methodology, the documents reviewed; we also have the background, which is quite elaborate giving the energy development trends arising from the rapid growth in the energy demand, which I beg that I should not go into detail.

The committee also had the opportunity to look at the project linkage to the country’s strategies. We also looked at the key areas of Government focus in the sector, which include: Generation, transmission and distribution; rural electrification and renewable energy development; and regional interconnection.

Allow me to talk a little more on this project. The Muzizi Hydropower Project is located in western Uganda, with the powerhouse approximately six kilometres upstream of Lake Albert at the eastern flank of the Albertine Graben. The closest towns to the project location are Fort Portal and Kyenjojo, which are situated about 50 kilometres southeast and southwest respectively from the project area. 

The project area covers the districts of Kabarole (Musongora village in Hakibaale Subcounty); Kibaale (Muzizi A and Muzizi B villages in Kyaterekera Subcounty and Kiyanja village in Ndaiga Subcounty); and Kyenjojo (Kaswa village in Kyarusozi Subcounty).

The Muzizi Hydropower Project is designed as a run-off river power plant with peaking capabilities of four hours of peak operation during low flow period, with a design water discharge of 12 cubic metres per second and a total head of approximately 450 metres; an installed capacity of 44.7 megawatts, with a total annual energy production of approximately 220 gigawatts per hour, which can be achieved.

Madam Speaker, we have highlighted in our report the project components. We also have the project cost and financing plan as indicated on page 7 and part of page 8. We have the project terms and conditions on page 8. The AFD financing has the following terms:

    (a) A loan of up to Euro 45 million.
    (b) Repayment period of 20 years, including six years’ grace period.
    (c) Indicative interest rate of 1.25 per cent per annum.
    (d) Commitment fee of 0.5 per cent on undisbursed but available amount per annum.

The KFW financing has the following terms:

    (a) A loan of up to Euro 40 million.
    (b) Repayment period of 12 years, including five years grace period.
    (c) Indicative interest rate of 2.5 per cent per annum, determined for the entire term of the loan at the time of binding of the loan agreement.
    (d) One-off management fee of 0.75 per cent of the loan amount.
    (e) Commitment fee of 0.25 on undisbursed but available amount per annum.

In addition, KFW will provide a grant of up to Euro 4 million to finance the on-going open-sector programme promotion of renewable energy and energy efficiency.

We have implementation arrangements indicated in our report and with your permission, Madam Speaker, allow me to delve into the observations and recommendations. The committee made the following observations and recommendations:

(i) Increase in Power Generation 

The project shall not only increase the power generation capacity of the country, but will also extend and increase access to the electricity. It will also improve quality of supply of the system to meet the growing demand. Connecting more households and institutions to the national grid will contribute towards reducing poverty and improving on living standards.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development constantly supervises the project to ensure that the intended benefits are met.

(ii) Employment Opportunities

The project is expected to generate employment opportunities for the communities both during the construction and operational phase. Availability of electricity in the area will also enhance the capacity of the communities to invest and expand their businesses.

The project will avail more power to support industrial growth with more employment opportunities.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that the project affected persons are given a fair opportunity to compete for employment while taking into consideration gender concerns.

(iii) Stakeholder Involvement

The committee noted that the project involves a number of stakeholders and communities. Thus, it is important that the interests of communities, Government agencies, national and international NGOs and civil societies are taken into consideration throughout project implementation.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that concerns of the community continue to be incorporated during construction and operation. Community participation is especially important and should be undertaken among people living around the project site, and along the proposed transmission line corridors and areas of influence.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that the request by Government to borrow up to Euro 45 million from the AFD and Euro 40 million from KFW from the German Development Bank to finance the construction of the 44.7 megawatt Muzizi Hydropower Project and associated transmission lines be approved, subject to the recommendations above. Madam Speaker, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, chairperson and Members of the Committee on National Economy for carrying out our duty. The report has been signed by more than the necessary one third minimum; it is eligible for debate.

1.54
MS FLORENCE EKWAU (FDC, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. At times, we give to this Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development resources, but it is annoying to find that the speed at which the ministry executes its mandate does not rhyme with the needs of the country. Resources were availed to the ministry in regards to the Buseruka Power Plant to have the necessary infrastructure in place in order to evacuate the power. It is a very big shame that for a very long time – maybe the ministry will update this House now on whether this power has been evacuated.

The investors are at the site and are producing the power, but the power lies there idle and yet people continue to suffer from constant load shedding.

I hope that with the resources we are going to –(Interruption)

PROF. KASIRIVU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you, honourable colleague for giving way. The last time we were in Buseruka, which is about six months ago, they said they were only evacuating three megawatts instead of the nine megawatts. However, the Government of Uganda is paying for nine megawatts! 

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Speaker, it is really annoying. We make a lot of effort here to give resources to this ministry. But without shame, it is over five years now since this power has been lying idle! The Indians are there working full time, producing power but it is lying idle without being evacuated.

So, why don’t you plan to have the necessary infrastructure to have the power evacuated at the same time when you are generating it? This is poor planning on the part of the officials concerned.

Madam Speaker, I hope in the case of Muzizi, we are going to be a little more serious. Put the infrastructure in place and evacuate the power immediately since we have given you the resources.

Then the other thing –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: No more time. Okay, half a minute for UWOPA. (Laughter)

MS IBI EKWAU: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The other thing is that, when we come back during the budget process and in our course of action in the following year, this House should interest itself with the unbearable and soaring costs of power tariffs. It is very expensive upcountry. Most people cannot afford the prices and yet they are even continuing to soar up.

So, if we really care for these people we represent, as a House, we should squeeze Government and these technocrats should think harder to see that the cost of electricity is affordable -(Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I thank you very much for accepting this information. I am under extreme pressure by the industrialists to reduce power tariffs because power is one of the major costs in running any industry and, therefore, these industrialists are becoming uncompetitive. 

We took a policy decision that all new power generation should produce and distribute power at no more than five cents per unit. That is the policy now. Implementing it is going to come when the big dams like Karuma and Isimba come into operation. But where the others have already been completed, I will maybe leave it to my colleague in charge of power generation and distribution. But as a policy, Government has taken a decision because if we do not produce power cheaply, we will not be able to make industries competitive. I thought that I should make this point.

Can I just use this opportunity to make a correction? In the report, we are talking about the KFW loan being 12 years but it is actually 20 years. I thought that I should correct that record for our Hansard. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: He was giving you information. Okay, please conclude and then hon. Baba Diri will say something.

MS IBI EKWAU: I thank you very much. I am most obliged for the information that the minister has given to this House. However, the finance minister should make sure that he closely coordinates with the energy ministry because speaking is one thing and making a commitment is another and then also doing is another.

We should not only think about the investors but also families should be encouraged to add value to their products. So, if we take care of the investors alone and then we forget about the household, we will not have added any value to this country. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

2.00
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. My concern is the cost of installing power in the new districts. For example, in Koboko, I have been told that the first 100 people who are going to install power in their houses will be charged only Shs 50,000. However, they are charging us Shs 225,000 and yet in other districts it is Shs 50,000. There is a problem; even if there is power, people will not use it because of the cost.  Despite all this, I support the loan because we need power for all our districts. I thank you very much.

2.01
MR EDDIE KWIZERA (NRM, Bufumbira County East, Kisoro): Madam Speaker, I support the motion. I would like to inform the House that when we are generating and transmitting, it means that we are curing the Buseruka issue where they generated without providing for transmission. 

There is a problem between generation, transmission and distribution and then, the usage. So, it is better that at least there should be a corresponding amount for transmission when they are generating because when you transmit, you must also distribute.

Power usage, because of the high tariffs, is becoming a bit of a problem. When they transmit, you wonder how many people are connected onto that line. The tariffs structure is still unclear.

We call upon the ministry to increase on power usage because we now have a lot of power. I thank you very much.

2.03
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I add my voice to those who are telling the minister that all these power projects should out of necessity lead to easy and increased access and affordable electricity for our people. 

I would like to request the minister that you confirm to the House again on whether the project that was launched in October, of enhancement of electricity to the households, is still on the free access and connection. I have seen people being charged and yet I thought that since October, this project should have led to free connections.

Finally, Madam Speaker, through you, I would like to appeal to Government to consider the Nchwera River Project with a capacity of up to three to four megawatts, which would spur development in Bushenyi and it would be adequate to cover our tea factories, towns and households.

I hope the energy minister is picking this river project; it is Nchwera River Project. The people have been expecting Government to add to the efforts of Igara Tea Factory, which has already carried out a pre-feasibility study on this project so that Government can buy into it and then we see a similar project like Muzizi. I fully support the loan for the Muzizi Hydropower Project.

2.05
PROF. BALTAZAR KASIRIVU-ATWOOKI (NRM, Bugangaizi County West, Kibaale): Madam Speaker, I support the motion. As earlier indicated, I would have wished to know and be assured that the problem that exists in Buseruka would be handled; either there is some request somewhere or some money that has been found to make sure that the amount of power generated in Buseruka is actually evacuated and put onto the grid.

I have not seen the nearest power station that the generated power at Muzizi will be evacuated to. Is it Nkenda or somewhere else? Is it necessary to establish another power station around Kibaale? 

It is interesting that the committee in their report indicates that the nearest towns to this project are Fort Portal and Kyenjojo and yet Muhororo and Kagadi are towns and are near Muzizi. I do not know whether the committee has not been able to get that geography well. 

Otherwise, I support the loan and look forward to having this project undertaken and benefit the people of this country. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the energy minister to explain why the six megawatts are not being used? Did we design poorly? How can we make nine megawatts of which six are just “sitting” there in Buseruka?

2.07
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (Mr Simon D’Ujanga): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The Buseruka incident was due to a mismatch as has been observed by my colleagues.

At the beginning, there was indeed a mismatch regarding the capacity to take away the power that can be generated from Buseruka. Madam Speaker, at the beginning ,Buseruka Power Plant was capable of producing nine megawatts but the present capacity was not capable of taking those nine megawatts. This matter has now been addressed. A new capacity has been created to sort out this and the situation is now better. However, the ultimate plan is to build a 132 kV line into Hoima, which project is on. So, this matter has been handled but we still have to improve it by doing a 132 kV line into Hoima. At the moment –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. As the House is aware, in all these min-stations and power projects, we sign what we call the power purchase agreement. The investors use these power purchase agreements to get funding from the financiers but immediately the interest rates start growing. That is why we appropriate money in the budget to pay.

Therefore, I want to find out from the minister what loss we have incurred as Ugandans for not consuming and yet we are paying? That is important because the power purchase agreement states that once the investor has acquired and installed machinery and they cannot evacuate, you pay as if you are consuming 100 per cent. So, how much loss have we incurred as a country and how many people are behind bars?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, the power purchase agreement has two parts to it. It is not true that you pay 100 per cent as soon as the power is put in place. The first part is the capacity charge and then consumption. So, indeed the capacity’s charge is being paid for nine megawatts with the other costs because that is the agreement; you pay for the capacity and also for the energy consumed. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter. The minister responsible is telling this august House that indeed the capacity is nine megawatts, which is produced and paid for yet it is only three, which is being consumed. So, can he tell us the loss Government is incurring to pay for the six, which is not being consumed? We want figures in monetary value so that we can know the magnitude of the problem.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, at the moment I cannot provide that figure. I need time to go and work out that figure. However, I would like to inform my colleague that every power station is operated that way –(Interjections)– yes, that there is a capacity charge and the energy charge.  So, to us in the power system, that is not a loss –(Interjections)– yes, it is not. That is how it is.  

Madam Speaker, give me one minute. It is like if I had a standby generator at my house. It is for availability of electricity. It can stand there for three months without switching it on yet I will have paid for it. Imagine I was hiring that generator from someone. I would pay monthly for hiring it and the generator would sit at my house not providing power but when I need it, it should provide power – (Interjections)– no, it is the same. That is what capacity charge is.

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am very happy and may the minister of energy kindly listen to me.

Hon. Simon D’ujang, you are an engineer and you belong to this country. You very well know that Ugandans don’t have electricity. Some people are still fighting to have power in their houses and are willing to pay for it. But here you are in Buseruka producing nine megawatts but only giving out three megawatts, and six is not used at all!
 
Madam Speaker, is the minister happy to be a minister of a ministry that is producing electricity that is not being accessed by Ugandans, and he is just comparing that situation to a generator that has been hired and is redundant? The power is being produced but taxpayers’ money went! Madam Speaker, this is where the President gets problems. Sometimes he is being harassed on behalf of you people because you are a technocrat. You are a person who is learned and you know much about electricity. Why are you not giving Ugandans power if it has been generated? That is why you have to help the President who appointed you, minister. Sincerely, do you want money from us so that you can put power lines and you generate and give us power? Why are you producing power and leaving it there? Madam Speaker, surely hon. Simon D’ujanga should apologise. This is too much.

THE SPEAKER: And also explain why it has taken five years. 

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I conceded that there was a mismatch at the beginning – (Interruption)

MR OBOTH: I thought I have the Floor.

MR D’UJANGA: At the beginning there was a mismatch –(Interruption)

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Speaker, this issue has intrigued Members to become more inquisitive. You had given two Members the opportunity to raise more concerns before the minister would get to the Floor. Is he in order to jump onto the microphone yet we still have concerns of importance?

THE SPEAKER: Mr Minister, please listen to the concerns of hon. Jacob Oboth, and hon. Florence Ibi before you respond. 

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker.  If I got the minister right, what he is attempting to do now is what he ought to have started with. The margin, the capacity charge and the energy - it is known. The little knowledge I got from the natural resources committee and then chairing that ad hoc committee, I know that one cannot construct a power plant that would discharge 100 per cent; it won’t be energy at all.
 
As an individual, I cannot use all my energy now for talking. I need to have some for storage. But the minister should be able to own up the errors! Don’t try to justify the excesses - producing nine megawatts but you are only discharging three megawatts! Is that normal? What you are saying is the right thing and, Madam Speaker, I request the minister to own up so that we get into approval of this loan quickly. That is a mismatch; the minister should be able to own it up so that we can move on.

MS IBI EKWAU: Madam Speaker, at times when we raise concerns, we are not just complaining for nothing. I have been on the Committee on Natural Resources. We have been closely following up these inconsistences, no wonder the country is not performing very well in regards to its energy needs.

Madam Speaker, the minister cannot, at any single moment, claim that there are no losses in this regard. We have visited the Namanve Plant - there was Electromaxx and the one we used to call “Migereko” -(Laughter)- no, Aggreko and the likes -and we were told that these machines are contracted and/or are supposed to be built, owned and operated; others are supposed to be built, owned and transferred. For the last how many years, the Indian investors in Buseruka have been generating this power. How do you claim that there are no losses, because after sometime some of these facilities are supposed to be transferred to Government?

We want to pass this loan very fast; you are even making us more annoyed or else we rescind and take another vote altogether. Be honest to this country, own up and see how to correct some of these anomalies. Otherwise, pretending that there is no problem would be telling lies to the country. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, please respond and we conclude.

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I have already said that there was a mismatch initially on this Buseruka project. This has been partly addressed. The situation is now much better but the ultimate thing is the 132 kV line that we are building in that area; it will solve this problem completely.

On the Electro-maxx Project of Namanve, I am glad to report that this plant is now reverted back to Government since the committee visited that place. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Margret Baba Diri raised an issue about the cost of installation in West Nile. This matter has reached the ministry and we are handling it, because there is a project in West Nile Region of rural electrification. Government had got a loan from the World Bank for free connection but there is a small misunderstanding, and this matter is being handled. 

Hon. Kwizera, said something about the mismatch, but I want to say that this has been noted - (Interruption)

MR FUNGAROO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Building on what hon. Margret Baba Diri raised on the case of West Nile, the tariff rate paid by the people in West Nile is higher compared to that paid by people in other parts of the country. We have a case where electricity has just been extended from Gulu to Moyo. However, the amount of power that has reached there makes it difficult for people to operate even a simple refrigerator. The capacity of power on the line from Gulu to Moyo is so small. What is the use of bringing power, which cannot even run a shaving machine?

Madam Speaker, Obongi has not got power up to now yet the line from Moyo is what was supposed to be extended via Laloki to Obongi. Do you want to maintain the difference in development between the parts of Uganda, those which are already ahead and those which are already behind? Why are you keeping Obongi behind up to now, in terms of extending power there? Why are you delaying our development?

MR D’UJANGA: Madam Speaker, I thank my colleague for raising those issues. The power to Obongi is going to come via Pakwach and the contractor will be on site in six months’ time. Because of the simple reason you just raised, that power in Moyo is weak, it would not be wise to extend it to Obongi through Moyo. That is why we now supply Obongi from Pakwach with better voltage - (Interjection)- Madam Speaker, we can discuss this with my brother outside after the sitting. I can give you more details on this.

Hon. Raphael Magyezi referred to a loan, which was approved here for free connection provided one has been under the line for the last 18 months. This project that was launched last October is still ongoing.

On the Nchwera River Project, I have taken note. I will follow up on how far the three megawatts project has gone. 

As for hon. Dr Kasirivu Atwooki, the power from Muzizi is going to connect to the 220kV line from Nkenda. There is a line which is being built from Kasese to Nkenda all the way to the oil fields specifically at Kabale where the oil refinery is going to be. This power station will supply into that line and, of course, there are other towns like Kagadi, which are close though the committee mentioned only two. 

Madam Speaker, I think those were the issues raised. We apologise for any mismatch that has happened before. We promise to correct them as we go on. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. Honourable members, the motion is that the question be now put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House do approve the loan as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

2.24
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion calling for the adjournment of the House. 

Madam Speaker, your Members have been very good and for the period they were called from the constituency, they came and have really worked. Yesterday, Members asked you to sit this Friday to accomplish pending work. At the same time, you also had assured Members that by 2 O’clock we would have accomplished and adjourned the House to give us time to travel back, which would also give you time to get back to your Office and create some networks that could facilitate certain programmes.

Madam Speaker, I would like to move a motion that the House be adjourned to another date that you will deem necessary. 

2.25
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I really want to thank you for having called us here for this siting. You have demonstrated your patriotic attitude towards this country because all that we have been debating is so crucial and strategic for the running of this economy.

Having said that, there are two loan requests that we handled: One was to do with the PTA and the other was to do with Bukasa. I will begin with Bukasa. I will ask my colleague, the minister in charge of the sector, to come and supplement on what I am saying. 

That project is international. It links us to Tanzania. It also links us to Kenya. They are supposed to do certain things on the other side. If we do not do our own part, then we are delaying them and the consequences are not very nice.

Secondly, on the PTA loan – the $200 million – I would like to inform this House that this loan is very crucial – (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, there is a way we proceed with the business in this House. We already have an Order Paper. We have prepared for all the business on that Order Paper. We were prepared for the business that the minister is talking about yesterday and indeed we disposed of it.

The issues he is raising now are not on the Order Paper. He is indulging in irrelevancies. The only issues he can talk about are those that have been provided for. 

In that regard, is the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, hon. Matia Kasaija, in order to indulge himself in businesses that are not provided for on the Order Paper today? The motion is for adjournment but he is indulging in business, which is not even on the Order Paper.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, we do appreciate the need to handle this business. However, in regard to Bukasa, I had instructed the minister to bring us the information about the ownership of that land. I think there was something else we had asked them to do. There was an issue of who owns the land? Is it National Forestry Authority (NFA)? I had asked the ministers that when they return, they should come with evidence about ownership because there were questions as to whether we own it or we are just encroachers and the committee had not been consulted on that issue.

On the one of the PTA, I think it was clear that even the committee was not satisfied that it should be borrowed.

DR CHEBROT: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The issue of the ownership of the land was clarified. We have documents to the effect that actually the land is owned by the Government of Uganda. The title is with the National Forestry Authority. We even have the letter to that effect. I can be able to table that letter here, Madam Speaker.

In addition to what the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has said, this project of Bukasa that we are talking about has a timeline. It is a project, which is under the Lake Victoria Basin Programme. If we do not implement this project on time, we will have difficulties when we go back for the regional meetings.

Madam Speaker, I beg that the honourable members reconsider these documents and re-table them since they were partially discussed yesterday.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, you have asked the honourable minister to produce evidence that actually the land is owned by Government. Where is the land title? What the House needs is the evidence not the narration on the microphone. Is he, therefore, in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, have you got what I requested you to bring? I wanted the title deed of the land because there was a dispute as to whether it is Government land or not.

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, this is a letter from the National Forestry Authority. (Laughter) The letter confirms the ownership of land by the Government. There is no dispute on the ownership of this land.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, in law, the ownership of land is confirmed by the title deed – the registered proprietor.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have a lot of business to do in and out of here. Yesterday, I do not know what stopped Government from doing their work right. You are being asked for a land title and you bring a letter from NFA, not even from the Ministry of Land! Nobody is objecting to this loan. But why can’t you do it right. If you want a reconsideration of this, do it right and stop panicking. We are at crossroads and our being back here is at stake. Our opponents think that we are back here because we fear them. But you are here wasting our time with papers. We want to do things the right way. Is the minister proceeding correctly? I thought the Minister of Finance, Matia Kasaija, had come to salvage the situation. Yesterday, he left it for somebody who soiled the whole process. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, guide us on what we should do with the NFA letter.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think we needed to agree on what is coming on the Order Paper so that Members prepare. You needed to supply the copies of the title deed because that was a big issue here. I wrote a note to the minister saying, when you come back, we want to see the title deed.

I think we should allow Members to go. I had only called them for one day. They have been here for three days. I know that we have that other Bill, but the timeline is 28th February. We can do it immediately after elections because everybody will be free by then. The elections are on the 18th February. We can meet from the 20th February onwards and still beat the deadline of 28th February, 2016. (Applause)

On the Capital Market Authority, why don’t you allow Members to come back when they are fresh and free from the campaigns?

2.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank you for the business that we have transacted so far. 

The Capital Markets Authority (Amendment) Bill is one of those that are required by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF). We have agreed on the amendments that are being proposed with the committee. So, it would actually take a very short time if we are permitted to present. We are going to present it in very special English. 

MR KATUNTU: No. We don’t have quorum.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I have had the opportunity to read the minds on both sides as well as the committee report on this matter. In fact, this Capital Market Authority (Amendment) Bill should have been handled together with the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill yesterday. They are required the same way. I am surprised we are pursuing loans with our financial system, which is a mismatch with international standards. I thought we would do this amendment first then get the loans from international bodies. 

In fact, the committee agrees with all the proposals without any single amendments. Probably, those who would have issues like hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, my neighbour, would be one or two people. The rest would be fast-tracked –(Interjections)- hon. Geoffrey Ekanya, I am still holding the Floor and you know it is by consensus. We all want to go away from here and anything that would waste or hold us here would almost tantamount to terrorism. (Laughter) I would like to appeal to ourselves that if we have approved some loans, we could also do our other role of legislating – it is just one piece of legislation. I have looked at it. It is only about having a functioning board to help Capital Markets Authority function and a few other things that relate to the administration of the capital markets. We passed the law ourselves but we did not put those things in there. That is why it has been returned to us for amendment. We could really provide the administrative arm of the authority in the next few minutes. That is my plea. But I am also in support of adjournment immediately after considering that.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, you gave very good guidance that the reporting dateline falls in February. I have checked and noted that it is not only Uganda that has not complied. There are several other countries too. You can even write a letter seeking extension, for example, the Anti-Money Laundering Bill took us five years and even now several have not done much.

Madam Speaker, we are here - the Minister of Finance, I hope you wish us well. People are campaigning in the villages while we are here. This Bill has over 90 clauses and for us not to make another mistake, we need to do it when we are sober.
 
I would like to agree with you, Madam Speaker, that we adjourn. Immediately after the elections, some of us by God’s grace - and I pray that we all win and are here to pass this Bill. (Laughter) Thank you, very much.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I know we are tired and hungry and we would like to go to campaigns. I appreciate that really. As I said earlier, I would like to thank you profoundly for the patriotic gesture you have shown for this country by leaving your constituencies to come and transact this important business. 

However, I would pray that since we have come, there are some businesses that we should not leave incomplete. Just one minute, Madam Speaker - I know my brother, hon. Abdu Katuntu, said I was involving myself in irregularities. No, it is not irregular - hon. Abdu Katuntu, can you listen to me please because we all need to note this. 

This PTA loan which I was about to talk about –(Interjections)- I know you raised concerns yesterday and I would like to apologise to this House for my absence. However, I did not leave the House because I wanted to; I went to see my doctor. Therefore, I left one of my colleagues to continue. 

You raised certain issues that were not answered, and we said we would go and consult. We consulted the whole of last night and we now have answers. So, I would wish that we look at these loan requests. If we do not approve this loan request, I have no money - the National Medical Stores is one urgent recipient of this money! They need $40 million and we thought we could use this facility to give them money to bring in drugs.
 
There are road contractors who want to be paid in foreign currency and we thought this overdraft would be very useful without necessarily going to Bank of Uganda to put more pressure on our shilling. Therefore, I pray, Madam Speaker, we consider this loan. Yesterday, you debated. We can answer the questions and if you get satisfied with the answers, this loan could be passed. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, the minister was not in the House. It would have been better if his colleagues had briefed him correctly.

This particular request was not deferred. It was just withdrawn; it stands withdrawn. The only request which was deferred was about Bukasa and on that, you can have an argument. The one you are talking about stood withdrawn by your colleague.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, it was withdrawn. So, that one is not on the Table. Let us discuss whether we move to capital markets or we -

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, when the minister got up, I thought he was going to talk about capital markets. Instead, he delved into an issue which was dismissed. We were all surprised and we could not follow him. We were on capital markets, but again you came up on the microphone and talkabout something else, which was dismissed. 

Hon. Oboth here was putting up an argument for the Capital Market Authority so that we could proceed. What is your take on the Capital Market Authority?

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable minister, where do you stand? You cannot want everything.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I am sorry, Madam Speaker. I thought we had concluded on the Capital Market Authority. Now, it seems the Speaker seems to have ruled saying there is time, which I definitely agree. We have done very well on the other legislations. If we wrote to Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and showed them what have so far been done, maybe they would soften on us provided we give them firm commitment that immediately after the elections, we would be able to - that is why I came, Madam Speaker, on this other loan. I thought we had concluded on the question of the Capital Market Authority.

THE SPEAKER: He is willing to handle it after the elections.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: On Capital Market Authority, I know we are ready - I see my technical officers shaking their heads. I can see the Bill is quite long unless you are going to keep us here until late tonight - 

THE SPEAKER: And the canteen is closed. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: The canteen is closed and people are hungry. Personally, as the sector minister, I would not be too hard. We will write to that organisation to tell them that Parliament has been doing everything they could manage, but also the Members are busy in campaigns and that we will handle this Bill immediately after elections. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for the work done. We have kept you here longer than we had originally indicated. Hence, I would like to adjourn the House sine die. In case there is anything, we shall invite you again; but for now, House is adjourned sine die. I wish you success in the general elections. I want to see you back. Thank you.

(House rose at 2.42 p.m. and was adjourned sine die.) 

