

Thursday, 19 January 2017

Parliament met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this afternoon’s sitting. I would like to announce that we shall suspend plenary for next week so that the committees can work on the Budget Framework Paper and report next Tuesday.  We are required to have completed the discussion and approval of the Budget Framework Paper by 31 January 2017. Therefore, let us use this coming week to do the sector meetings.

Secondly, honourable members, yesterday I said I would give the terms of reference for the committee to investigate the awards given to the public officers. These are the terms of reference that I am proposing:

1. 	To investigate the claims that the public officers solicited for a payment, honorarium, bonus or golden handshake, totalling to Shs 6 billion, from the President contrary to standard practice of rewarding public officers.

2. 	To investigate the basis of determination of the beneficiaries to the bonus payments, including a full account of the role of each beneficiary in the court cases.

3. 	To examine whether all the proper and legal procedures under the laws of Uganda were followed in making the alleged payments.

4. 	To scrutinise all supplementary requests and other budget allocations provided to the public officers in facilitating the court processes in Uganda and abroad.

5. 	To establish all revenues so far received by the Government under the Petroleum Fund.

6. 	To examine any other matters related to the above and make policy recommendations for the sound management of public finances. 
7. 	To do anything incidental to and pursuant to these terms of reference and to report back to the House within two months.

Honourable members, I reflected on our debate yesterday and I find that I have confidence in the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises (COSASE). They have done a good job so far. Therefore, I would like to assign the committee on COSASE to handle this investigation. Thank you very much. (Applause)
 
BILLS
FIRST READING

THE UGANDA NATIONAL HEALTH LABORATORY SERVICES BILL, 2016

2.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Uganda National Health Laboratory Services Bill, 2016” be read for the first time. We have given a Certificate of Financial Implications and it is herein attached. 

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Health for perusal and report back. 

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

2.37
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read for the first time. I hereby lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Cooperative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2016. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for perusal and report back.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE SUGAR BILL, 2016

2.38
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Sugar Bill, 2016 be read for the first time. I would like to lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Sugar Bill, 2016. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Bill is sent to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry for perusal and report back. I am not campaigning for these last two Bills but can we ask that they be handled expeditiously. The cooperatives sector and the sugar industry are in turmoil. Committee, please work quickly on these. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

2.40
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table reports of the Auditor-General on the financial statements for the years ended 30 June 2013 and 2014 for the following local governments: 

i) 	Kasese District 
ii) 	Rakai District 
iii) 	Oyam District 
iv) 	Kanungu District 
v) 	Sembabule District 
vi) 	Mubende District 
vii) 	Lake Katwe Subcounty 
viii) 	Buhuhira Subcounty 
ix) 	Bwera Subcounty
x) 	Rukoki Subcounty 
xi) 	Kyabarungira Subcounty 
xii) 	Karambi Subcounty
xiii) 	Ihandiro Subcounty 
xiv) 	Bugoye Subcounty
xv) 	Kisinga Subcounty 
xvi) 	Kitswamba Subcounty 
xvii) 	Bwesumbu Subcounty 
xviii) 	Karusandara Subcounty 
xix) 	Nyakiyumbu Subcounty
xx) 	Kilembe Subcounty 
xxi) 	Mahango Subcounty 
xxii) 	Kitolhu Subcounty 
xxiii) 	Kiyondo Subcounty 
xxiv) 	Maliba Subcounty
xxv) 	Munkunyu Subcounty 
xxvi) 	Kyarumba Subcounty 
xxvii) 	Central Division, Jinja District 
xxviii) 	Kapujan Subcounty, and 
xxix) 	Akura Subcounty. 

I beg to move

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, they are all sent to the Committee on Local Government Accounts for perusal and report back. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO REVIEW THE OPERATIONS OF THE WEALTH CREATION PROGRAMME

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I had allowed this matter to come on the Order Paper but I got a report from the chair of agriculture saying that they are about to complete their evaluation on Operation Wealth Creation countrywide and this would pre-empt their report. Therefore, we will hold it until they bring their report and we discuss them together. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE ON THE AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE PARLIAMENT OF UGANDA

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report was presented yesterday and I had requested the House to allow us to deal only with the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) elections. We shall find time after the budget to fully discuss the other new proposals. The EALA issue is important because we must conduct elections by mid-March. I hope you were able to look at the proposals yesterday.  

2.43
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON RULES, PRIVILEGES AND DISCIPLINE (Mr Clement Ongalo-Obote): Madam Speaker, the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline proposes that Rule 13 of our Rules of Procedure be amended to read as follows: “The Speaker shall ensure that the Members elected under Rule 12, in as much as it is feasible, represent the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda.” 

The justification is: to bring the provisions in line with Article 50 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community and the decision of the East African Court of Justice in Reference No.6 of 2012 between Among A. Anita v. Attorney-General of Uganda, the Secretary General of the East African Community and others. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the proposal. 

2.46
MR JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I am more interested in the issue of representation of special interest groups based on my experience. 

I pray that we specify the specific groups because we have women, people with disability and the youth. We, the people with disability, have a bitter experience because we were not represented in the previous assembly, although we had our contestant who did not go through. 

Madam Speaker, if you look at the representation of other countries, you find that there is at least a person with disability and they are supported. Therefore, I pray that we specify them and show support for those specific groups. Thank you. 

2.47
MR ANTHONY OKELLO (NRM, Kioga County, Amolatar): Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee and his members for the hard work they have put into having this report come out. 

I have heard the recommendation proposed by the chair of the committee and I find it good because the gist of contestation here is how to operationalise Article 50(1) of the treaty. With the proposed recommendation, the core areas of the treaty seem to be covered. The treaty says, “…as much as it is feasible”. It also covers areas of various political parties represented in a national assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in the partner states. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Ababiku Jessica has raised a concern which in a way could be fundamental. However, the spirit of the treaty is “…as much as it is feasible”, implying that it is practically impossible to provide for the election of nine members and cater for all the categories mentioned. Therefore, this is an area we need to look into keenly as we proceed with this matter. 

You can also have a very difficult scenario where you have many political parties represented but if we go with proportional representation, where you want to get the ratio of parties represented in the House and use it to apportion the number of people to represent us in EALA, you can hit a big snag. This is because you will not cater for all the parties that are in the House. 

That means some formula has to be designed to arrive at a right number because at the end of the day, you may not be in a position to cater for everybody. I think that is the spirit in which the statement, “…as much as it is feasible” has been brought here. Madam Speaker, the onus is on us to see how we can proceed with this matter. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable members. I just want to restate the provisions of Article 50 of the treaty, which provides thus: “The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly, who shall represent as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in that Partner State, in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.”| 

I was reflecting on this issue of the parties; when a National Resistance Movement (NRM) member goes to Arusha, how do they represent the NRM? They are going to meet a Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF) member there, members from Kenya African National Union (KANU), the Orange Democratic Movement (ODM), the parties in Burundi. I think these people are just Ugandans representing Uganda; there is no party issue you are going to speak for there - I am just showing you the difficulties. 

I have been thinking about how we can satisfy everybody, including those who are not here. I think the area we need to address is the area of the youth. I sent a petition from the Youth Ambassadors of East Africa. The young people want to be seen and the persons with disabilities. I think for the others, we can find where to fit them – There is gender which is, of course, very important.

MS ANITA AMONG: Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the ruling of Among Anita, there is a part that says, “This court held and as it has also held above that no such a guarantee exists for all political parties represented in Parliament or any other group specified in Article 50(1).” They say there is no guarantee that exists that all must be represented. It is here in the judgment.

2.52
MS ROBINAH RWAKOOJO (NRM, Gomba West County, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Further to the information that hon. Among has given, I want to quote from the judgment given by the judges in Arusha where they say, “It is our view that in order to conform to the provisions of Article 50(1), the election rules must enable the establishment of an electoral process that ensures equal opportunity to become a candidate, full participation and competition for specified groupings and at the end of the process, their effective representation in EALA.”  Somewhere else, they leave it to various national assemblies to come up with whatever procedure they think will be fully inclusive of all these groups.

There was also something against consensus building. There was a provision for imposition of consultations and consensus, and they were questioning why it should be between the voting by secret ballot and the declaration of results. So, it was like they were saying, let things take their course; have your secret ballot and allow people to campaign from whatever political shades and special interest groups and the ballot will finally decide - (Interruption)

MR NIWAGABA: I would like to seek clarification from you as to whether indeed that particular judgment disallowed consensus building only after the electoral process but did not disallow consensus building before the electoral process.

MS RWAKOOJO: Consensus building is not disallowed totally; it is just the placement. This is because they said, “Rule 13(1) and (2) of Appendix B aforesaid provides for consultations and consensus in the election of members to EALA. This rule is located between the provisions on voting by secret ballot in Rule 12 and declaration of results in Rule 14. 

It is unclear to us and no explanation was offered by the first respondent why such procedure should exist at such a crucial stage of the electoral process. We say so because in any election, consultations and consensus building are done in the earliest stages of the electoral process and certainly not after voting…” - so it is the placement but not that it is totally eliminated – “…Therefore, any provision that imposes consultations and consensus after voting is unusual.”

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, with regard to Rule 13 of Appendix B, the court noted that rules 3, 4, 5 and 6 of our Rules of Procedure already provide for the procedure for nomination of candidates; rule 8, 10 and 11 provide for the creation of a verification committee; rule 12(1) provides for campaigns and nomination of candidates; rule 12(2) provides for voting by secret ballot; and rule 14 provides for declaration of results.

The question therefore raised was: What is rule 13 doing there and yet rule 12(2) has already provided for voting by secret ballot and rule 14 provides for declaration of results? So, what is the point of rule 13 coming in between rule 12 (when voting is taking place) and rule 14 (when results have already been declared)?

That is why the court found it odd that after voting, you hold consultations and consensus building and if it fails then the House votes on the matter. Therefore, rule 13 is where the court has a problem. It is not telling this House to come up with a formula for electing Members of EALA; it is only asking what rule 13 is doing between rules 12 and 14. This is where the problem is.

The court said, “Rule 13(1) provides for consultations and consensus in the elections of members to EALA. This rule is located between the provisions on voting by secret ballot in Rule 12 and declaration of results in Rule 14. It is unclear to us and no explanation was offered by the first respondent why such procedure should exist at such a crucial stage of the electoral process. We say so because in any election, consultations and consensus building are done in the earliest stages….” So, consultations and consensus are not ruled out but they are done at the earlier stages; why do they come after voting?

Therefore, this is why the committee thought that if we have to retain rule 13, then we have to cure that problem - remove consultations and consensus and leave the rest of the rule as it is. On the other hand, if this House so desires, it appears to me that rule 13 does not really add anything to our rules, we can just delete it completely.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think rule 13 is misplaced. I remember during the last elections, members campaigned. They came here and spoke for 40 minutes each, Members voted and that was it. There was nothing more to consult about; the votes consulted for us. There is a Member who won by one vote and later went on to become the Speaker. Therefore, I think the consultations are misplaced here.

2.59
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Madam Speaker, you are right; the moment you vote for someone to go to Tanzania or wherever, they represent Uganda. Likewise, when Members of Parliament have been voted from whichever party and they reach here, they represent Ugandans. 

When we were constituting committees of Parliament, there was a rule here which said that you will be represented in a committee according to your proportions in the House. They did not say that since we are here, let us stand in line and vote for those who are going to the committee on gender, equal opportunities and so on. Madam Speaker, you came up with a rule on how to do it. 

Likewise, when our representatives are leaving here, we must have something on how we should send them there. It should not be that everybody going there is representing Uganda. Even if he is disabled, he is a Ugandan but the issue is that he is disabled. Therefore, since we are categorising, we must continue with the categorisations. 

We have gone multiparty and we should not be shy about it. If we are in a multiparty dispensation, we should go by that. First, how do we deal with it? It is stated somewhere in our Rules of Procedure that leadership of committees will be appointed by either the Opposition or the ruling party but not the Speaker. It is very clear. 

Madam Speaker, given that, I think that we must first ask ourselves how many political parties are in the House. There are only three parties: UPC and NRM are one. (Laughter) I will justify my statement. (Interruption)

MS ALUM:  Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. The former Leader of the Opposition, hon. Nandala-Mafabi, knows very well that in this Parliament, there are four different political parties. I am in this House on the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC) ticket and many other Members, who are also here, are holding the flag of UPC. 

Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Nandala-Mafabi to lie to Ugandans that UPC is NRM and that I am holding the flag of NRM yet I am holding the flag of UPC and I am also the chief whip of UPC?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the records of this House indicate that there is a party called Uganda People’s Congress and it is officially here. Therefore, hon. Nandala-Mafabi is out of order. (Laughter)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we must mention the facts. I would like to state that when we are appointing members of a committee, we apportion them accordingly. The leadership of social committees will be appointed by the party in power. Hon. Maxwell Akora is the vice-chairperson of the Committee on Information Communication and Technology and he was appointed by the party in power. Does it mean that –

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, we are dealing with EALA; do not confuse the House.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I would like to state my case first. We are dealing with EALA and as far as political parties are concerned, it is feasible; out of the three political parties, each will get a seat and the independents will also get a seat. When we compute this, we would have already covered four seats and the next thing is to consider the issue of the youth, women, workers and the army. Therefore, it would be wrong for us to say that it is not feasible and yet it is feasible. 

Our criteria should be, after getting those ones then we follow proportional representation. Furthermore, even the Constitution of Uganda is very clear; any party that crosses and joins the other ceases to be as it was. If any Member crosses from one side of the House to another without your permission, he or she has crossed the Floor and must leave his or her seat. If somebody has not left their seat and there is cooperation, it means we must also look at it in detail.

Finally, Madam Speaker, the East African Legislative Assembly is all of us. It would be wrong to assume that some people should be left out. The reasons we had problems with the last one was because after having consensus, some of our colleagues went behind and had other consensus and this resulted into other issues. This time, we must discuss everything on that table, agree and finish it here so that we all go out knowing what belongs to you and what does not belong to you. This would be the best way to move. 

Madam Speaker, we trust that under your leadership, we will achieve this. On the issue of minority interest, I want to say that “minority” is not a Gishu word; it is an English word. This implies that the world over, it is known that there might be a minority. Under the United Nations, the minority interest must be taken care of in whatever circumstance –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nandala-Mafabi, do not blame anybody about your failure to have representatives in the last Parliament; you did not present any candidate.

3.06
MR ARINAITWE RWAKAJARA (NRM, Workers Representatives): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. It is very important that today we discuss this issue and have a conclusive decision. I bring you greetings from the workers fraternity and they wish you a happy new year including all Members.

Madam Speaker, I stand here to deliver a message from the workers. They say that it is high time they are represented in the East African Legislative Assembly as an interest group, which is well stipulated in the Constitution of Uganda. Our Constitution is very clear and it brings out the interest groups very well: youth, women, disabled, workers and UPDF. 

This time round, it is good that the youth brought their petition here demanding that their right to be represented be recognised. As we get together as East African countries, we have to defend our rights. You know very well that workers in other countries are marginalized and not recognized and, therefore, we must have a representative to defend our rights and protect them. 

Madam Speaker, the definition of a worker is very clear in the laws of Uganda. Not everybody is defined as a worker, even employees who claim to be workers. Workers are those that are organised in organisations of workers and it is well stipulated in the laws of this country. Therefore, the unions are - (Interjection)- hon. Mbwatekamwa, if you need lessons on who is considered a worker in the laws of Uganda, if you cannot read the laws yourself, I will help you. 

Madam Speaker, it is high time we have workers represented in the East African Legislative Assembly for the clear reasons that are known worldwide. As we debate, I beg colleagues that we must consider workers to be represented in the East African Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.10
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know at this moment it may not be possible to increase on the numbers of our representatives. It is very clear that we have only nine and if we have only nine, then they are the only ones we may categorize.

Madam Speaker, our Rules of Procedure state that we should have representation from all the political parties, shades of opinions and interest groups. As for me, what rings a bell in my mind is that the four categories are very clear - the three parties we have and then the independents. Those are four slots. For the remaining slots, we can look at the other interest groups like the youth, people with disabilities, and then the workers; that would make it seven. I do not know whether the army is really an interest group. However, if they are, we may disregard them for EALA’s sake.

Madam Speaker, when you add the four to three, we shall have seven and remain with only two, which then brings us to the numerical strength. It is from there that we can see how we can share; the women can come in or other interest groups.

I believe that if we go by what our Rules of Procedure say, we would be having only two positions that are not shared. I would request that in the interest of empowering our women, one of the slots should straight away go to the women and then we remain with one, which can be taken over by the majority.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ssebagala, I just want you to enumerate; I want to write down your categorization.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, my categorization is as follows: one for the NRM, one for DP, one for UPC, one for FDC, following our Rules of Procedure, and then one for independents. Those are five slots without any argument. We shall then remain with four. Of the four, one should go to the youth, the other to the people with disabilities and then one to the workers; that is eight.  The remaining one can then go to the women.

3.13
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I had wanted to propose what my colleague, hon. Ssebagala, has proposed. Therefore, I do not have much to add.

3.14
MR DANIEL MUHEIRWE (NRM, Buhaguzi County, Hoima): Madam Speaker, we have percentages of representation according to parties. I would, therefore, propose that we consider those percentages and then individual parties will consider all these other interests. It is at this point that we shall be able to know which party considers all the other interests that we are talking about. 

Remember, Parliament has these parties represented here and these Members will actually have their input and the interests of their parties will be reflected on the Floor of Parliament and in the ballot boxes. I beg to submit.

3.15
MR MULINDWA SSOZI (NRM, Lugazi Municipality, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. What hon. Ssebagala has proposed is very good but that is in the interest of equity. Here, we are looking at equity and justice and going by equity, that is okay. However, my view is that we maintain what we have and we go by party sharing because that is the justice we need. That way, we shall maintain and bring in our views properly. We shall cater for all the other parties - the workers, youth - through our party systems. Thank you.

3.16
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, I agree with some of my colleagues’ proposals. However, the numbers that are in this Parliament are not by mistake. When you see 300 MPs, representing NRM, it means that is the percentage outside this Parliament representing that population. 

When we vote EALA MPs, much as they are representing us they ideally represent Uganda as a whole. Therefore, if you say that a party which has 300 MPs be represented by one like a party that has two MPs, you are saying that the 20 million outside this Parliament should be represented equally like the 500 people that are outside this Parliament.

Secondly, I heard my senior colleague saying that NRM can then have one member representing the disabled and then the others. I do not know whether it is not possible for the one representing FDC to represent the disabled. I wonder why the disabled should be from NRM. Therefore, I think parties should look at quality and capability irrespective of the features. Thank you.

3.18
MR DAVID ABALA (NRM, Ngora County, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the committee for a job well done and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for directing us on where to pass. 

Madam Speaker, the NRM has 300 MPs and others have some numbers that we all know; therefore, I have the opinion that if we are talking about representing this country, we would say eastern Uganda would have two Members, northern two, western two and central two. That would be eight members. The ninth member can be a person with disability. 

This would be a way to take care of all the interests. It would now be the parties to fight for the two seats in each region and from there, we would have sorted ourselves properly. Thank you so much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that is where we came from and the court ruled against us. We are now responding to the court ruling.

3.19
MS MILLY MUGENI (NRM, Woman Representative, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to that of the previous speakers. I suggest that since we have not seen any shortfall in the old structure, let us maintain it that way. Perhaps, I suggest that if we are to add anything, we should look at people with disabilities because they are not represented at all. 

However, with the other comments that we are giving, I think we are overstretching ourselves. The structure that we have now is like a child who is crawling and you can order to go to school. Let us go by stages; I know we shall get there. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.19
MR SAM BYIBESHO (NRM, Kisoro Municipality, Kisoro): I support hon. Mugeni. Madam Speaker, any time all of us can be disabled. I, therefore, support her. Let this country be the first to have a representative of people with disabilities in EALA. It is because – (Interruption) 

MS KARUNGI: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, if he says we should have disabled representatives in EALA, are we also going to include the youth and any other categories that may subsequently be seen as necessary to represent us there? I thought we needed people who will just represent us there as a nation, and we leave the other issues of the youth and people with disabilities here. This is because we need to send people there to competently represent us as a country with others.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again, let me remind you that we are responding to the ruling of the East African Court of Justice. There are instructions that they gave us.

MR BYIBESHO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The reason why I am bringing this up is because when you talk of the workers, we are also workers. When you talk of women, majority of the women are also in EALA. However, when you talk of the youth, then maybe that should come in. I also support the idea of having representation of people with disability because all of us can be disabled at any time. Therefore, we should also include the people with disabilities in EALA.

3.23
MR RICHARD OTHIENO (NRM, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Article 50(1) of the EAC treaty seems to emphasise representation of shades of opinions. In this House, the political parties represent various shades of opinion. The strength of the various political parties indicates the concentration of the various shades of opinion in this House. 

I would, therefore, propose that to be in line with the provisions that require us to ensure that there is fair representation of the various shades of opinions in this House, we need to go along the way the concentration of the shades of opinion are represented in the House. That is by looking at the relative representative of all political parties.

Madam Speaker, it is in line with that that I do not agree with the inclusion of the disabled persons because disability does not represent a shade of opinion. It is just a physical condition. It is a state in which we find ourselves in. It is not a shade of opinion –(Interruption)

MR TINKASIIMIRE: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I did not want to interrupt my friend with a point of procedure. However, he referred to Article 51 of the Treaty for the Establishment of the EAC and went on to submit that it refers to shades of opinions. It is totally a different article. It is actually Article 50 and it reads thus, for avoidance of doubt: 

“The National Assembly of each Partner State shall elect, not from among its members, nine members of the Assembly, who shall represent as much as it is feasible, the various political parties represented in the National Assembly, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in that Partner State, in accordance with such procedure as the National Assembly of each Partner State may determine.” 

In this national assembly, as far as I am aware, we have people representing persons with disability, the youth and women - (Interjections)- I may not talk about UPDF. My major interest, Madam Speaker, is particularly the three interest groups who have never - 

THE SPEAKER: Now you are submitting. 

MR TINKASIIMIRE: I would like to raise a point of procedure, please.

THE SPEAKER: No, you are now smuggling –(Laughter)– Hon. Othieno, please conclude.

MR OTHIENO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the wise ruling. Madam Speaker, the issue I am raising is the question of concentration of opinions as represented in the House. It would be unfair to Ugandans to ignore the majority or the way they decided that their shades of opinion be represented in the House. 

It is along that line that I propose that we maintain what we have so long as we ensure that in as much as it is feasible, we represent all the various shades of opinion represented here. If it is provided that disability is a shade of opinion, let it be so. Thank you.

3.28
MR REMIGIO ACHIA (NRM, Pian County, Nakapiripirit): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is only for a few years that we have been in a democratic Parliament, after the 1995 Constitution came into place. We came from a different dispensation of no-party democracy and the Movement. We should not lose the basis for which we are here in this House, which is a multiparty dispensation.

In my opinion, Madam Speaker, this is a very easy question. If you go by the percentages, and if this House agrees, whatever percentages there are by the different shades of opinion, it is incumbent upon us to address the directive of the East African Court of Justice. We cannot run away from that ruling. 

What we need to do is: if NRM with its majority gets six members, this House must make sure that the six represent the different shades of opinion - gender, youth, workers and people with disabilities. Why are we wasting time? Let us make command here that those that have three members must make sure that they bring a person with disability and those that have six must make sure that there is a youth and a worker. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.30
MR JAMES WALUSWAKA (NRM, Bunyole County West, Butaleja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. It is now high time that some of us who belong to political parties see to it that we have a working relationship with others. To me, since we do not have time, because you brought this issue because of time, I would say that we remain as we are. 

This is when parties that work together with other parties will know that working together with others is good. When we say that we provide for each and every interest group, we may not complete this. I would like to request that we remain as we were. If, for example, DP, UPC or FDC bring candidates that we feel are okay, if they work well with us, we will work together and vote. I thank you.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: Madam Speaker, listening to the debate going on now, I am wondering whether we are proceeding correctly and whether rule 13 really needs to be amended. It seems to me that rule 13 is only misplaced but what we are doing now is what rule 13 actually requires us to do. 

Rule 13 is misplaced and that is why it is confusing the House but what it is saying is, before we conduct elections, we shall go through consultations and try to reach consensus on how we are going to elect these members. If we do not -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongalo, there is a judgement on that issue of agreeing; it was outlawed by the courts.

MR ONGALO-OBOTE: In that case, the House is trying to do what it should not do, which is doing consultations and trying to get consensus, which the court said is not correct. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ongalo, I do not know why you are disturbing the House. Leave Members to debate and then we shall take a decision.

MR AGABA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am the vice-chairperson of the rules committee and that is why I can only rise to give information to my chairperson.

Madam Speaker, I agree with you that the ruling in the Anita case was against the current provisions of rule 13. The spirit of this House and the debate now is to allocate quotas or numbers to different interest groups. In the Eighth Parliament, seven seats were allocated to NRM and two to the Opposition. One of the losing candidates at that time, the hon. Jacob Oulanyah, went to court and challenged the allocation of numbers to political parties and the court agreed with him.

In the Ninth Parliament, trying to cure what court had out ruled in the Oulanyah case, in the wisdom of the Ninth Parliament, they institutionalised political consultation and consensus in the rules. That is why one of the losers at that time, the hon. Anita Among, went to court and challenged that consensus and consultation. The court agreed with her and said it is against the spirit of Article 50 of the Act and, therefore, it was unconstitutional. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, in our wisdom, as I provide information, we thought that rule 13 as it is, is right but the court ruled against it because it provides for consultations and consensus building among the political parties. 

The reason we are proposing that the Speaker takes charge of that election and ensures that the provisions in Article 50 of the treaty are reflected in the outcome is to provide for these consultations outside the rules. The Speaker will sit with the interest groups and do consultations and come to the House and we have a fair and free voting. However, putting it in the rules - the court will send us back. Thank you very much.

3.35
MS MARGARET RWABUSHAIJA (Independent, Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is important that as we discuss the issues at hand, we know that the Constitution is very clear. In this Parliament, we have people of different groups. We have the political parties but above all, it is also clearly spelt out that the interest groups must be represented. Therefore, as we deliberate, let us not go outside the Constitution. 

I would like to add my voice to the fact that we also have a court ruling, as Madam Speaker has just said. Let us follow the court ruling as we move on. I thank you.

3.36
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In my opinion, this matter can disturb our brains so much. When I look at the composition of the House, I felt that if we gave DP one, UPC one, NRM two if the law allows, FDC two, independents one, disability one, youth one, the total would be nine and all the headache would be gone. I bring that up because the two parties - FDC and NRM - are the ones leading in numerical strength in the House. Therefore, we should give them the opportunity of more numbers. 

When you look at, for instance, people with disabilities, nobody should say that they are the same with us. When we go to look for money out there, they have a disadvantage. Regarding the money that people use in campaigns, those people who are okay can have an advantage and more money for campaigns as compared to the disabled. Therefore, they should be catered for. When we talk about workers, I thought that we should leave them out because all of us are workers for now. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.38
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We had this debate in the last Parliament and it was quite protracted. We even had to constitute a small team to study the issues. That time I was a parliamentary commissioner and they requested me to be part of this team and that is how we came up with some of these changes.

We were instructed by the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community in Article 50, which talks about representation, and it says that as much as it is feasible, political parties represented in the House should be represented in EALA, the different shades of opinion in the country and the special interest groups. The underlying words are, “as much as it is feasible” and it is this Parliament to determine the feasibility of that.

Maybe where the court faulted us was in putting consensus in writing here. However, we had those consultations and the debate was between political parties and where we should go numerically. However, we are alive to the fact that the quantitative test must be applied; in that, if you have a Parliament of 400 Members and you talk of shades of opinion - because Parliament represents the whole country – if you become mathematical and get a pie chart, which shade would be dominant? 

Looking at the numbers in Parliament, that is how we eventually said NRM will have six, the Opposition as a shade of opinion, two and the independents one. Probably, what we need to address ourselves to is: has that changed in terms of the constitution of this House? Has it materially changed? My view would be -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA LATIGO: Thank you very much, honourable minister, for giving me this opportunity. Madam Speaker, I belong to the committee and that is why I am seated here. I can understand the difficulties that members have, we have the same difficulties, we do not disregard the proportions that exist in this Parliament but we cannot put it in the rules, we can still use that proportion to achieve the objectives of the court ruling and provisions of the treaty.

If you examine you will find that political parties are specifically mentioned as a frontline entity, and if they are addressed then the other ones become feasibilities. If in this House we agree that we shall send a person with disability, we will send a youth, a woman then that is why we crafted this proposal. 

Then you as the chair of the elections will look at the nominations that come to represent the parties, and say does it have the diversity that the treaty requires.

Alternatively we can agree that besides addressing the existence of the parties in Parliament, we make this provision and then even if a candidate of FDC is nominated it is quite obvious because of numerical strength that the candidate of the NRM will be elected. At the end of the day the NRM will have the same majority that it wants. We cannot craft it in the rules because that restriction is going to take us back to court and we will have to suffer unnecessary stress.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it was hon. Baryomunsi who was on the floor, in making these proposals. Let’s not forget that we are part of the CEDAW; we cannot have just one woman of the nine; they must be at least a third.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I want to thank professor for the information. I think that discussion was necessary Prof. Latigo because the treaty says political parties represented but unless you agree on the numbers definitely if you subjected everybody to the vote you can have all the nine members NRM. That’s why there was need for agreeing that the other parties get these numbers. So, that agreement can be secured but maybe we leave it out of the rules since the court has said so.

In my view, I don’t think in terms of the composition of Parliament there has been a material change in terms of proportions and we could maintain the numbers. Has FDC become 40 percent or the entire opposition? I think the proportions have remained more or less the same. What we did that time was to advise that when the parties are nominating their candidates, they should make sure that the interest groups are catered for in other words you don’t bring all the six members as men or women but to make sure you balance. Where feasible the other aspects like the youth, the PWDs, the elderly should be integrated in the candidates whom the parties bring. That was the spirit which we discussed then. I wanted to give that institutional memory because I was part of that committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think what hon. Baryomunsi is saying is that we cannot put the proportions in the law. I think let’s just agree that we have an obligation to ensure that feasibility and then they work on it.  So put that proposal of your amendment.

3.45
MR CLEMENT OBOTE (NRM, Kalaki County, Kaberamaido): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that that rule 13 of appendix B of our rules of procedure be amended to read as follows: “The speaker shall ensure that the members elected under rule 12 in as much as is feasible represent the various political parties represented in the House, shades of opinion, gender and other special interest groups in Uganda.” I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members the question is that rule 13 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: We are only doing that we are not doing the others. The rest of the rules of procedure will be discussed later after the budget but this one was important.

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENTS ACCOUNTS OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL’S REPORT ON DISTRICT LOCAL GOVERNMENTS AND MUNICIPAL COUNCILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2014/2015

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, that report was presented, members said they wanted time to go and read especially about their districts you can now present your update from the district. Members you are free to debate on the Local Governments Accounts Committee the report was presented it’s in your IPADs.
You had wanted to read about your areas and how they fared. You are subscribing to the report can I put the question.
I put the question that the report of the committee on the Local Governments Accounts be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS ON UGANDA’S FOREIGN MISSIONS

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the minister informed me that he is going away for the OAU so let’s defer that until the other week Tuesday.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SECTORAL COMMITTEE OF DEFENSE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS ON THE STATE OF GOVERNMENT PRISONS IN UGANDA

3.49
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Judith Nabakoba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to present a report on the Committee of Defence and Internal Affairs of Parliament in accordance with rule 175(2) and 177 of the Rules of Procedure.

The Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs conducted oversight visits to selected Government prisons in the country during the period of August and September 2016.

Of the existing 249 Government prisons the committee specifically sampled the following prisons: Luzira, Bugungu, Kirinya, Morokatipe, Tororo remand, Tororo main, Nakasongora, Mbarara, Bushenyi, Rimi, Mubuku, Ibuga, Fort Portal, Isimba, Masindi, Maluku, Mbale and Kigumba.

Objectives of the field visits 
    1. To assess the conditions of life of inmates.
    2. Evaluate the extent of compliance to established laws in the treatment of inmates.
    3. Appraise the interventions of the rehabilitation of inmates and assess the challenges faced in the management of prisons.

The methodology 

We undertook on spot visit assessments in the prisons, received memoranda from inmates and held meetings with officials of Government prisons service.

We reviewed some of the relevant documents, notably the Prisons Act, 2006, the 1995 Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules on the Treatment of Offenders/Prisoners.

Establishment and Functions of Uganda Prisons Service
Uganda Prisons Service derives its mandate from Article 215 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995. In order to operationalise the constitutional provision, Parliament enacted the Prisons Act, 2006.

The functions of the Uganda Prisons Service include:
    (i) Ensuring that every person is detained legally in a prison, kept in humane safe custody, produced in court when required, and lawfully discharged or removed from prison.
    (ii) Facilitating social rehabilitation and reformation of prisoners through specific training and education programmes.
    (iii) Facilitating the re-integration of prisoners into their community.

The Uganda Prisons Service is further guided by the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, which emphasises that prisoners have a right to decent accommodation, good feeding, medical care, among others.

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

The committee noted that Uganda Prisons Service currently operates 249 prisons that were designed to provide a total carrying capacity of a daily average of 16,612 prisoners. As at June 2016, the population of prisoners stood at 48,422, exceeding the available capacity by 31,810 inmates and reflecting an occupancy level of 291 per cent.

All prisons are overcrowded, housing up to three times the designated holding capacity. The overcrowding remains a major problem in prison management around the country to the prison administrators and inmates themselves. In Luzira Upper Prison, for instance, there were more than 3,000 prisoners in a system which was designed for only 600 inmates. In Mbale main prison, there were 840 inmates yet it was built to have 336. Jinja Main Prison had 1,141 out of the 336 required and Jinja Remand Prison had 868 out of the 340 prisoners required.

The committee observed that overcrowding in prisons relates to challenges in the justice system, for instance, shortage of judicial staff, prosecution officers, investigators, missing of court files and fewer high court sessions. In addition, unnecessary adjournments by judges greatly negates the trial process by making the cases drag in court for a longer time thus the high number of un-convicted offenders in prisons custody that eventually contributes to the rise of the prisons’ population.

The committee further noted that there are 209 prisoners who have been sentenced to death over the years and some of them are of advanced age, which also contributes to prison congestion.

The committee noted that the growing prisons’ population has overstretched existing physical facilities and put pressure on services like water, leading to unhygienic conditions and other unacceptable behaviour.

The committee, therefore, recommends as follows:

    (a) The development budget of the Uganda Prisons Service should be increased to enable rehabilitation and construction of more prisons to accommodate the increasing number of prisoners, and to reduce congestion in the available facilities.

    (b) Courts should employ alternatives to imprisonment such as community service, suspended sentences and affordable fines to ensure that the many petty offenders do not congest the prisons.

    (c) The advisory committee on the Prerogative of Mercy, whose task is to advise His Excellency the President as per Article 121 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, should make recommendations regarding the death penalty given that since 1999, no executions have been carried out.

    (d) Government should appoint more judges or re-appoint retired judges on contract to assist in reducing backlog of cases.

    (e) Remandees whose cases lack sufficient evidence should be given bail as prosecution gathers more incriminating evidence.

Delay in the Administration of Justice to the Prisoners

Field visits of the prisons facilities revealed that at the end of June 2016, there were 26,865 prisoners, representing 55 per cent on remand awaiting trial, which clearly outnumbers the convicted prisoners. The convicted prisoners were 21,284, representing 44 per cent. As a matter of fact, the population of the inmates on remand in most prisons triples the population of the convicted prisoners, hence the increasing numbers in these places of detention.

The committee was informed that the prisoners who were committed to the High Court stay on remand for long periods, ranging from two to five years, before trial. The biggest cause of this challenge is the inadequate number of judges at High Court level, which currently stands at about 44, for a country which has 117 districts.

The inadequate number of judges has left the inmates desperate for criminal sessions, which in most cases are held only twice and can only permit a hearing of 40 cases per session, compared to the thousands of prisoners on remand.

The committee noted that the delivery of justice is a coordinated process in the Justice Law and Order Sector, whereby all departments within the sector have to be aligned and coordinated simultaneously to perform all activities in the process.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs should recruit more High Court judges in order to increase on the frequency of court sessions.

Prisoners Pending Minister’s Orders 

Countrywide, there were 40 inmates at the beginning of 2016 to 2017 who are still awaiting minister’s orders to determine their respective fates. The mandate to grant orders in respect of persons to whom a special finding of “not guilty by reason of insanity” under section 48 of the Trial on Indictments Act, Cap 23 is with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. The provision is to the effect that a person found not guilty by reason of insanity should be remanded to a prison, mental hospital or other suitable place of safe custody as per the minister’s order. 

In this respect, the individual remains on remand until such a determination is made. Once the Minister responsible for Justice has issued the order, the superintendent of the custodial facility where the individual is detained is then required, by law, to issue regular reports to the minister regarding the individual condition, history and circumstances. When considering the periodic reports, the minister may order the prisoner to be discharged. 

Failure to adhere to the above procedure can cause a predicament to the Judiciary and indeed prisons system resulting in the overcrowding and violation of the rights of these mentally challenged prisoners where some prisoners spent between one to 17 years in prison until the decision of Justice Batema in the case of the Bushoborozi Eric v. Uganda, where it was  held that where the trial court makes a special finding that the criminal lunatic is not guilty by reason of being insane, the judge must make special orders as to the discharge or continued incarceration of the prisoner in an appropriate place. 

The trial court must order, in line with sub-section (4) of section 48 of the Trial and Indictments Act that the superintendent of the mental hospital, prison or other place detaining the prisoner makes periodical reports to court, which may issue appropriate special orders for the discharge of the criminal lunatic or otherwise deal with him or her.

The registrar of the court shall periodically and in any case, not later than three years from the date of the last court order or report from the institution keeping the prisoner, make a production warrant for the prisoner and present the case file before the High Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate special orders. The registrar may appoint counsel on state brief to assist court in revisiting the cases pending the judge’s special orders. 

As a result of the above decision, the grant of orders in respect of persons whom a special finding of not guilty by reason of insanity currently lays with the Judiciary. The challenge, however, is that section 48 of the Trial and Indictments Act is still present on the Uganda’s statute book. It remains the duty of this Parliament to strike it out by amendment.

This is especially so because of the fact that the detention of these criminal lunatics and others who are being detained, pursuant to section 41 of the Trial and Indictments Act, is dependent upon the decision of a member of the Executive and not an independent tribunal also renders their detention arbitrary and unlawful under the International Human Rights Law, which in the committee’s view, lends precedence to the reasoning of the hon. Justice Batema’s case.

The committee, therefore, recommends the minister’s power under section 48 of the Trial and Indictments Act should be transferred, by amendment, to the judicial officer handling the case. It should be noted that this proposal should consequently affect Section 113 of the Magistrate’s Court Act where the minister currently has powers to make orders for further confinement of a criminal lunatic.

In addition, there is need for periodic mention in courts of law in cases involving persons detained in prison pending orders of the minister for purposes of follow up. Clear guidelines should be developed for the Police, Prisons, DPP and Judiciary for dealing with people who are mentally impaired.

Mistreatment of Prisoners

The committee observed that there were allegations of deliberate physical and psychological mistreatment of inmates. The inmates informed the committee that in many cases, these abuses occur in Police stations, military bases or in pre-trial facilities. Pre-trial detainees are often at the greatest risk of being mistreated, according to the inmates in the prisons because they are often under the sole control of the detaining authorities who may perceive torture and other forms of ill treatment as the easiest and fastest way to obtain information or extract confession.

The prisoners reported that the common methods of torture and mistreatment include beating, denial of medical treatment or death threats and these culminate into false confessions, which the court bases on to convict the suspect. When the statements are contested by the offender during trial, the defence team rarely succeed.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Human Rights Committee should follow up this matter with a view of establishing more facts in relation to torture and mistreatment of prisoners.

Secondly, as an institutional measure, the prisons’ authorities must strengthen the monitoring department to periodically interface with the inmates to identify cases that affect inmates.

Inadequate Legal Representation of Prisoners

The committee observed that prisoners are faced with the challenge of legal representation because most of them are too poor to afford to pay legal fees due to their background. In most cases, some of the offenders are not aware of their rights because they are perceived to be wrong before the law. Some of the offenders who do not have adequate knowledge are forced to abide by the outcome of the court proceedings. The inmates informed the committee that they are not given time to discuss their cases with lawyers to give them the gist of the offences.

The committee was informed that there are arrangements made between Uganda Prisons Service and Uganda Law Society to provide legal aid services to inmates. However, there are still inadequate due to the high number of criminal cases.

Hard-to-reach areas do not receive legal representation at all due to inadequate facility given to the lawyers to represent the suspects and also legal aid is not regulated by any legislation. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Uganda Law Society should encourage lawyers to provide pro bono services.

The state has to honour its obligation to provide legal services for criminal suspects. The committee requests Justice Law and Order Sector to encourage lawyers to take on capital offences rather than minor offences when providing legal representation under pro bono services. 

Distance between Prison and Adjudicating Courts of Law

The committee observed that due to misalignment of criminal justice agencies, there are long distances between prisons and adjudicating courts. For example, the distance between Buhweju and Bushenyi is 40 kilometres; Amuru and Kiridima 50 kilometres; Tororo and Malaba court 17 kilometres; Jinja and Iganga 41 kilometres. In addition, Kibaale, Hoima and Buliisa have to travel to Masindi while Butambala, Gomba and Mpigi travel to Nakawa for High Court sessions. 

This cumulatively results into huge costs to Government in terms of fuel and maintenance of vehicles, delayed production of prisoners to courts and also a barrier to justice on the side of prisoners.

Most challenges are encountered on implementation of urgent court directives to produce a prisoner to court, especially when there is no standby transport logistics.

The committee recommends that location of prisons should be well aligned and adjacent to the adjudicating courts of law to reduce the distance prisoners have to be transported to and from the courts of law.

The committee further recommends that more vehicles be purchased for transportation of prisoners to courts.

Lack of Land Titles and Regularised Tenancy Agreements

The committee was informed that the current 249 prisons are located on different types of land in terms of ownership; 130 prisons are on central government land; 60 on Buganda Kingdom land; 19 on other kingdoms and 40 on districts local government land.

Most of this land is neither surveyed nor titled, which exposes it to illegal encroachment by private investors and groups of local people. For example, Luzira prison, which traditionally had 261.671 acres of land, is currently seated on 169.88 acres.

In July 2006, Uganda Land Commission signed a tenancy agreement with Son Fish Farm Limited and gave out 203.3 acres out of 332.4 acres of land belonging to Bugungu prison.

In January 2012, an additional 42.3 acres were allocated and leased to the same investor for a period of 10 years. In 2012, part of Mbarara prison land was claimed and taken by private investors and the matter is still in court.

In addition, in 2004, part of the land belonging to Rwimi Prison farm was attached by a group of encroachers who have claimed that land and this matter is in court. 

Although prison service has been receiving funds for surveying and titling of prison land, the process has been slow.

The committee observed that the prisons service has not generated much from the Public Private Partnership policy yet it continues to lease land to private investors.

The committee recommends that prison service management should expedite the land surveying, and title acquisition process to avoid future illegal encroachments on prisons land.

The committee recommends that Uganda Land Commission should stop giving away prison land to private developers who do not pay returns to the prisons service.

Gender Mainstreaming in Prisons

The committee observed that the design of prisons structures do not take into consideration various gender requirements. 

Female prisons are designed and constructed as those of male. For example, in Masindi prisons, both male and female prisoners use the same entrance. Besides, female prisoners receive inadequate sanitary towels and underwear.

In addition, the female prisoner’s facilities do not match the required standards for keeping a mother with her child, no special wards for breast feeding mothers and no care centres for pregnant mothers. Some inmates stay with their children as old as four years in cells, which is against the Prisons Act Section 59, which restricts that the age should be limited to 18 months.

The committee recommends that gender should be mainstreamed in all prisons activities to increase on gender sensitivity of the prisoners. The gender   monitoring   office   should   be   strengthened   to   monitor integration of gender in prison life and activities.

Night Soil Bucket system

The committee noted that the prisons service has eliminated use of buckets in 186 out of the existing 249 prisons in the country.  However, the committee observed with concern the use of night soil bucket system in 63 prisons, which still exist, for instance, in Buhweju, Ibanda, Mitooma prisons, among others.

The committee further noted that some inmates are kept in uniports, which do accommodate water borne facilities. This poses sanitation challenges not only to the prisoners themselves but also to the prison warders.

The committee recommends that prisons should provide adequate sanitary facilities and total elimination of the night soil bucket system in all prisons in Uganda.

Inadequate Staff Housing and Accommodation

In almost all prisons visited by the committee, it was found out that most of the prison institutions have colonial age housing facilities, which are currently dilapidated and are in appalling state.

The committee further observed that poor housing and working conditions of the prison staff, especially those of the lower cadres, reduces their morale. Thus they are unable to fully dedicate themselves to working in such unbearable conditions.

It is ironical to note that the same prison officers who are supposed to rehabilitate the prisoners suffer the same consequences as the prisoners. This explains the high attrition rate of 250 staff in the prisons per year.

The committee was informed that some prison officers spend part of their meagre paid salaries to rent houses outside while others who cannot are forced to stay with their families in congested dilapidated structures.

In addition, some staff share houses whose space is quite small and cannot accommodate their families. This poor housing condition does not only infringe on the rights of the prison officers but also lowers their morale.

The committee also observed that prison staff still sleep in uniports and houses roofed with asbestos sheets, which have been banned worldwide because they cause cancer.

The committee appreciated the on-going construction and renovation of accommodation facilities in some of the prisons such as Nakasongola, Mbarara and Luzira. However,  there  is  still  a  lot  to  be  done  to  improve  on the accommodation facilities of prison officers.

The committee, therefore, recommends that prisons management should prioritise construction of decent accommodation for staff.

Rehabilitation Programmes in Prison Services

Rehabilitation and reformation of offenders is one of the core functions of Uganda Prisons Service. It comprises of various interventions and mechanisms that are employed in various fields to provide purposeful activities for prisoners to challenge their offending behaviour, provide basic education to tackle illiteracy, and equip them with life and work skills.

In order to ensure that the prisoners are reformed during their incarceration and are properly re-integrated into society as law abiding citizens, Uganda Prisons Service has embarked on a number of programmes to empower prisoners to achieve social rehabilitation such as agriculture, tailoring, carpentry, art and craft in order to impart skills into these inmates and prepare them to face life after they have served their sentences.

The committee, however, noted that some prisons such as Mbarara and Bushenyi do not have such programmes for rehabilitation and the prisoners are only hired to work in private farms. This has made many of them stay idle in prisons and some even leave the prisons worse than they joined.

His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Uganda, directed that starting 2017 this year, all Government ministries, departments and agencies should procure furniture from Uganda Prisons Service in order to boost its production. The committee however noted that whereas it is a good idea to encourage and promote local consumption of furniture, Uganda Prisons Service does not have the capacity to produce the required furniture for all Government agencies. 

This is because the administration of prisons experiences inadequate funding, limited space for production and inadequate and obsolete equipment. In addition, the prisons service relies on manpower provided by inmates who are not well trained in carpentry and joinery to produce furniture that can compete with imported furniture.

The committee recommends that Government should enhance budgetary allocations for the prisons service to bolster implementation of the presidential directive as well as funding for rehabilitation programmes to improve the lives of inmates while in custody.

Agricultural Production in the Prisons

Uganda Prisons Service continues to pursue agricultural activities as an essential component of its operations in the areas of food, cash crop production and livestock rearing. A tour to different prisons indicated that Uganda Prisons Service remained one of the Government institutions with the largest acreage of land in the country. Agricultural production in Government prisons is one of the many rehabilitation programmes that are aimed at providing correctional services to inmates as well as equipping them with agricultural skills. 

In the financial year 2015/2016, for instance, Uganda Prisons Service produced food worth Shs 8.5 billion while in the financial year 2016/2017, Shs 14.22 billion is projected to accrue from prisons, assuming there are no erratic weather conditions.

Early this year, His Excellency the President of the Republic of Uganda directed the prisons service to increase agricultural production through seed multiplication of cotton and maize in order to supply the growing cotton industry and population. The committee, however, noted that agricultural production in the prisons service continues to encounter a wider range of challenges such as irregular rainfall patterns due to climate changes, continuous leasing of prison land to private developers, low levels of mechanisation, frequent breakdown of farm tractors and reliance on manual labour provided by the inmates who do not have expertise in agricultural production.

Madam Speaker, the committee, therefore, recommends that Uganda Prisons Service should fast track establishment of irrigation systems in all prisons farms in order to mitigate reliance on nature. 

Uganda Prisons Service should partner with Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries to provide technical expertise and support in order to increase agricultural production.

Health Care Services to Prisons

Health care services in Uganda Prisons Service is organised in accordance with the general public health administration to ensure that there is continuity of treatment and care for prisoners, including those living with HIV, Tuberculosis and other infectious diseases. In addition, Uganda Prisons Service offers specialised counselling services to the inmates as well as spiritual counselling.

Currently, Uganda Prisons Service has 63 health centres out of the 249 prisons, catering for 49,839 prisoners. Most of the health centres are at the level of Health Centre II, which limits their capacity to provide adequate health care to the estimated 49,839 prisoners. This explains inadequacy of drugs in most of the prisons health units. In all prisons, the health centres are congested with few health workers and poor sanitation.

The committee further observed that due to inadequate accommodation in some prisons such as Mbarara and Bushenyi, TB inmates were sharing the same dormitory with the rest of the inmates. This causes a risk of spreading the disease to other prisoners. This is against rule 22 of the UN Standard Minimum Rule for Treatment of Offenders. 

The committee further observed that there is inadequate emergency response to ill health of prisoners. This is due to lack of trust resulting from the criminality perception of inmates by their warders, which leads to laxity, especially when sickness is reported at an early stage until it becomes an emergency. 

In addition, lack of dedicated standby ambulances in remotely located prisons sometimes lead to death of inmates while in transit to hospitals. 

Madam Speaker, the committee therefore recommends that Government upgrades prisons’ health units from Health Centres II to Health Centres III for effective medical services in prisons and increased staffing levels.

The committee recommends that Government should provide standby ambulances to prisons as it is with the Police and military to respond to emergencies resulting from ill health of inmates. Special units should also be constructed to accommodate inmates with exclusive health conditions to avoid spreading of contagious diseases.

In conclusion, Uganda Prisons Service operates under serious challenges as noted above, which require urgent Government attention, especially in areas of tackling congestion challenges, addressing land grabbing, need to put up decent accommodation for staff, providing legal aid services to prisoners, among others.

The committee would like to appreciate the prisons service for their service rendered in the country such as day care centres in some of the prisons, providing milk for children who are staying with their parents in prisons, skills development like agriculture, carpentry, art and craft and formal education. 

Madam Speaker, I beg that this report be adopted. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson and the Members of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs for that good report. Honourable members, the report has been signed by the necessary minimum of one-third. Therefore, you are free to debate it.

4.30
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to start by thanking the committee for coming up with this report. 

Before I go further, I would like to first address myself to the recommendation that the committee gave that the retired judges must be brought from their retirement back into service. I would like to disassociate myself from this and I hope the committee was not trying to bring back hon. Ssekitoleko’s proposal to Parliament. When the right time comes, we should adopt the report minus that recommendation from the committee.

Secondly, I would like to talk about legal aid services. As we sit here, there are so many people in prisons because of poor representation in the courts of law. I do not know whether I am remembering right that there was a Bill, which came before this Parliament about legal aid services. If I am remembering wrongly then it is a high time that we address ourselves to that issue or the ministry concerned brings that Bill before Parliament so that we help the many inmates who are suffering because of poor representation at that level.

Madam Speaker, what happens is that sometimes the lawyers who are supposed to present these people before court meet them for five to 10 minutes, or sometimes they do not even meet them at all and yet what they are giving before the court is what will be used to pin them down. Therefore, I see this as a very big problem that the inmates or prisoners face.

Concerning the advisory committee, these people need to advise the President because there are so many old people who are in prison. If this advisory committee was performing their role well, this would be one of the ways of decongesting the prisons. Some of these old people cannot even walk well. What are they doing there? Even if they came back to the community, I think that they cannot cause a lot of havoc and yet they are contributing to the high number of inmates in prisons.

Madam Speaker, the committee made mention of the fact that children as young as four years are still staying with their mothers in prison. It goes even beyond that. There are children of –(Member timed out.)

4.33
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, most especially now that she is a Member of Parliament. I have felt your tone about what you were reading; it was painful on your side, forgetting what you were by that time.

Madam Speaker, the committee left out a very serious observation. Most of the prisoners are taken out to work and when they go out to work, the prison officers get money but the prisoners get nothing. Under our legal rules or statutory obligations, every prisoner must have an account and when he goes out to work, whatever he does, they must pay him. Where did you put that observation in your report? I have not seen that one.

Secondly, most of these prisoners who are kept in prison are the poor and some of their cases are bail-able but there is a problem we must solve. Recently, a mother went to stand surety for her son who had been arrested because of money being stolen from mobile money. When the son was released, he ran away. Police arrested the mother and the judge was saying, “If you do not bring the money, we shall not release you.”

Concerning night buckets, in Kalungu one time, my people were arrested because they never had latrines. They had them but they were very old. They were taking them to a prison, which never had latrines too. I asked the police officer, “Where are you taking these people? You do not have latrines where you are taking them and you are taking away from here because there are no latrines. What will they use where you are taking them?” Why arrest them? Give them time to construct latrines. At least they had something to start with but there was nothing at police.

As Members of Parliament, we must look at those bail-able cases. There are a number of people who are kept in prison with bail-able cases but because securing a bail or getting a police bond, the circumstance come in demanding for money. Otherwise, the issue of latrines in prisons is escalating and whenever we meet prisons, be it in PAC or sessional committees, they confirm to us.

Finally, Madam Speaker, they have talked about the presidential directive of buying items from prisons. Does he buy them himself? Has the President got shares from prisons – (Member timed out.)

4.36
MR GODFREY KATUSABE (FDC, Bukonjo County West, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson in attempting a very comprehensive report. I have about four submissions. 

First of all, the report does not bring out a clear distinction because it was very important for the committee to look variables: dependent variables and independent variables.

Also in terms of your interventions, especially with the recommendations, to bring out the cause clearly, some of your interventions recommended were entirely dependent upon resource availability and of course, we live in a country that is resource constrained.

Madam Speaker, it would be very important for the committee to catalogue their interventions or recommendations as follows: that in the short term or the immediate term, this is what we have to prioritise, as a country and this also applies in the medium term and long run. What we are seeing in your report is like we have to do everything at the same time. That is ideal but in terms of reality, that is a bit impossible.

Your report singles out very clearly that we have to prioritise the food for the prison officers and also the inmates. As a country we have to prioritise that. 

We are looking at latrine facilities. We have to prioritise that but also congestions in prisons. We recognise that we have inmates and prison officers. Can we, as a country, begin thinking about scaling up the prison officers so that we have a direct relationship between the inmates and prison officers? 

As a country, we also need to begin thinking about the difference that the prisons make. When you walk into a prison, you leave a –(Member timed out.)

4.39
MR ANTHONY AKOL (FDC, Kilak North County, Amuru): Madam Speaker, allow me to thank the committee for the work well done, except the recommendation to recruit those who have retired from the service as judges. I do not agree with that recommendation.

Prison is a place where we are all candidate to. It is a matter of time. If you are lucky then you will never be there but we are all candidates for prison. 

I would like to give a simple example of what happened in Gulu at one point. When the councillors were debating whether to renovate the prisons, the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) said prison should not be a decent place because it is a place for people who have committed offences. However, it did not take long for the CAO to be taken to the same prison.

That proves to us that when we are talking about prison, it is like when we are talking about disability. We are all candidates to become disabled at any point and at the same time, we are candidates to become inmates in the prisons. I look at the Prison Act, 2006 and when you look at section 57(a), a prisoner shall be treated with the respect due to his or her inherent dignity and value as a human being. 

Madam Speaker, when you look at what is happening in the prisons, the inmates are not even free to talk to you when you visit them. I wonder how the committee members were talking to those inmates. In my experience, when you want to get the facts in the prisons, you have to separate the inmates from those who are mistreating them. 

For example, we reached one prison and they told us they are fed once in a day, but three in one. That means you eat lunch, breakfast and supper at once; that means you are treated inhumanely. 

When you look at how these people are paid their gratuity when they leave prisons, it is Shs 3000 in the first months and Shs 1,000 in the subsequent months. That means that the work you do while in prison, you earn Shs 12,000 in a year. The cost of feeding in prison is Shs 750 – what can Shs 750 buy today? How can a person survive on Shs 750 for breakfast, lunch and supper? I think we need to look into this.

A more serious case is about infants; section 59(2) –(Member timed out.)

4.43
MR ATIM ACHILO (Independent, Aruu County North, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and the committee for giving us that excellent report. I have two recommendations. This should come as a recommendation to the committee. The lawyers are charging prisoners a lot of money which most of them cannot afford. So our prisoners remain in prison. 

Secondly, on the transportation, there was a time I saw prisoners being transported – at the end of the day, some of them lost their lives. I wonder if these families are paid in any way – I wonder what you have to say about this. 

Then on the new-borns in prisons – it appears that in Uganda, children in prison are made prisoners as well. Yet it is not the child who is a prisoner, it is the mother who is prisoner. But at the end of the day, the babies also suffer as prisoners. 

Let me end with the issue of the judges. I think we should reject this move because, first of all, there are lawyers who are qualified and are looking for jobs. We can recruit these new lawyers to take over the positions of these judges. Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

4.45
MR JACOB OPOLOTI (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join colleagues in thanking the committee for the job well done. However, I also join the rest to request that we revisit the proposal of reappointing retired judges. 

Madam Speaker, in a country where the majority of the population are youth, and where there are so many well trained lawyers, and the unemployment level is very high and a judge retires at a higher age than other ordinary civil servants, I would not expect such a recommendation to come from a well- intentioned committee of Parliament. So I join others in resisting it and proposing that we should not adopt it as part of this report. 

Madam Speaker, hon. Ssewungu mentioned something about the prisoners who are taken out for labour and they earn nothing. I hope that in responding to the issues we are raising, the chairperson of any other committee member will convince us that in their interface with the prisoners, that concern did not arise. For those of us who stay near prison facilities, you see that prisoners trek long distances to work for the benefit of the staff of the prisons. 

Madam Speaker, there is also a proposal to buy more vehicles for the prison services. Unfortunately, vehicles do not move on their own, they must be fuelled and maintained. Wherever you go, these vehicles are hinging on stones and yet they are still in good conditions. 

Therefore, I think the leadership or the management of the prison services should be more serious; they should maintain these vehicles and use them for the purpose for which they are procured. It is unfortunate that prisoners walk long distances and this even tempts the prisoners to try to escape and in the process lose someone whom you have tempted by making them walk long distances. 
	

Finally, Madam Speaker, the committee also recommends that on the mistreatment of prisoners, the human rights committee should pick interest. I thought that all committees of Parliament are supposed to apply the human rights element – unless you wanted to mean the Human Rights Commission. Why would a committee of Parliament –(Member timed out.)

4.48
MS AGNES AMEEDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Pallisa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you committee chairperson. I have only one issue on the report. It seems to me that your methodology involved more observation and talking to the managers of the prisoners. I implore you that next time, you do more interaction with prisoners; that will give you more a better picture of the problems facing prisoners, and that will give us a better ground to make recommendations. 

Another issue that is crosscutting is corruption; corruption is a chain from the prisons to the police, up to the courts. If you had interacted with the prisoners, you would know how much corruption is involved. There are so many prisoners who committed petty crimes in prison. This can only be addressed if we pick it as a crosscutting issue. Whereas the law of community service was passed, it is hardly being implemented. That should have come up very strongly. Thank you. 

4.49
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee – but I have a feeling that they left out some important issues. I happened to work in Mubende Regional Referral Hospital for five years. And some of the prisoners have HIV/AIDS, yet they are denied the opportunity to take their drugs in time and bringing them to hospital to access their drugs. In the end, they have experienced treatment failure and many die. 

Therefore, the human rights committee should do something to make sure they visit and help these prisoners in their cells. 

The committee has mentioned that the staff do not have accommodation. I wish you could tour Muyinaina Prison in Mubende and you see what is happening. The OC is so creative that he is using prisoners to lay bricks and he has constructed over 20 nice-looking houses without Government’s intervention. What they get out of their labour, they sell to outsiders. So, I think the Ministry of Internal Affairs should visit and see how your team is creative. And such people deserve promotion and rewards because of their creativity. Not a handshake of the type we were discussing yesterday.

And finally, some prison cells do not have electricity – not even a solar panel – (Interruption)

MR AOGON: Madam Speaker, to add to what my honourable colleague has said, we are currently watching the AFCON matches. But when you go to the prisons, the fellow Ugandans there also feel like praying for the team while it is playing but they are not able to. We have not provided DStv services in the prisons. (Interjections) They deserve those facilities and it is their right to have them. 

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you very much. As I summarise, Madam Speaker, some cells do not have power – not even a solar panel to provide light. And yet we give the warders to guard these prisoners at night, exposing them to risk since they cannot even see properly at a distance of – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: I just want to inform the House that in Luuka, the OC Prisons is a woman and she has done very well on constructing houses from local resources. (Applause) So, it is possible.

4.52
MR STEPHEN KISA (NRM, Luuka South County, Luuka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Thank very much for that observation. That OC has done very commendable work to change even the prisoners’ environment.

I am standing here to thank the committee for the observations. However, I want to make one observation. Recently, I visited Kirinya in Jinja to see if I could buy furniture from there but I observed that most of these prisons do not have good facilities when it comes to preparation of meals. I spent some good time there and saw that the same saucepan used to prepare porridge is used to prepare beans and later posho. When beans get ready at 2.00 p.m. they serve them to the prisoners. Then they have to wait for three or four hours to serve posho. One wonders how a human being can live in such a situation.

Therefore, I recommend that we increase funding to these prisons because these are fellow human beings and fellow Ugandans. And all of us are potential candidates for prisons
 - (Interruption)

MR WALYOMU MUWANIKA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Kisa for giving way. The information I would like to give is that we had a meeting with one of the committees and one of the witnesses was a prison officer. This officer acknowledged that they use one saucepan to prepare meals for the prisoners. Since this information came from the prisons officers, I agree with hon. Kisa that in prisons, only one saucepan is used to prepare meals. Thank you.

MR KISA: Thank you for that additional information. Madam Speaker, I also want to add that the prison commanders should be innovative and the committee should visit some lower level prisons besides the regional prisons that they visited. Thank you.

4.56
MR ANGEL DULU (NRM, Adjumani County East, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have two observations to make. One is about the recommendation that the development budget should be increased in order to de-congest the prisons. That is a good idea but when you look at the categories of inmates in Uganda, majority of them are the youth and some of them are students that were taken there for one reason or another.

So when we are talking about increase of the budget, we should also look at how we can introduce training of prisoners in Uganda just like it is in other countries. In some countries, when a prisoner completes serving their sentence, they get training after coming out. I had a friend who was taken to prison when he was in senior six for a petty crime. Sitting for his exams became very difficult and yet he had not been proved guilty.

The other one is the number of prisons visited. According to the report, the committee visited 17 prisons out of the 249 and that represents only 6.8 percent. Madam Speaker, when you look at the categories of prisons visited, they are in urban areas bearing in mind that treatment given to prisoners in urban areas is quite different from the treatment in rural areas like in Adjumani, where I was once remanded.

You will dig from morning up to sunset; when you return, roll-call is done and you are taken inside. Whether the feeding is proper or not is not an issue; a prisoner in Uganda is treated as a less human being. So, it is so severe that if this House could consider putting in place things to improve the condition of prisoners, I will be glad to support it. Thank you.

4.59
MR BILDAD ADOME (NRM, Jie County, Kotido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I will interest myself in talking about prisoners from Karamoja. This is my first time to speak in this House. (Applause) So, Madam Speaker, with due respect, I would expect you to give me additional minutes.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, use five minutes. And do not disturb him.

MR ADOME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee chairperson and members for the good job they have done. But like I said, I will interest myself in talking about the prisoners from Karamoja. I would like to inform this House that Karamoja, through an Act of Parliament sometime back, enforced disarmament and this was done in three phases namely they did sensitisation, voluntary disarmament and forceful disarmament. Members who were got with guns during forceful disarmament were imprisoned through the court martial and many of them were in prison between nine to 10 years.

However, I would like to talk about our members of the community who up to now because they were illiterate have never been seen. The prison service has never told us where they are. We have moved right from the first prison where many of our inmates were taken, people were brought from many districts of Karamoja and many of them were taken to Moroto Prison. We have, however, followed for the record since then but many of these people have disappeared. Their families have tasked us and we have moved to all prisons in this country but nobody tells us the rightful information. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to interest this committee to find out the fate of these families. They would like to know where their people are. If they are dead, let us know that they are dead and where they were buried. Karimojong are also good at burying people without bones or something, this would prepare the Karimojong psychologically and, therefore, help them to know that their people are dead and the concerned families would complete their rituals.

Secondly, I would like to talk about the welfare of prisoners upcountry. Somebody has just said here on the Floor that prisoners in Uganda are not treated as human beings they are beyond human beings. In Karamoja, prisoners are treated like dogs and even dogs can be tamed; they call them and some people feed their dogs. However, on the other side they are inhumanely treated. They are beaten; I visited a prison in Kotido where I found prisoners who had been caned on their backs. Therefore, I would like to request that this House through the recommendations of this committee ensures that torture in prisons is reduced.

When I say inhumane treatment is being geared towards prisoners, you may not understand because here in central and some parts of urban centres, there is some kind of understanding. However, in rural areas where there is no television and many radios, people are suffering in silence. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Adome, the information you have just given to this House is serious that there are people who have not been heard from for 10 years. Can you supply the names to the minister so that Government tells us where these people are? Please, do that.

5.05
MR BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson of the committee and Members for valuable information given to this House. I would like to make an observation that this august House always makes vital observations about the prisons but it looks like at the end of the day, these recommendations are not implemented by Government.
 
Therefore, it seems to have become a ritual for us to come here and make very good reports and recommendations but at the end of the day Government does not implement them. We have talked about the over-congestion in prisons and the recommendations are always made. I would like to know from the Minister of Internal Affairs since he is here, whether there are any efforts in place to ensure that these prisons are decongested.

Secondly, the chairperson has made very fundamental observations on the issues of gender mainstreaming in the prisons. She has told us that the women sometimes shared facilities with males and that most of the prisons do not have day-care centres; no breast feeding centres and even the health facilities are at health centres II and there are no ambulances.

Madam Speaker, I was just thinking aloud; if there are no ambulances, if the health services are at health centres II, what happens to the women who are in labour? Do they just give birth in the prisons like that, what happens to them? Are there special facilities for women who would like to give birth, or want to access family planning services and other reproductive health services?

When you become a prisoner as a woman, you do not lose your rights. The women should continue to enjoy their maternal and reproductive health rights like other women who are not prisoners. Therefore, I would like to know from the minister because the chairperson has made the recommendations but what is the ministry doing about these critical observations that the committee chairperson has made? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.07
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the detailed report and they have explained exactly how our prisoners are suffering. When you commit a crime and you are taken to prison, the purpose is to correct you so that when you come out of prison, you are a better citizen than when you were imprisoned. 

However, to our amazement, many prisoners when they are released, they are worse than what they were. Do they do any counselling or corrective measures we are talking about? What happens, I think this is very important, let us help our prisoners so that when they come out, they are useful citizens rather than criminals.

Secondly, the prisoners work a lot. Some of them can make furniture and we even asked them to provide furniture for our offices; they are doing a good job and yet do not benefit. This is very unfair. Even as a prisoner who does some work and have gone to the fields to work per day work, they should be given something also so that they enjoy their sweat. The mere fact that they are prisoners they should not suffer and even when they come home, they are not fed well and so they should be treated fairly.

Furthermore, the number of prisoners is more in remand than sentenced. Therefore, we need to come out with the timeframe, how long should a person remain in remand rather than remain in indefinite. As mentioned here some can stay even for 10 years. Therefore, we need to find out how many years each prisoner has spent, what is happening and why are their cases not completed so that we reduce the number of prisoners in prisons.

Those on death row, as I imagine you receive information that you are going to be hanged and you are not hanged and you remain in prison for years; can we work out if one is to be hanged, to be hanged quickly. However, if you are to be forgiven let them be so that we do not leave somebody there in anxiety throughout.

Madam Speaker, I think that we need to help our prisoners so that they do not suffer indefinitely in prison.       
         
5.11
MS REHEMA WETONGOLA (NRM, Kamuli Municipality, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the Members. First, my concern is about the prisoners who have served their sentence and sent back home. According to our laws, they are supposed to go with a package; something in their pockets.

However, these people are not paid and because Government has refused to pay them, they indefinitely refuse to go back because they have nothing to start with. Something must be done on that.

About the recommendation that the committee made on the issue of having a health centre III at every prison, that would have been good but there are some sub counties that do not have health centres III. Therefore, if we take up such a recommendation today as Parliament, it would be binding.

The health policy is that every sub county must have a health centre III. I would also love to see that these centres are at every prison. However, some prisons are very near health centres III. Therefore, I would request that that recommendation be amended so that those prisons near health centres III are not catered for.

The other one is about the judges. I wish to add my voice that I do not support the issue of old judges. We have young and good lawyers who can become magistrates. I recommend that Government increases the recruitment of magistrates and judges because there is a problem in the prisons, as said by the chairperson. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, about three years ago this House passed a resolution to increase the number of judges. I do not know where it is stuck but we already passed that resolution.

5.14
MS JACQUILINE AOL (NRM, Woman Representative, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee. However, I know this report allows us to give ideas and widen the scope.

This report has mesmerized me. It is as if the committee was looking at prisons where prisoners are and not looking at the prison staff’ living conditions. I have been there and I think they need to improve on that.

In fact, the prisons and the police - I was in Rwanda just the other day and I was mesmerized at the orderliness and I was prompted to ask certain questions to the people I met. I asked whether they have pickpockets because we were fearing to walk with our phones. When you are getting across to Development House, your phone is snatched either by a boda boda, or by someone walking. In Rwanda, they said, this is for the consumption of the committee, for them they register boda bodas.

I would be of opinion that you liaise with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives so that all these boda bodas join a particular SACCO and they put on a helmet with a specific registration number and the taxis as well should be registered with particular SACCO and their drivers. This is because there are taxis that are used to rob people at night. At least if somebody could read a name of a SACCO on it or something, it could be easy to fall up. That is food for thought for the committee.

Talking about the criminals, in Rwanda, they said that they have a place on an island where they keep habitual criminals for as long as they learn how to work and earn money and then they are released to the community. Can’t we do better? We also have islands in Buvuma and some are isolated; they cannot walk back. For example, we have these criminals like the children that we take to Kampiringisa, they walk back to town and we see them on streets. 

I did not see a single person of that nature in Rwanda. What are friends for? We go to these places to benchmark not only for the things we go for but we really have to think outside the box and ask questions so that –(Member timed out.)

5.18
MR SSENGO KALULE (NRM, Gomba County East, Gomba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson of the committee and her team for such a detailed report.

The committee notes that the prisons service is losing a lot of land. The prisons department used to be one of the most organised departments in this country and it was very productive.

However, if they are now losing the land to grabbers, that is going to weaken the department. I do not know whether this Parliament cannot take serious action against land grabbers. We have had very many cases of land grabbing and some schools closed in the name of constructing very big hotels; a glaring example is not far away from here. It is just near Radio Uganda. That Shimoni land was given away under the pretext of constructing a very big hotel but up to now, there is not much of that hotel in that place.

Therefore, we do not take certain measures to protect land; you might find that all the prisons land is grabbed by the so-called investors. I think time has come for us to take decisive measures to protect prisons department land. 

I also note that much as this report is detailed, it says nothing about juvenile’s prisons. We used to have one in Kampiringisa; I do not know what has happened to that prison. What do you do with the underage prisoners? Where do you keep them? I understand Kampiringisa has broken down. I had expected this report to tell us what we intend to do with juvenile prisoners.

MR SSENGO KALULE: Madam Speaker, I would also wish to touch on the issue of the carpentry department of the prisons. Some years back, the prison department used to produce very good furniture. However, as of now, I do not know what happened. Is it that the good carpenters have run away? (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: You have said what you wanted to say. Now, juvenile prisons are under the Ministry of Gender, Labour and social Development. The Committee on Gender might want to take an interest.

5.21
MR DAVID MUTEBI (NRM, Buikwe County South, Buikwe): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to appreciate the work of the committee that has brought out quite a number of issues in the Uganda Prisons Service. I would like to observe that most of the prisons we are talking about today are full of petty criminals and most of the people committing big crimes are outside the prisons.

Therefore, as we talk about these grave problems in the prisons, we need to think about other institutions of Government that are causing these serious problems. As we talk today, the conduct of some of the judicial officers leaves a lot to be desired. In the past, we have been complaining about police but at the moment, there are very many cases that have been investigated by the police, passed on to the Residents State Attorney but these people were not brought to court. There are very many that have been incarcerated simply because they have not succumbed to the bribes that are required by some of these judicial officers.

Therefore, when we are talking about the problem today of congestions and all the untold sufferings of our people, we need to seriously think about the conduct of judicial officers in this country. I represent Buikwe County South where Lugazi Prison is based but I can tell you today that all the officers of Government: RDC and DPC, among others, are crying because the Residents State Attorney have refused to take people whose files have been fully investigated to court. These are some of the people who are causing the congestions and all the other problems within the prisons. I, therefore, would like to implore Parliament to take some actions. 

The Judiciary in this country is the only institution that is not answerable to the people. We are the representatives of the people but whatever they do, is being done with impunity and with total disrespect - (Member timed out.)

5.24
MR VINCENT WOBOYA (NRM, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to also thank the committee for the wonderful job. I would like to, however, point out that they should have included in the sample space some of the rural prisons. It is because while we are pointing out challenges, they are worse in some of those rural prisons. For example, if you came to my prison in Mutufu in Sironko, you will see that some of the challenges are actually beyond expectation.

I would like to note that most of the challenges pointed out like over-crowding, dilapidated buildings and poor sanitation are prevalent in this prison I am referring to. However, of all these, I would like to single out poor sanitation. Surely, in the 21st century, how can you continue using buckets as a means for disposal of human waste? We have alternatives. Why can’t Government interest itself on this matter? Why can’t we come uP with eco-sanitation toilets for these prisons? Therefore, I would strongly recommend that these prisons be provided with echo-sanitation toilets. 

The other issue that I would like to touch is access to justice that my colleagues had earlier talked about. How can’t you afford transport for prisoners for a distance of just a few kilometres to access justice in the courts in the various areas? We need to provide transport for these people to access justice. 

The other issue is about the character of some of the OCs in charge of these prisons. You did well to point out some good examples of OCs who are doing a wonderful job. However, the behaviour of some of the OCs in places like Mutufu should be monitored and checked. When you talk of abuse of these prisoners, the OCs should be held liable. They are the ones subjecting people to long hours of labour. The prisoners are cultivating Matooke and at the end of the day, the profits from these Matooke are not shared with the prisoners.


Therefore, we need to check some of these errant officers so that the prisoners are not subjected to inhuman conditions. I also finally would like to look at the cases that are provided in these prisons - (Member timed out.)

5.28
MS SYLVIA RWABWOGO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to, first of all, thank the committee for the job well done. I believe they have done a very good assessment of the situation in our prisons because at one time, they talked about one of the prisons in Kabarole. However, on the facility for women’s sexual and reproductive health, we need to commit resources to that effect in this year’s budget. That is one of the recommendations that we would expect to be coming from the committee’s report because unless we do this, we will go on lamenting about this situation and have no solution.

Therefore, we are looking forward to that in this report and also in the budget. We should also commit ourselves as the Tenth Parliament and commit resources to solve the problems and even implement some of the recommendations.

There are bed bugs in prisons; there are no beds or bed covers for them to cover themselves in cold nights and no toilet access in the night. All these issues have come up in this report. I used to think it was part of the punishment but now I know it is not and we know it is a human right for these people to have a very good environment. 

Madam Speaker, I beg Members to support my proposal to include it in our budget and commit ourselves to it so that - unless it is done, we shall not go on with the budget for the sector. This should also include the sanitary towels, which is very important for the women. Women there cannot interact with others. They keep sitting inside the whole day trying to contain the flow. Madam Speaker, this is unfair to the women of Uganda and our children.

These prisons generate a lot of money through providing labour to the communities around. We need to find out what they use the money for. I would like to propose that we use this money to improve the environment in the prisons in Uganda. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you. Hon. Ruhunda. I will invite hon. Kemirembe who will be making her maiden speech. 

5.31
MR ALEX RUHUNDA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the good report. I have been forced to speak as a member of the budget committee; we have been meeting the prisons’ authorities who have been demanding that we increase their budget such that they can improve their agricultural productivity. This has been ongoing for a very long time. 

It is very unfortunate, Madam Speaker, to hear the lamentations from the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries yesterday. If you are going to be getting to our people who are starving, you will find that we are going to resort to importing that food. Yet, the prison is capable of producing food as the buffer food that we will need in the country to mitigate this food insecurity.

Therefore, I do not know why when we have all these facilities around us, we cannot optimally utilise them. The prisons even told us that instead of these fake seedlings, which we have kept importing into the country and our farmers making losses, they are capable of making those seedlings for supply to our farmers. Therefore, it is very unfortunate when we see that we cannot even afford to utilise our own facilitates.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, when it comes to value addition, for instance, when we are talking about the good point on irrigation; for sure, what makes us fail to provide money for irrigation? I cannot understand. Therefore, Parliament needs to put her foot on ground and we make sure in this master plan which you have asked the ministry and the Prime Minister to present before us, we go into details to see where these resources are going.

It is very unfortunate that we are wasting a lot of money with Operation Wealth Creation. I am sure that there is a motion to that effect. They are running up and down - (Interruption)

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you very much, my brother hon. Ruhunda, for giving way. Madam Speaker, Operation Wealth Creation  - usually, I would like to give an example like coffee seedlings, they bring them in December and January when it is a dry season so that when they are accounting they will say, “The seedlings they brought dried.” Are you getting it?

Therefore, Operation Wealth Creation is the one even creating poverty. It should be called “Operation Poverty Creation”. The information I am giving my brother is that the persons involved are not agricultural officers. They are just people who want to make money. It would be very good as you have proposed that we let an institution like prisons make seedlings for us. 

MR RUHUNDA: To conclude this point, Madam Speaker, you know usually, when we are critical of some of these programmes, we are misconstrued. However, for me it is a fact. They brought and dumped - they first rushed in the orange seedlings in the district. It was too hot, the climate had changed; then in our area Kabarole, we still had good weather conditions. They do not know whether we grow oranges or what, they came and dumped these seedlings at the district headquarters.

If you go to Kyenjojo, all the coffee seedlings that were supplied - because I also come from there and I am a farmer - died. Worse still, the matter is that when you look at the transportation of seedlings, these are scientific things; we need these scientific agricultural experts to be the ones handling these sensitive matters –(Member timed out.)

5.35
MS PAULINE KEMIREMBE (NRM, Woman Representative, Lyantonde): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I would like to thank the committee for the job well done. Under mistreatment of prisoners; these people are not only mistreated in police stations but also in prisons. They are taken to people’s farms to work, paid Shs 3,000 per prisoner but getting back to the cells, they only give them Shs 100 per day.

We need to look into that; it is Shs 100 per prisoner countrywide. If they are taken to people’s farms to work, they get Shs 3,000 per prisoner but when they get back to the prison, each prisoner gets Shs 100. That is the truth –(Interjections) 

Therefore, this amount should be increased so that at the end of the day, these people get some money, send back home because some of them have families yet they work freely for long hours. They go at 8.00 a.m. and return at around 6.00 p.m. which is even not allowed.

In some prisons, there are inmates that are couples - man and woman. These people are imprisoned for many years and are denied their conjugal rights. We should create –(Interjections)- some places safe for these people to go. It is a human right - yes. That is my proposal. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: As I invite hon. Ariko, minister you will tell us who is responsible for adjusting the money these people receive. Shs 100, you cannot even buy a match box – (Interjections) - the what? No, but the regulations are not cast in stone and these are human beings and they want to start a life after.

5.38
MR HERBERT ARIKO (FDC, Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. May I take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and the committee for the report? I was only wondering why the fever of these adjustments of age for judges was catching up with the committee. They were doing a good job and then this thing of reappointment of judges -

Madam speaker, I thank you because you have made statements that have helped us that we shall have passed the report probably without the clause regarding judges’ ages. 

The purposes of having prisons are reformatory, deterrent, punishment and social justice. Like my colleague, hon. Kemirembe has said, the prisoners usually spend most of the time when they are in prison working and doing labour. 

What she has said is one of the things I was going to mention here that people that take prisoners to work in their farms or any other hard labour always pay Shs 3,000 for a prisoner. However, the prisoner has only that Shs 100 as a saving for a hard day’s job. Where is the social justice here? Where is the fairness and the reformatory element of our prisons here? Shs 100 for a man or woman that went to till in a garden and possibly cultivated a quarter an acre in one day, they only go back home and look forward to Shs 100.

Madam Speaker, as we pass this report, this is one of the elements that Uganda Prison Service must look into so as to see that while they are serving a sentence, they are justly and fairly treated even as we try to reform them. Otherwise, we shall be building hard core people who come to a society that they know did not think well about them.

Madam Speaker, there is the element of our prisons services becoming strategic. A few weeks ago, I was privileged to be delegated by you to preside over the National Debate Championship of the Secondary Schools Students here in Parliament. In that debate, one of the topics was Privatisation of the prison services. One of the arguments that came out strongly was the cost of running prison services; the expenditure put into feeding prisoners. 

As the prisoners labour to work in other farms, the chairperson has said that the prisons have a lot of land –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER:  I give another half a minute for privatisation. 

MR ARIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for being gracious. Why don’t we make the prisoners work much more to produce food that would feed them? And the strategic element is that if Government spends the money that is used to buy food for the prisons to enable the prisoners work more in their farms, then we will have enough food that will go to the silos and Government can save that food for periods of disaster and famine in the country. 

As I conclude, the issue of accidents – yesterday, you saw gruesome images of prisoners who were involved in an accident. A number of them were critically injured. Is there a way, as we take our prisoners to work, that we ensure that their transportation caters for their safety? Sometimes prisoners have had to walk from the prison area to the places they go to work for about six or ten kilometres. Let us treat them in a more humane way so that if they have to work in a given place, then we must provide transport for them. Otherwise, I thank the committee for the report and I thank you, Madam Speaker, for that opportunity. With those observations, I support the report.  

5.43
MR OLIVER KATWESIGYE (Independent, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the elaborate report. Like other members of Parliament have said, the matter of appointing the judges was resolved a month ago; I do not think that it is necessary for the committee to bring it back now. 

Madam Speaker, in Buhweju, we have Magistrate Grade I – this is a person who takes a full month without setting foot in Buhweju. The court is in Mbarara High Court. That means that prisoners need to be transported from Buhweju to Mbarara, more than 50 kilometres. This does not only delay justice, but also leads to congestion in the prisons. 

I would like to hear the recommendation of the committee on bringing courts near to the people because people need these services brought closer. 

About one month ago, as they were being transported to Mbarara, they were involved in an accident; most of them died and others were injured. The first person to call of course is the Member of Parliament. Therefore, I propose that we bring courts nearer to the people.

Madam Speaker, another thing that beats my understanding is the loss of files in courts. I was on the Committee on Human Rights and I managed to visit many prisons. We would reach a prison and find people lamenting that they have been incarcerated for one year or two years and their files got lost. I do not know whether it is fashionable, but most of the courts in Uganda face this problem. Our committee needs to look into this problem. 

Members talked about the hygiene in prisons; hygiene in prisons is alarming. These prisons keep women with their children –(Member timed out.)

5.46
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am looking at two categories of prisoners. One is the category of suspects and two are the convicts. I want to address myself to the issue of limited access of health facilities for suspects and convicts. Only this month, I lost one of my constituents; he died in Jinja while he was still a suspect. First of all, when he fell sick, the prison authorities denied him access to medication. Secondly, when he died, even his body was not treated – they could not even cover his body with a mere bed sheet or transport the body to his people yet his family members were not in position to transport the body. 

The question which came to my mind was, when someone is still a suspect and he or she dies in prison, who must take responsibility of transporting the body to the relatives?

There are those convicts who are in capital punishment, but also there are those who are convicted for one or two years. If they die before they finish that sentence, who should take charge of this whole process?

Madam Speaker, I have been interacting with a number of prisoners, but most of them are imprisoned on mere speculations and some of their relatives do not even know that their people are in prison. It would only be fair for prison authorities to find a mechanism to ensure that the country knows who is in which prison and where they come from. 

The other issue I want to talk about is the issue of land. According to the report of the committee, some prison land was leased out, but this could be a ploy by some mafias to grab this land. They talked of leasing for ten years – under what circumstances would prison land be leased out to some other individual yet the prison has not in any way processed a title. How do they determine which land to lease – (Member timed out.)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Ms Sarah Opendi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also want to thank the committee for the report. Specifically, I wanted to comment on what they recommended regarding the infectious diseases. They mentioned TB and that TB patients were sleeping in the same rooms or wards with those who are not sick.

Madam Speaker, I would like to inform this House that in the early years, we used to have TB isolation centres and if you moved across different health facilities, you will find these places not utilised now because we have since changed our policy in line with the WHO recommendation. That is because once a patient is on treatment, that patient cannot pass on TB to the others. However, those who are isolated are those with multi-drug resistant TB and of course the extra-drug resistant TB. We do not have very many isolation centres currently; they can only be found in Mulago and a few other regional referral hospitals.  

I, therefore, would like to inform the House that it is not that when anybody has TB, they have to be isolated; you are only isolated when you have the drug-resistant TB. Otherwise once you are on treatment, you cannot transmit it to others. Thank you.

5.52
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (HOUSING) (Dr Chris Baryomunsi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee for the well-written report. 

I usually visit prisons in my constituency, particularly around Christmas time and I encourage Members to always do that. In addition to the many other constituents, I always visit the prison population because they have their own special challenges. They usually get excited when you visit, and as a Member of Parliament, you will be able to discover a lot of things. Some of them may share with you the reasons they are in prison and you will be able to contact their families and resolve some of the issues that led to their imprisonment. 

Madam Speaker, I will comment on one of the issues that were raised; the issue of prison land. As a minister from the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, it is true that in the past, government land has been abused, including prisons land. However, I would like to assure the House that we have since put in place stringent measures with respect to how government land can be given out. 

The land policy clearly stipulates that the Uganda Land Commission should not issue leases or give out government land without the consent of the user department – in this case the Uganda Land Commission should not issue leases unless the Ministry of Internal Affairs is in concurrence with respect to land use for the prison land. 

However, Government has also appointed a commission of inquiry to look into how government land has been managed in the past and we are going to support that commission of inquiry. I also would like to put Ugandans on notice that we shall definitely cancel land titles for those who have acquired government land irregularly and illegally. And to those who have settled on or taken government land, we warn them to leave it because we want to secure all government land wherever it is - (Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I am seeking clarification. Honourable minister, thank you for giving me the opportunity unlike my young sister who fled before I could get clarification from her.

Madam Speaker, the minister is speaking on a matter that has been of serious concern to Parliament. We have asked the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development several times to give us details of pieces of land owned by Government without success. I, therefore, wonder how you can assure us that things are now under control when we have not got even a single report giving us an update of pieces of land owned by Government. 

The reason we asked that question, Madam Speaker, if you recall, is because the evil of land grabbing is intensifying in areas where Government owns land. It is as if Government thinks that its land can be used for anything; any minister can order on what that land can be used for and yet that land does not belong to that ministry but Government.

I have not had a chance to debate this report but this report should be able to distil the emergency issues of national importance that must be dealt with as a matter of priority. 

We cannot imagine – 

THE SPEAKER: But what is the point of clarification? (Laughter)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like the minister to convince me by promising the House that by next week, he will bring that report which we have been asking for regarding the pieces of land owned by Government. And if there is any land which has been given out, they must assure us that that land will come back to its owners – that is the people of Uganda. Thank you.

DR BARYOMUNSI: Thank you for that very detailed point of clarification. Madam Speaker, when we assumed responsibility in the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development, the assignments which were handed over to us did not include a request by Parliament to bring that report. Otherwise we would have brought it.

Nonetheless, late last year – I think around August or September - I told this House that the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development had constituted a committee to carry out an assessment and come up with an inventory of government land. There is work which is on-going to compile all pieces of government land wherever they are and once we have completed that work, we shall definitely come and inform Parliament. 

I cannot say that it will be next week because the committee is traversing the country engaging the local government leaders to know where the government land is.

5.59
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Tom Butime): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to help my brother, hon. Nzoghu, by telling him that a suspect is a suspect and until he has been tried and sentenced, he doesn’t become a direct responsibility of prisons authorities. Therefore, your relative who died was still in your hands. You should have been informed to pick the body and take it for a decent send off.

What I have realised, Madam Speaker, is that many of us lose touch with our relatives when they are on remand in prison. You reach a prison and talk to the prisoners but they have no idea when they should have gone to court. They have nothing to wear and some of them fall sick while on remand but their relatives do not follow up to find out how the prisoners are doing on remand in Mobuku, Katojo and other prisons. Therefore, we should not forget that our relatives – (Interruption)

MR KIBALYA: Madam Speaker, I have heard a statement from the honourable minister, which has made me unsettled. He was referring to the comment made by hon. Nzoghu that the relative he lost was still in their hands. The honourable minister is a Ugandan like us and he knows very well that accessing a prisoner is not easy, as he says that you can track, follow and visit at wish and will. 

When a prisoner is on remand, some of us think that they are entirely in the hands of the prison authorities and not in the hands of the relatives. Can the minister possibly clarify to us that if we have our people on remand, we are still in charge of them and so we can monitor and access them at wish and will? That is the clarification I am seeking.

MR BUTIME: The clarification will be given by the Minister of Internal Affairs who is present in the House. I was providing information to the honourable member.

Secondly, Operation Wealth Creation was established to improve on where NAADS had failed. In my view, a lot of improvement has been registered by these army officers working on Operation Wealth Creation. 

In my district, seedlings were distributed better than what NAADS did in the district of Kyenjojo; we are happier than during the time of NAADS – (Interruption) 

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think the honourable minister has a conflict of interest because he is also a soldier and soldiers are the ones who are distributing these seedlings to the various destinations in this country. Is it, therefore, in order for a soldier who is serving in a different portfolio to also give his positive opinion when the complaint is about soldiers who are not doing their work very well under Operation Wealth Creation?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the wealth creation issue will be discussed when hon. Oketayot brings a report. Let us concentrate on the prison.

MR BUTIME: Finally, not all the crops which were distributed dried or withered; many germinated and they are doing very well. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: How will my relatives know that you have taken me to Ibuga? How does the prison communicate to the families where the person is? I think this is a very serious issue?

6.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR YOUTH AND CHILDREN AFFAIRS (Ms Florence Nakiwala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to talk about the shared punishment, in particular the children serving punishment with their mothers. According to the early childhood development programme, we lose out on children capturing the early days’ knowledge, especially the first a thousand days as they are in prisons. 

In Luzira, for example, it is a bit better because they have the child care centres but in other areas like Moroto and Bulenga where I visited recently, it still leaves a lot to be desired. This goes back to the financing that is mentioned in the paper right here; that almost 40 per cent of the mothers serve with their children. This also goes to the children left at home. 

I have received cases where mothers come to my office claiming that they were sentenced and are out of prison and they now are looking for their children they left behind. They sent messages that they should go to such a person but they can no longer be traced and some were abused by their relatives.
 
We are considering providing decent visiting areas for the children below three years so that they could maybe spend two to three minutes with their mothers as opposed to the bars and behind the wire mesh. This is so that they could have body to body contact, Madam Speaker.

It is only relevant for the early childhood development and we could also think of a sharing arrangement where some of these children can be taken to care centres of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development for care until the mothers who are serving short sentences can access their children later. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.08
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to refer to page 13 of your report on rehabilitation programmes. I would like to thank the committee for the comprehensive report but as I listened, I realised that most of the challenges hinge on budgetary issues. 

Now that Government has come out and pronounced itself on prisons departments benefiting from “Buy Uganda, Build Uganda” (BUBU) enforcement, we have been working out catalogues off the businesses and the companies with the capacity of the produce they have. 

In prisons, you are producing the best furniture, food - though not value-added - and we are saying that you should organise your business. Form a commercial entity so that you can also benefit from BUBU so that we can also come in and do the skilling, incubation, look at your standard of the products and we also try to get markets for you. Therefore, go ahead and do that.

Tomorrow, we have a discussion on BUBU with the Prime Minister and I will present this proposal that you form a commercial entity so that you exhibit your products. However, when you go there, you do not know whom to refer to, we sometimes buy tables, flags and many other products but when you want to negotiate with anybody, they say the person in charge is not around. Therefore, form a business and we will support you. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kania Obiga): Madam Speaker, first I would like to join the rest to thank the committee for the report. I would further like to thank the committee for undertaking the effort to go and visit these prisons so that they are able to help us and the country to see how bad the situation is and to find out the areas where improvements have been made. 

I would like to assure you that the ministry responsible for prisons takes this report in good faith and we shall work with you, as a committee and this Parliament, to ensure that whatever we can implement within our collective capacity and capacities of the resource of this country, we shall do.

Secondly, I would also like to emphasise one point, which Dr Baryomunsi made about the opportunity for you, honourable members, to visit the prisons. At your level, nobody is going to stop you from visiting any prison for any purpose of monitoring what is happening there. 

If you do get an obstacle - because an individual in prison for security reasons may want to ask questions - just let us know and you will have the opportunity to visit the area; not only because these are prisoners but your voters. Remember if you visit a voter in that difficult time, chances are that by the time he comes out he will really give you his vote. 

It is not only for that but also because of our responsibility as MPs to ensure that the services in our areas are improved. Please take the opportunity and help us so that we can help the prison services.

Secondly, I know you have made very many useful comments; I do not have the time to go through all of them but I will make some general comments and answer some of the questions.

However, I thought I should remind us that the mission of Uganda Prisons Services which was enacted here and which still remains is, “To contribute to the protection and development of society by providing safe, secure and humane custody of prisoners while placing human rights at the centre of their correctional programmes.” That remains the motive, mission and the goal of the Uganda Prisons Service. There may be diversions from that but those are not intentional. 

If you want to appreciate the current situation in the Uganda Prisons, unfortunately, we have to put our minds back a few years from now on how it was and how it is now to appreciate whether there has been some changes.

Many of our prisoners used to go naked but because of your budgetary allocation, you have made it possible that today, our prisoners - those convicted and those on remand - are dressed. That credit goes to Parliament and Government.

As the chairperson reported, what you call the night soil pails - this is a system where inmates use buckets to ease themselves at night. However, because of the resources you have provided, we have removed that system from about 186 prisons of the 249. We have therefore made some efforts. 

If anything bad happens in the prisons, it is not because we want it that way; it is because of the limitations, like my brother Akol said. There was once a great leader before we came here who was a Vice President of this country. He was told to improve the prisons but he did not. However, when his Government fell and he was imprisoned, he regretted the conditions there. We do not want to go to prison or our relatives to go there but prisons are inevitable. 

The Uganda Prisons Service have been able to produce in the last season 42.6 metric tonnes of maize grain, which they used for feeding secondary school children in Karamoja. However, they were let down by the weather; they could have done better. The prisons department is now able to do that. Last season, they were able to produce 408 metric tonnes although they had budgeted to produce 688 tonnes but again, they were let down by the weather.

Maize production; as we talk, Uganda Prisons produces 50 per cent of its food. I am grateful, Madam Speaker, that you mentioned Mubende and Luuka and a few other prisons. In improving the welfare of these people, there is a directive from the headquarters that whatever resources a district prison commander can use to innovate, the prison headquarters will provide the commander with iron sheets from the SACCO.

The Prison Service has a very good working SACCO from which they buy iron sheets and provide to those people who have made bricks and have other material. This is being done in quite a number of prison stations. However, the truth is that it is not enough. Many of our officers are still poorly housed.

Nevertheless, from a professional view, when you visit these prisons, you will realise that three quarters of the individuals working there are humane. Perhaps there is one or two who mistreat prisoners or who do not want to take them to hospital but the majority are very humane.

Therefore, it is our duty to make sure that the other quarter that is not doing well is weeded out like any other human weakness –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I had the minister was keenly following the debate and has read the report. In fact, that report should help you to come to this House to ask for help.

However, the way you are talking makes it difficult for you to provoke sympathy that can help you improve. You are saying that everything has improved. However, what the report is saying is that some of your administrators are very cruel to the inmates. There is a lot of mistreatment of the inmates and you are aware of that. Therefore, what action have you taken against those people who brutalise inmates? That is the kind of response we want from you. How can we help you to improve?

You cannot say that you are humane to prisoners when you have 63,000 people for a capacity of 3,000. We want you to acknowledge that the committee has done a good job for you to diagnose the crisis in the prisons so that you can now translate that into the kind of help that you can get from Parliament.

However, when you cover it up, who is going to help you? The committee has done a good job for you. Acknowledge the fact that the Prison Service is in a bad state. Do not look back 30 years. We are looking at prisons now. Uganda has grown; we are not moving at a speed of 30 years ago.

You have to tell us how we can help you, honourable minister. Do not just cover up the matter. I would like to thank the Government Whip for appointing this lady to preside over this committee because she is looking at it with the idea of helping to make justice real to the prisoner but you are just covering it up.

I, therefore, want clarification on that issue. Why are you not taking this report seriously and instead lamenting about the past?  

MR KANIA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course, I must thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for that lecture but right from the beginning, I said this is a very good report, which has exposed the weaknesses in the prison services and we are going to use it to work to improve our services.

I was just trying to explain where we have come from and what our areas of weaknesses are. Therefore, I will be there and I am sure I will have the support of my colleagues. However, there are definitely people who mistreat prisoners and that is not a policy. The issue is now to identify that and one of the ways of identifying that is for all of us to get involved like the committee has done and I am asking you to do. 

If you get opportunities to go to those prisons, talk to the prisoners and any other person and help us get that information. I can assure you that we will use it and that is my line of argument. I didn’t put it eloquently as you have done; but I am learning.

Let me answer to a few definite issues which were raised. The first is the issue of what is paid to prisoners. Right now, according to the standing regulations, a skilled prisoner, when taken out to work, is paid Shs 500 per day. The one who is semi-skilled is paid Shs 250 and the one who is unskilled is paid Shs 100. Now, this is something the ministry is studying and I am sure the committee is aware. When we met the committee for the first time, they raised this issue. They asked us to raise it and we are studying it. 

We are taking long because prison is not a place where people go to make businesses, unfortunately. Therefore, allowing people to do whatever work they can do and from wherever involves issues of discipline and how you can control them. We need to study what other countries are doing. I can assure you that before the end of this financial year, we will have informed this Parliament of what we think is a fair condition.

Definitely, for somebody to be paid Shs 100 - Even in the first place, taking somebody to go and work and they earn Shs 3,000 while the prisoner gets Shs 100 – we would rather the prisoner doesn’t go. However, there are also other reasons why prisoners would like to go out and work. 

In those prisons, one of the biggest struggles is to get out of that gate and look at the outside world. Psychologically, they get a lot of satisfaction. That is why when their relatives do not visit them, sometimes, they break down because they are unable to feel what is outside. That is why even if you tell a prisoner that he is going to work in a place for Shs 50, he will go not because of the monetary value but because it gives him an opportunity to see the outside world. I am not justifying the price but I am saying this is one of the reasons that give them satisfaction but they need to be reviewed.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, this is a violation of human rights; stop justifying the Shs 50. In the Constitution, whether they are in prison or not, they are entitled to adequate pay. The business of getting out - no, give them adequate money for the work they have done. Otherwise, do not allow them to go. You cannot run away from that, honourable minister and we shall not allow it.

MR ARIKO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. I am happy for the explanation you are giving although it is not satisfactory. 

Honourable minister, besides the explanation on Shs 200 and Shs 100 which I am sure inside your heart, you must be ashamed of, where does the Shs 2,750 and Shs 2,900 go if the prisoner is looking forward to receiving the Shs 250 and Shs 100? You seem to suggest that it is somebody else who receives part of the pay the prisoners work for. Thank you.

MR KANIA: I was referring to a situation where one of the Members said he has information that these prisoners work for Shs 3,000 per year or per month or whatever it is. The truth is they work for less than that and I am giving you the truth, not to please anybody but I must tell you the truth. If it is bad, we sit down together and correct it. The ministry is studying it so that we correct it. We are the responsible people together with Parliament to correct it. That is the issue of the payment and it involves whether the prisoners should go to work, who should be able to allow them go to work and what category should be allowed to work. 

The second issue I would like to comment on is tracing the prisoners. How would you know where your prisoner is? This was raised by hon. Nzoghu regarding the sad loss of his voter, who he was unable to see. Before a person goes to prison, he goes through a court process. Therefore, there is a point of location: if X is appearing in a certain magistrate or high court, from there, he is sent to prison. 

I would like to assure you that the prisons are one of the best record keepers. Every day, the numbers of prisoners are counted in the morning, at midday and in the evening before they are locked in. Therefore, there is no way your prisoner can get lost and there is no reason the prisons would not tell you if the person died. 

After some time, if he is not claimed, they bury him. Every prisoner who is buried, if he is within the prison or public place, is marked. If he is released, he is marked. Therefore, I am just putting it emphatically that the prisons’ records are very clean.

I would join you, Madam Speaker, in requesting my colleague who said his people disappeared from that prison in Karamoja to give me that list. We will definitely know where those prisoners are whether they were taken by somebody or not. We will know from our records and the records are up to date. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I still want to touch on that point. Supposing I am travelling to Gulu and I commit an offence in Masindi but I have come from Kidera; I am then arrested, charged and put on remand; how does my mother in Kidera know that I am in Masindi? How do you contact my relatives? I do not come from Masindi. I am just a Musoga.

MR KANIA: Now, for you, a Musoga who has committed the crime in Masindi; if it is criminal, the police will have a record of you. The prison will receive you from the police and if you have identification on you, we will record all those in our records: who you are, how we got you from the police and which police post it was. From there, there are two ways you can know it: the first one is if your relatives are following. They will definitely go to that police station and say this - (Interjections) - just listen. 

Of course at some stage a person cannot just get lost. On the other hand, — let me clarify this for the Speaker, just hold on because this is a very important clarification we have to make.  If it is criminal, you are taken to court. If it is civil, obviously there must have been somebody who took you to the police and from the police, you are referred to the prisons. There is always a trace. There is no way anybody can get lost in prisons and that is what I am trying to say.

MR ADOME: Thank you very much. Madam Speaker, I hope the minister is not taking members for liars because we have tried it ourselves. In Karamoja, we have moved to many prisons and what the prisons people tell us is that many of the Karimojong who were arrested during disarmament did not have identification cards. At that time around 2000, there were no national identification cards. Many of them did not have any form of identification.

The other point they give us is that because they were arrested for an illegality like being in possession of a gun, they said they changed their names, which truth we are not yet certain about. Therefore, I would like to inform the minister that before he thinks that Members are not speaking out and that the prison service is doing better, let us explore the best options of ensuring that we look for people. There are people who have disappeared, honourable minister. It is true people disappear in prison. Thank you.

MR KANIA: Madam Speaker, if those people disappeared in prison, kindly tell me the names and in which prison. There must have been a record and we shall trace it. 

However, to complete the Speaker’s query, in prison, there is always a public office telephone which is available to people who are unable to inform their relatives. 

In fact, that is one of the first things they will ask when booking you. Who is your next of kin? Normally, the prison officers will take it upon themselves and ring the nearest police stations or prisons to your district and say we have so and so. 

However, even in the extreme circumstance that the prison officers forget about it and do not do it, the prisoner, whoever he is, will always make that effort and reach that person. That is why I am saying in prisons, people rarely get lost but I cannot say there is nothing that they cannot do. 

Now when you lose a relative - when you are suspect or a prisoner in custody, whatever happens to you, the prisons authorities will always inform the persons or the next of kin. They will always inform you.

Therefore, I am sorry that hon. Nzoghu might have been unable to get the information but I am sure definitely it was not deliberate. I am also sorry that maybe because of resources and so they were not able to do those other things which we normally should do in respect of people who are dead. However, we certainly regret it but it might be because of lack of resources and other things.

Regarding the issue of mistreatment of prisoners, I have already answered that. I have said that there may be people who definitely mistreat prisoners but that is not a policy and we have within the prison’s authority a disciplinary measure against prison warders who mistreat prisoners. In fact, it is a very serious offence to mistreat them – the only problem we have and where we are trying to enlighten the prisoners is that when in prison, you have rights to complain against any mistreatment. Of course like any human being, sometimes they may be afraid to complain because they may get more punishment.

However, the investigative arm of the prisons tries to ensure that that kind of action is not taken against the prisoners and they are not mistreated. They may be there but there are exceptions rather than the - (Interruption) 

MR NAMBESHE: Honourable minister, you have mentioned rights and I would like to seek clarification about the rights of these prisoners to sex. We are aware that prisoners though they are, have a right to sex; why is it that our prisoners in Uganda have been denied their right to sex and even the report has gone deliberately silent on that?

MR KANIA: Madam Speaker, one of the reasons why one goes to prison is to deny them certain rights. It is society like Parliament to say that these rights should be denied or should be allowed. At the moment, our laws do not allow prisoners the right to sex. I understand there is a better word but –(Interjections)– I think the other way is easier, but it amounts to the same thing.

I promise that some of the issues which I have not been able to answer on this Floor today, we will definitely go through them. This is not the first time we are interacting and we will come back to the House and interact with you. 

However, I would like to thank my colleagues, the ministers for Lands, Local Government, Health, Trade and the Youth and Children Affairs for explaining the issues regarding children and business rights. I thank you very much and would like to assure this House that this is a very useful report and we will use it to ensure that a year from now, the Prison Service is a little bit better. I do not know how big it will be but it will depend on the – Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.39
MR WILFRED NIWAGABA (Independent, Ndorwa County East, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the report. There are only three important matters I thought the sector, particularly the prison service, would interest itself in:

One is the alternative sentence to the imprisonment which is the Community Service Order. You need to investigate how popular community service orders are, which particular offences are covered under Community Service Order and whether we can enlarge the number of offences that could be covered by Community Service Orders to reduce on the number of prisoners.

Secondly, the issue of pre-trial remand period. Over 55 per cent of the prisoners in prisons are on remand, meaning their cases have not been tried. Is there a way we can consider, especially you the ministry to amend the Magistrate Court Act, the Criminal Procedure Code with the view to reduce the number of days prisoners who are yet to be tried could be on remand in order to reduce the congestion in prison.

Alongside that, the criminal justice system of pursuing persecution instead of prosecution, especially in cases related to politics and land matters, where people seek imprisonment of individuals, not to pursue justice but to persecute them. If we do not change that system – especially in cases to do with politics and land, we will continue to have prisoners on remand yet they are not supposed to be there. 
The other point is on legal representation; our Constitution, in Article 28(3) allows legal representation in capital offenses - free legal services in capital offences. I wonder whether the Ministry of Internal Affairs, the entire Justice and Law and Order sectors have considered – (Interruption) 

MR BUTIME: I am seeking clarification from you, Madam Speaker: are we starting the debate again? 

THE SPEAKER: No. 

MR BUTIME: And therefore, will the Minister of Internal Affairs come back?

THE SPEAKER: No, these are final comments from the Opposition – 

MR NIWAGABA: I am only giving information for the minister to take note. I would need the minister to take interest in the quest by the legal fraternity for Government to come up with a legal aid framework where people will have free legal services based on an existing legal framework. Until we do that, we will continue to complain about lack of legal presentation. 

Yes, the lawyers under the Uganda Law Society offer pro bono services but those are not sufficient and adequate to cater for all the prisoners we have. 

Lastly, honourable minister, is the question of land giveaways, particularly of land belonging to prisons - and I think the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, particularly agricultural institutions which have large chunks of land that are now being given away. Unless Parliament comes up to prohibit the Uganda Land Commission and the district land boards from giving away Government land any how – in the next 20 years, when we are in charge then, Government will have no land. I hope you do something about it. Thank you. 

6.44
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the chairperson for the good report. I want to emphasise the issue of reappointment of retired judges. This should be deleted from the recommendations because we fear anything can happen. There are some judges in this country the public is tired of –(Interjections)– I do not want to name them. 

Secondly, I would like to agree with hon. Chris Baryomunsi about Members visiting prisons. Sometimes when you go there, you learn many things. Some of our people there are not even convicted; they are simply imprisoned. If you go and share experiences with them, when they finally come out, you can help them. 

Madam Speaker, there is a problem and I disagree with the Minister of Health – TB patients in the health units are on treatment but the ones in prison are definitely not on treatment and for them to sleep in the same dormitories with the others is uncalled for.

Lastly is the issue of torture and mistreatment; this one is different. I have experience because I have been in prison several times. When you are put in prison, your fellow inmates can mistreat you – actually those ones are dangerous; you can be beaten. Therefore, when you are arrested, make sure you have something in your pocket. If you do not have anything –(Interjections)– yes, the fellow inmates can seriously harass you. 

Therefore, honourable minister, work on that. I remember one time I was imprisoned and I had nothing on me; it was a problem. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to thank you; 30 Members have contributed. Now there was general support for the report except for the recommendation on page 5. I want to put the question that recommendation 4.1.4 be amended by deleting everything after the word “more judges” – the one of reappointing retired judges is the one we are addressing. That one should be deleted. I put the question that the report be amended as proposed. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the report of the committee be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Now, there is a small matter which the minister wanted – okay there is something they wanted to lay, but let us start with the Minister of Finance. 

6.47
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to suspend Rule 129 of the parliamentary rules in order to reconsider the resolution of Parliament regarding the proposal to borrow up to $100 million from IDA to finance the grid expansion and re-enforcement project so that it can be allowed to move to the committee: The motion states:
 

WHEREAS on 14 September 2016, in accordance with Article 159 of the Constitution, Government requested this august House to consider and authorise borrowing of US$100 million from the IDA to finance the grid expansion and re-enforcement project;

AND WHEREAS on 6 December 2016, this august House, having considered a request of Government to pass a resolution authorising Government to borrow, US$91.56 from the IDA to finance the grid expansion and re-enforcement project; 

AND WHEREAS this august House resolved that the resources meant for capacity assessment project implementation and sector skills assessment totalling to US$7.3 million should not be approved and the fiscal price contingency should be reduced from 5.8 per cent of the total cost of five per cent equivalent to US$4.36 million, reducing the loan amount to US$91.56 million; 

AND WHEREAS the International Development Association, which is to provide funding for the project has indicated that given the capacity constraint which they assessed and design to take Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Ltd to implement the project, plus the general capacity weaknesses in the sector; 

AND FURTHER given the likely fiscal price contingency that may arise under the project, it will not proceed to finance the project unless we approve this;

NOTING THAT the World Bank will cancel the loan unless a full project financing including capacity assessment project to implementation training sector totalling to $7.3 million unallocated and $5.5 million located funds to cater for fiscal price contingencies approved; 

NOTING ALSO THAT Rule 209 of the parliamentary rules prohibits reconsideration of any specific question upon which the House has come to a conclusion, during the current session except upon a substantive motion for recession by a vote of all Members of Parliament participating in that decision; 

COGNISANT OF THE FACT THAT rule 15 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure allows a Member with the consent of the Speaker to move that any rule be suspended in application to a particular motion before that House: 

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by this House that:
    (1) Rule 209 of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure be suspended in order for the House to reconsider its decision of the 6 December 2016 on the proposal to borrow up to $100 million from the International Development Association to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project.
    (2) This august House reconsiders its earlier decision not to approve $7.3 million as funds to support Capacity Assessment, Project Implementation and Training, Sector Skills Assessment and Sector Skills Strengthening Programmes sub-components of the project.
    (3) It authorises Government to borrow the whole amount of $100 million from the International Development Association to finance the Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project.”

Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you may recall, our committee considered that loan request and gave its position, which we agreed with.

So we cannot usurp their powers; I will send it back to the Committee on National Economy to re-evaluate before coming back to us. It is sent to the Committee on National Economy.

Hon. Namayanja has a matter to table on behalf of the Opposition.

6.52
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. A delegation led by the Leader of the Opposition and which included shadow ministers, among others, visited West Nile to assess the situation on schools, hospitals and Zoka Forest.

The delegation visited schools in Moyo, Moyo Hospital, roads, resettlement camp of Pagirinya and Bidibidi and the Zoka Forest, which has been greatly depleted.

This is the report, which I beg to lay on Table. This report has a number of observations and recommendations. It is our prayer that the recommendations are discussed by the relevant committees for correction of the situation in the West Nile sub—region. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, the report is available for your perusal and utilisation.

Now, honourable members, I had earlier said that we are suspending the plenary so that we can do the budget work. I want to further suspend the work of the standing committees so that all of you can go to the sessional committees during next week because each of you is a member of the sessional committee anyway. Therefore, let us put off the standing committees this week and we go to finish sector reports before we resume. This coming week, there will be no plenary; let us concentrate on the sector.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I respect your directive but I seek your indulgence on this matter. We are requesting the frontbench not to shy away from our committees. (Interjection) - Yes, this is true; we go to sectoral committees and suffer with ministers, particularly the Minister of Education; I am frank about this. 

We want them because they have areas to answer and, Madam Speaker, you may have heard this on the news; that we sent them back because some ministers did not appear.

MR BUTIME: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We shall oblige; we shall be there and on time. However, let honourable members know that if the sectoral committee meeting starts at 10.00a.m. they should not come at 12.00noon. Ministers usually arrive, sit there as they wait for Members of Parliament and half way they are not there. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have also got those reports where the chairperson is there with two members and the other 15 members are not there. So let us all play our roles from both sides. The House is adjourned. 

(The House rose at 6.56 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 31 January 2017 at 2.00 p.m.)

