Tuesday, 31 January 2017

Parliament met at 2.50 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister and Members of Parliament, I welcome you back to the sittings of the House. I want to thank the committees of the House for the work done to ensure that we can deal with the National Budget Framework Paper today. I also want to thank the members of Cabinet for their cooperation in that exercise. 

I am also informed that we held meetings of the East African Legislative Assembly (EALA) here. The Speaker of EALA extends his gratitude to all of you, Members and staff, for the support rendered to them during that period. This is their last session and they will be moving to Kigali to conclude the term of their Assembly. 

Honourable members, I am required under the Public Finance Management Act to establish two committees for classified expenditure. I have appointed the following to the committee on classified expenditure on accounts:

1. Hon. Angelline Osegge - Chairperson, Public Accounts Committee. 
2. Hon. John Baptist Lokii – member of the Public Accounts Committee. 
3. Hon. Alex Byarugaba – member of the Public Accounts Committee 

I am also required to appoint on budget expenditure another committee on classified expenditure. I have therefore appointed the following Members:

    1. Hon. Amos Lugoloobi – Chairperson of the Budget Committee. 
    2. Hon. Judith Nabakooba – Chairperson of the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs.
    3. Hon. Fred Mwesigye – Chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs. 

Honourable members, during the time you have been busy, we have received information that in some parts of the country there are people who are fencing off wetlands, cutting off water rights of other users and also denying them access, especially in the east. I would like to ask the Minister of Water and Environment to take interest in that issue and ensure that the citizens have access to water and that no one deprives them of that right, together with their animals. 

We would also like to ask the Members to sensitise the population on the proper use of wetlands to avert the effects of climatic change. You can see the effects of climate change; they are very visible. We no longer have to speculate on what can happen; what can happen has actually happened, so let us take action on those issues. 

Honourable members, you are welcome and let us proceed with our work. There was a matter from hon. Okupa. 

2.53
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Regarding the environment, last time we were told that a company called SGS, which is going to do vehicle inspection, was surprisingly allocated a swamp on Kampala–Gulu Road. They are now busy reclaiming the land and blocking the drainage in that area. 

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister should call upon whoever is giving that company land in a swamp on that road to stop it because it is going to block the drainage. No wonder, we have floods in Kawempe and Bwaise. 

Secondly, I would like to ask this to the Government and specifically to the Prime Minister. Government is in the process of constructing a standard gauge railway but it is surprising that on Seventh Street, on the land which belongs to former Uganda Railways Corporation, somebody has been given a plot to construct a supermarket. Tomorrow, we shall have to compensate that person because we are in the process of constructing the standard gauge railway. 

Government should stop whoever is constructing on Seventh Street along the railway line. Even where there are Inland Container Depots (ICDs), Maersk, they are busy chasing people and starting construction. We cannot accept to lose money like that. Whenever Government has a big project, there are people awarded and they are busy constructing. 

Government should come up with a statement on whether they have stopped these people who are constructing along that area. Thank you. 

2.55
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We have been unfortunate - I do not know whether it is only in Uganda or the whole world – because this sunshine has been too much almost everywhere in Uganda. The other day, it began raining and I was very happy, but then my heart told me that it could rain for a short time. 

I think we should be informed by the people in charge of that area whether we are going to have a lot of rain or little so that we can advise our people to plan well for the little rain, which we are seeing, or plan otherwise. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: On the issue of the standard gauge railway, can you tell us the road so that we know what instructions to give to the minister?

MR OKUPA: The construction is taking place on Seventh Street as you approach the Shell depot. Towards the end of the street, near the Maersk ICD, is where people are being evicted. In the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we were being told that some people are being compensated and construction is going to start soon. However, we are seeing people constructing along that road, unless they are telling us that the railway line will pass there.

2.57
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The points raised by Ndugu Okupa are taken seriously. We are now in the process of compensating people to ensure that the route for the standard gauge railway is clear. If anybody is jumping in to construct something, that will be trying to reverse the process that is underway. That issue is going to be investigated and appropriate action will be taken and the House will be accordingly informed. 

The second point is about wetlands being given to somebody to construct an inspection yard. As far as we are concerned, wetlands are no-go areas except for specifically and legally authorised activities; for example, some wetland areas can be authorised by National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) to be used for fish farming. Therefore, so long as something is legally authorised - (Interruption)

MS NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to seek some clarification. 

Recently, the President gave a directive that whoever is in a wetland must vacate. I would like to know from you how this is going to be achieved. It is not only what the honourable member has talked about; there are so many people occupying wetlands. How are we going to see implementation of this and how do you want us to participate in this, because it concerns all of us? 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, on the question of people living in wetlands, what the President said is actually correct. Wetlands are meant to be wetlands and they should be reserved as such. We know that wetlands have been encroached on by different people in different ways over different periods. However, Government is studying, in detail, the modalities of how wetlands can be best recovered without causing unnecessary chaos. Therefore, a plan is underway. We already have an atlas for wetlands in the country and that programme will be done because Government is steadfast on that issue.

Regarding the last point by my sister, hon. Karungi, I have already had a discussion with the Minister of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, Ndugu Ssempijja. This House will be given information on issues concerning drought, rains and when to plant crops very soon.

LAYING OF PAPERS

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the proposal to borrow US$ 50 million from the International Development Association of the World Bank to support the Development Response to Displacement Impacts Project in the Horn of Africa.

THE SPEAKER: The report is sent to the Committee on National Economy for perusal and report back.

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Land Fund report on the achievements and challenges for the period July 2014 to June 2015 and July 2015 to June 2016.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I need to check for the appropriate committee to handle this Land Fund report. I will assign it in a few minutes.

MOTION FOR THE PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017/2018-FINANCIAL YEAR 2021/2022

3.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Madam Speaker, I beg to present the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the Financial Year 2017/2018-2021/2022. This document is available on your iPads.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, section 9(1) to 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, committees are mandated to, among other things, critically examine Government budget estimates and make recommendations for general debate in the House as well as comment on any policy matters affecting ministries under their jurisdiction. 

In compliance with the above provisions, I beg to present a report of the Budget Committee on the Budget Framework Paper (BFP) for FY 2017/2018 to FY 2021/2022 for consideration and approval by the august House as required under section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA), 2015.

On 21 December 2016, the Executive complied with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 by laying on the Table the Budget Framework Paper for FY 2017/2018 to FY 2021/2022 and a certificate of gender and equity compliance. However, copies of the Budget Framework Paper were availed to Members of Parliament on 6 January 2017. The committee recommends that in future, Government should ensure that the final copies of the Budget Framework Paper are submitted in a timely manner in accordance with the law.

Scope 

We are presenting this report in two parts. The first part is: the Government medium term macroeconomic forecast; medium term fiscal framework and forecast; the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility; the resource envelope; proposed policy measures and indicative expenditure framework for FY 2017/2018; and the medium term and fiscal risks. Part 2 is the sector committee observations and recommendations on Government sector plans and expenditure.

Madam Speaker, I would like to beg for your indulgence. This being a huge report, it has always been the practice that we present part 1 and the honourable members should feel free to read part 2 on their own and make comments accordingly. Part 2, as I mentioned, is on the sector committee observations and recommendations. I will not delve into the methodology but I will move straight to part 1. 

Government Medium Term Macroeconomic Forecast, Medium Term Fiscal Framework, the Proposed Policy Measures, the Resource Envelope and the Indicative Expenditure Framework for FY 2017/2018

General Observations

The committee notes that the Government has prioritised the following areas for next financial year 2017/18: 

(i)	Increasing production and productivity in the primary growth sectors of the economy including agriculture, tourism, oil, gas and minerals;
(ii) 	Supporting private sector development for sustainable employment and economic growth;
(iii) 	Enhancing infrastructure development to provide affordable power and lower transportation costs for value addition and enhanced market access;
(iv) 	Improving social service delivery;
(v) 	Enhancing economic management and domestic resource mobilisation; 
(vi) 	Improving efficiency in Government operations.

According to section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management Act 2015, the Budget Framework Paper must be consistent with the National Development Plan (NDP) and with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. The Budget Committee observes that FY 2017/2018 will be the third year running of the current NDP II, hence the need to closely scrutinise its consistency with the NDP II. 

It is advisable that a mid-term review of NDP II be undertaken and remedial actions be taken on sectors which may be falling off-track. The mid-term review is critical, given the new emerging challenges in the economy. 

The committee observes that during preparation of the Budget Framework Paper 2017/2018-2020/2021, several consultations were made to ensure that the Budget Framework Paper is consistent with Vision 2040, NDP II, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the National Resistance Movement (NRM)  Manifesto and the President’s 23 Strategic Directives for the years 2016-2021. 

The committee observes that Government has shifted from the output based budgeting approach to programme based budgeting. Programme based budgeting is a framework in which budget inputs or resources are linked to the achievement of the long-term intended outcomes. Outcomes often take more than a year to be evaluated, however they are supported by annual outputs. The successful programme based budgeting approach is enabled by a functional Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and a set of well-developed outcome and output indicators. 

The committee observes that Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) have developed outcome indicators and budget estimates are allocated accordingly. However, under the programme based budgeting approach, budget allocations are highly aggregated, which limits information access to budget items, hence constraining an information-based decision making process at Parliament. 

The committee observes that there was a sudden transition from output based budgeting to programme based budgeting with no clear justification to the MDAs and without proper guidance. Consequently, the outcome and output indicators do not have baseline information and they lack means of verification for their respective performances. 

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should carry out massive sensitisation of programme based budgeting to MDAs and local governments, other end users and all stakeholders. In addition, all MDAs should determine baseline indicators and specify targets for 2017/2018 as a measure for assessing annual performance against target. This is a mandatory requirement for all MDAs that draw funds from the Consolidated Fund. 

Compliance of the Budget Framework Paper to the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 
Madam Speaker, the committee observes that the Budget Framework Paper is, to a large extent, consistent with NDP II and reflects the key strategic objectives of the NDP. In particular, Government will continue to prioritise infrastructure investments necessary to facilitate private sector growth and enhance productive capacity of the economy.  

Government will continue with the implementation of NDP II core projects such as opening up new roads, the Standard Gauge Railway, oil refinery, oil related infrastructure in the Albertine region and electricity transmission projects. These projects are in line with Vision 2040 and the East African Community (EAC) Monetary Union convergence criteria. 

The committee noted that in some few areas, the Budget Framework Paper is not consistent with the requirements imposed by section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management Act. You may refer to table No. 1 below. 

The law demands that the Budget Framework Paper should indicate actual, estimates and projections covering the previous two financial years, the current financial year and the next five financial years. It should also indicate in respect of each year, the following economic variables: average and year end GDP, average and year end rate of inflation, rate of employment and unemployment, average and year end exchange rate, interest rates and money supply. 

The committee observed that the Budget Framework Paper does not indicate projections for some of the mentioned economic variables like rate of employment and unemployment, interest rates and money supply for the financial years in the medium term. Therefore, the committee’s efforts to scrutinise some of the variables were constrained.

Madam Speaker, we present in table No.1 compliance of the Budget Framework Paper and we used this to make conclusions on where Government passed and where they failed. They failed on only two accounts out of 10.

The committee notes that the Certificate of Gender and Equity put the Budget Framework Paper compliance level at 57 per cent against the pass mark of 50 per cent. Notwithstanding, the three sectors - JLOS, Legislature and Public Sector Management - which failed to submit their Budget Framework Papers for assessment in time and given the background for gender and equity issues in the country, the score is still low.  

The committee notes that the country lacks baseline compliance indicators upon which gender and equity compliance can be premised. The committee, therefore, recommends a baseline study, which will guide future Budget Framework Papers and budgets on gender and equity compliance.

The committee notes that while the Charter for Fiscal Responsibility was laid on the Floor of Parliament and approved on 21 December 2016, the minister is yet to publish the final Charter of Fiscal Responsibility as required by section 5(2) of the Public Finance Management Act. The law requires the minister to publish the charter within a period of one month after approval by Parliament. The charter was approved by Parliament with measurable fiscal objectives to guide the country’s fiscal framework and enhance fiscal transparency. 

Madam Speaker, the committee is constrained in determining the level of consistency of the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility with the Budget Framework Paper as required by the Public Finance Management Act. The committee recommends that the minister should provide an explanation to Parliament for that omission. 

Medium Term Macroeconomic Forecast 

The committee observes that the overall medium term macroeconomic policy goal is to ensure macroeconomic stability through investment in infrastructure to support and sustain economic growth and socioeconomic transformation; low and stable rates of inflation; increased domestic resource mobilisation; maintain adequate levels of international reserves; and promote a sustainable and competitive exchange rate. 

However, in the recent past, the pace of GDP growth, level of inflation, exchange rate, budget execution targets and foreign exchange reserves have deviated from their respective programmed levels. This has compromised macroeconomic stability necessitating adjustments in management of the economy, albeit at a cost. 

As a result, macroeconomic assumptions have changed to take into account new developments that could lead to a deviation from the country’s NDP II planned path. The committee recommends that Government should stick to its medium term programmed expenditure path, ensure efficiency and effectiveness in spending and ensure improved service delivery. 

Real GDP Growth Rate

The committee notes that although the economy expanded at 4.8 per cent in FY 2015/2016, the growth was one per cent less than the projected growth in the NDP II at 5.8 per cent. The current projection further revises the overall NDP II growth projection downwards from an average of 6.4 per cent to 6.0 per cent for the medium term. Please refer to figure No.1, which is below. 

The continued downward revision of the growth rate has a negative implication for the attainment of the planned overall development objectives under the NDP II. In figure No. 1 you can note that the projections for GDP growth are in the curve on top. The last Budget Framework Paper GDP growth rate is a curve just below the NDP curve and the current projections of growth for 2017/2018 to 2021/2022 lie below, showing that the growth rates are increasingly going down. 

The committee notes that in the medium term, growth is projected to accelerate but at a lower rate compared to the NDP projection. The projected growth in the medium term is premised on the anticipated revival of the private sector through improved access to credit and ongoing public infrastructure investment that is intended to reduce the cost of doing business. In addition, increased activity in the oil sector following the issuance of the oil production licences are all intended to improve the growth prospects.

The projected growth will be affected by the uncertain global environment, lower international global commodity prices, regional market uncertainty, climate change effects and slow execution of the public infrastructure given the usual binding constraints in policy implementation that have not been worked on.

The low growth rate notwithstanding, the committee recommends that Government should remain committed to a faster execution of all planned investment projects to guarantee and stimulate the projected economic growth. 

Annual Inflation

The committee notes that tight monetary policy has helped contain core inflation within the Bank of Uganda range. The inflation forecasts continue to indicate a manageable inflation rate. The projected inflation targets are premised on changes in domestic food prices, stability of the exchange rate and international commodity prices. 

The committee notes that the unfavourable weather conditions affecting agricultural production, strengthening of the US dollar, a rise in interest rates in the USA and a projected rise in import prices leading to a deteriorated trade balance may warrant monetary tightening to deal with inflation, which could last for longer episodes if conditions do not abate.

The committee recommends that monetary authorities should continue to closely monitor all factors that trigger inflation and respond in a timely manner to contain inflation and its adverse effects.

On the supply side of the economy, the drivers of the envisaged medium term growth, that is, agriculture, tourism, manufacturing, trade and construction, should be vigorously pursued for sustainable economic resilience against any potential shocks.

Unemployment

The committee observed that according the Uganda National Household Survey (FY 2012/13), unemployment in Uganda stood at 9.4 per cent. 
The committee notes that stagnation in structural transformation towards manufacturing is resulting from limited skills in the labour market. While the Youth Livelihood Programme has benefited over 80,000 youth, they are still in the agricultural or trade sectors, which require less skilled labour force and hence unable to trigger socioeconomic transformation.

The committee recommends that Government should prioritise programmes that have a direct impact on youth employment. A review of the national curriculum should be urgently undertaken to ensure that emphasis is put towards practical skills. 

The committee noted with appreciation the growing trends in the provision of infrastructure for vocational training. It, therefore, recommends that in order to address the problem of youth unemployment countrywide, Shs 15 billion should be availed to provide for more bursaries to students aspiring for vocational and technical education.

The committee visited Namanve Industrial Park and noted that a number of projects, which were allocated land, have been delayed for lack of infrastructure such as access roads, electricity, water and waste water treatment facilities and drainage. Uganda Investment Authority has, for many years, not had the resources to provide this infrastructure. 

The committee therefore recommends that the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company urgently establishes the required 132 kVA power substation at Namanve to address the immediate energy needs. In addition, Shs 50 billion should be provided for the establishment of the drainage system and the remaining road infrastructure in Namanve. 

In the medium term, Government should identify and develop a new industrial park nearby Kampala to accommodate incoming investors. These measures will unlock the potential of creating employment opportunities for many of our educated and uneducated human resources.

Private Sector Credit

The committee notes that the private sector credit growth projection of 13.8 per cent of GDP in 2017/2018 is desirable to drive the rise in economic growth from five per cent to six per cent over the medium term. This is only possible if monetary policy easing continues and implementation of the public investment programme generates the desired growth dividends envisaged in the domestic economy.  

The committee notes that despite Government policy to reduce domestic borrowing, which for a long time has had the crowding out effect on private sector credit due to high interest rates arising from the high treasury bill rates, Government’s domestic financing in 2017/2018 will take an upward trend. The Budget Framework Paper indicates that net domestic borrowing will increase from Shs 5.3 trillion to Shs 7.7 trillion between 2016/2017 and 2017/2018 respectively. 

The committee recommends that Government should strictly adhere to the local content policy. In addition, there is need to put in more effort to combat levels of corruption that have eroded economic gains in the implementation of Government programmes. The Government should pursue efforts for external concessional borrowing as well as strengthen tax administration as alternative measures to domestic borrowing.

The Exchange Rate

The committee notes that the exchange rate is projected to depreciate by 2.6 per cent to an average rate of Shs 3,533 per US dollar. The stability of the exchange rate over the medium term will largely be driven by expected improvement in inflows from exports, NGO sector, offshore portfolio investors and foreign direct investment to the oil sector. However, should the above materialise, there could be an upward appreciation of the exchange rate, which could hamper export growth. On the contrary, should the above not materialise, especially with stagnated export growth, volatility of the portfolio investments and delay in oil related infrastructure, the depreciation over the medium term could be larger and feed into the inflation levels. 

The committee recommends that the monetary authorities should timely intervene into the foreign exchange markets to ensure stability. In addition, more resources should be provided to promote export growth as a sure means of foreign exchange earnings that will guarantee a strong trade balance.

Interest Rates

The committee observes that the weighted average lending rate for shilling denominated loans declined to 23.1 per cent in November 2016 from a peak of 25.2 per cent in February 2016, while that of foreign currency denominated loans has risen from 9 per cent in January 2016 to 10.1 per cent in November 2016. The committee is concerned that the interest rates remain high and linked with the rise in non-performing loans that doubled in FY 2015/2016 to 8 per cent of total loans. As a result, credit conditions will stagnate to an average of 13 per cent of GDP. 

In the absence of long-term capital for private sector investments, economic growth performance over the medium term will continue below potential levels. The committee recommends that Government should consider expediting pension reforms and adequate recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank (UDB). The allocation of Shs 50 billion to UDB is a welcome gesture but is still too small to generate the necessary impact in private sector growth.

The committee recommends that the interest rates for long-term capital at UDB should be regulated by the Government and in any case not exceed 12 per cent per annum. Furthermore, priority areas to be funded by UDB shall be determined by Government. In addition, Government should promote financial literacy programmes that address the importance of savings for investment as a means of promoting economic growth.

The National Development Strategy Implementation

The committee notes that the financial year 2017/2018 is the third year of the implementation of the NDP II and the economy is supposed to have registered a higher economic growth rate of 6.4 per cent; instead, it is projected to grow at 5.5 per cent. 

The committee observes that the economy has faced a number of shocks including an uncertain global environment, regional uncertainty, lower international commodity prices, climate change effects and a deceleration in the execution of public infrastructure investment. These have slowed down economic growth below the NDP proposed levels. 

The economy grew by 4.8 per cent during the financial year 2015/2016 and is projected to grow by five per cent in 2016/2017, which is lower than the targets envisaged under the NDP II. It is important to note that when you factor in population growth, per-capita growth only hovers around two per cent, which is far below what is needed to attain a middle income status.

The committee recommends that sectors should develop Public-Private Partnership (PPP) frameworks or inventories in line with NDP objectives so as to guide and attract potential investors in PPP projects. 

Recent Developments and Impact on the Medium Term Macroeconomic Framework

The committee observes that the outlook for FY 2016/2017 points towards a widening current account deficit from 5.8 per cent in 2015/2016 to 7.1 per cent of GDP. The deterioration of the external position results partly from a projected rise in imports for infrastructure development from 18.3 per cent of GDP to a projected 19 per cent of GDP, while exports are projected to stagnate at 10.8 per cent of GDP in FY 2016/2017. This has resulted into the worsening of the trade balance from 7.7 per cent in 2015/2016 to a projected 8.2 per cent of GDP. 

The committee recommends that due to the need to maintain macroeconomic stability, Government will have to restrain its expenditure in FY 2017/2018. This can be attained through a fiscal contraction by adjusting the recurrent expenditure while maintaining the country’s investment programme.

The committee notes that inflation expectations are projected to remain within a single digit level of 5.4 per cent, despite drought conditions experienced by the country during the FY 2016/2017. The committee recommends that with a favourable inflation outlook, the central bank should plan to continue its monetary easing programme, as previously demonstrated in the reduction of the Central Bank Rate (CBR) from 13 per cent in October 2016 to 12 per cent in December 2016. 

The committee notes that while Treasury bill rates have continued to decline across all tenors in FY 2016/2017, the reduction in the CBR has been slow to transmit to lending rates, partly reflecting tightening of lending standards and the asymmetry in the transmission of monetary policy. Since the success of monetary policy depends on fiscal policy implementation, the committee recommends that the fiscal and monetary authorities should endeavour to harmonise their programmes to guarantee positive outcomes.

The committee is concerned that although the level of domestic arrears stood at 3.2 per cent of GDP by end of June 2016, Government is slow at clearing them. There is a possibility of a recurrence and accumulation of domestic arrears despite the commitment control system, which was adopted by Government. The accumulation of domestic arrears constrains private sector growth. 

Although Government is commended for undertaking that arrear repayments will take first call of the budget, it was not indicated how much has been accrued as domestic arrears. However, the Auditor-General, in his report for the year ended 30 June 2016, indicated that domestic arrears had continued to escalate at 62 per cent from Shs 1.39 trillion in FY 2013/2014 to Shs 2.25 trillion, of which Shs 0.561 billion is for pension arrears and Shs 1.692 billion is for other forms of domestic arrears. Therefore, the Shs 110 billion projected to be cleared in FY 2017/2018 is unreasonably inadequate. 

Apart from arrears to local suppliers, it is imperative to note that there are huge arrears accruing from court awards and the Human Rights Tribunal awards. The Auditor-General, in his report for the year ended 30 June 2016, indicated that outstanding amounts in court awards, compensations and other liabilities totalled to Shs 684 billion as of 30 June 2016. This is an increment of 1,166 per cent from Shs 54 billion to Shs 684 billion over the last five years.

The committee recommends that:

i) 	The National Budget Framework Paper should always indicate the total outstanding domestic arrears as a basis of making allocations for their clearance. 

ii) 	Accounting officers who have committed Government beyond the funds appropriated for a given activity in flouting the commitment control system should be held responsible and personally accountable as required under section 45(5) of the Public Finance Management Act.

iii) 	Local suppliers should be paid in time so as to enable them meet their loan requirements, boost consumer demand and tax revenue growth.

Medium Term Fiscal Framework

Revenue Policy Measures

Given the limited revenue options, there is no scope for tax rate reductions or increases in FY 2017/2018. Despite implementation of various revenue policy measures, the committee observes that the trends in net Uganda Revenue Authority (URA) collections, as a percentage of GDP, have remained stagnant to some degree. The net URA collections as a percentage of GDP slightly grew from 10.33 per cent in FY 2011/12 to 13.3 per cent in FY 2015/2016. There are three main reasons for this stagnation: the large informal sector that constitutes 43 per cent of GDP; the narrow tax base composed of a few tax payers coupled with a weak tax exemptions regime; and weaknesses in tax administration.

The committee notes that domestic revenues are projected to increase in each of the next five fiscal years. In FY 2017/2018, domestic revenue collections are projected at Shs 14.507 trillion, of which Non Tax Revenue (NTR) is Shs 403 billion. This is a 12.3 per cent increase on the projected outturn of Shs 12.9 trillion in the current financial year. It is projected to rise to Shs 16.6 trillion in 2018/2019 and further to Shs 24.1 trillion by 2021/2022. 

The projected revenue to GDP ratio of 15.2 per cent by FY 2021/2022 will still be 10 percentage points lower than the convergence criteria as per the East African Community Monetary Union Protocol threshold of 25 per cent. However, the projections above will be driven by reforms in the tax system and efficiency in tax administration, and will require investments in equipment and human resources. In the medium to long term, revenue mobilisation efforts will focus on strengthening tax administration and compliance of tax payers.

The committee recommends that Government immediately reviews tax exemptions, widens the tax base and persistently improves tax administration in order to ensure growth in domestic revenue collections over the medium term.

The committee observed that in FY 2017/2018, Uganda Revenue Authority has been allocated an indicative additional allocation of Shs 90 billion to strengthen tax administration and compliance measures. These measures have been listed on page 22 of the report. You may read them on your own because they are very important. I will now turn to expenditure - paragraph 70. 

Expenditure

The committee notes that expenditure and lending is projected to increase from Shs 19.8 trillion to Shs 23.4 trillion in financial year 2017/2018 (equivalent to 22.7 per cent of GDP) and will average 20.5 per cent of GDP for the medium term. In financial year 2017/2018, expenditure excluding net lending is projected at Shs 21.5 trillion, which is an increase of 17.9 per cent above the projected outturn of Shs 19.8 trillion in the current financial year 2016/2017. 

Government’s interest payments are projected at Shs 2.739 trillion next financial year, of which Shs 2.0 trillion is interest on domestic securities, Treasury bills and bonds, and the rest is interest on external debt. It should be noted that interest payments due rose by 22 per cent between FY 2015/2016 and FY 2016/2017. Interest payments due are projected to rise by 35 per cent in FY 2017/2018 compared to this financial year.

Fiscal Deficit

The committee notes that the fiscal deficit is projected to widen from Shs 5.79 trillion in FY 2016/17, and this is 6.2 per cent of GDP, to Shs 7.513 trillion, which is 7.3 per cent of GDP, in FY 2017/2018 resulting from the huge Government spending in the coming financial year. Domestic financing is projected to grow by 118.2 per cent from Shs 670 billion in FY 2016/17 to Shs 1.477 trillion, largely to finance oil related road infrastructure in FY 2017/18. 

The committee notes that this is well-intentioned expenditure, although with a potential risk of hiked interest rates and slow private sector growth. The committee notes that private sector credit is projected to decline to 13.2 per cent of GDP in FY 2016/2017 from 13.5 per cent of GDP in the previous 2015/2016 financial year.

In addition, although, in the medium term the deficit will be financed largely by external financing in line with Government’s strategy of reducing domestic financing, the Budget Framework Paper fiscal deficit projections indicate that fiscal deficit will stand at 3.4 per cent of GDP, which is above the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the EAC monetary convergence criteria of three percent of GDP. 

The committee recommends that Government should adopt austerity measures geared towards minimising resource wastage as well as promoting efficient use of resources in order to meet the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the EAC monetary criteria threshold on fiscal deficit.

The committee notes that gross debt projections indicate that external debt in nominal terms will rise to an average 30 per cent of GDP, while domestic debt will average 12 per cent of GDP over the medium term. This will exert pressure on Government to ensure efficient implementation and that returns are generated to sustain the country’s economic growth path. 

Government’s fiscal expansion in FY 2016/2017 will be financed by the rise in foreign loan disbursements, especially with the development budget. The current account will be financed by a rise in the financial account, hence generating a surplus in the balance of payments of about US$ 20 million for reserve accumulation.

The committee observes that while Government and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) debt sustainability analyses indicate a low risk of debt distress for Uganda, at the same time it points to increased vulnerabilities. The committee recommends that Government addresses the vulnerability to export shocks and ensures growth dividends from the projects financed by public debt.

Resource Envelope for Financial Year 2017/2018

The committee observes that the projected total inflow, excluding appropriation in aid, for FY 2017/2018 will increase by 17.7 per cent, majorly owing to an increase in net domestic financing (domestic borrowing) and increased domestic revenues. Budget support will decline by Shs 892.9 billion, an equivalent loss of one per cent of GDP. However, project support will grow by 21.9 per cent or by 0.7 per cent of GDP, implying that the donor community is progressively moving away from budget support.  

The projected growth in total resource inflow outstrips the projected growth in the economy. Resource inflow will increase from 26 per cent of GDP in FY 2016/2017 to 29.2 per cent of GDP in FY 2017/2018. Please refer to table No. 2. External debt repayments will increase from 0.2 per cent of GDP in FY 2016/2017 to 0.9 per cent in FY 2017/2018. 

The domestic resource inflow will grow by 22 per cent, moving from a percentage share of 71 per cent of the total inflows in FY 2016/2017 to a share of 73.6 per cent in FY 2017/2018.  The declining trend of the percentage share of the external resource in the total resource inflow is consistent and in line with the country’s overarching goal of self-reliance.

On page 25, we present table No. 2, which depicts the resource envelope in tabular form. It is important to appreciate the contents of this table. Looking at column No.4, it gives you the projections for FY 2017/2018. We are expecting domestic revenue amounting to Shs 14.5 trillion. We are also expecting external support in form of budget support amounting to Shs 33.8 billion during 2017/2018. 

Net domestic financing/borrowing is going to increase from Shs 5.3 trillion to Shs 7.7 trillion, of which domestic refinancing is going to be Shs 6.2 trillion on account of the existing debt stock. Project support, as I mentioned earlier, is increasing from Shs 6.5 trillion to Shs 7.9 trillion. Therefore, we have a total resource inflow of Shs 30.23 trillion. 

However, having had that resource, we have to offset external debt repayments amounting to Shs 915.8 billion, and the resource envelope reduces to Shs 29.3 trillion. We also offset domestic arrears payment – remember this is where we are providing Shs 110.0 billion out of the Shs 2.5 trillion I mentioned earlier. That will reduce the available resource envelope to Shs 29.2 trillion. When you offset project support, which is Shs 7.9 trillion, we remain with Shs 21.2 trillion. 

When you offset domestic refinancing of Shs 6.2 trillion from the existing debt stock and our interest payments commitment of Shs 12.7 trillion, the available Government of Uganda’s resource envelope is Shs 12.2 trillion. That is the money available for FY 2017/2018. Our annual GDP, as you will note, for FY 2017/2018 is projected at Shs 100.4 trillion. 

The committee notes that the discretionary resources available for Government expenditure will grow by 4.6 per cent from Shs 11.7 trillion in FY 2016/2017 to Shs 12.253 trillion in FY 2017/18, hence an increase in available resources by only Shs 540.2 billion. That is the amount of money we have. When you talk about our expenditure needs, you need to put into account what is available. 

Table No. 3 summarises the resource inflow by source, both domestic and external. Domestic resources will constitute 73.6 per cent of the total resources while external resources will constitute 26.4 per cent in FY 2017/2018.

Sectoral Priorities for Financial Year 2017/2018

The committee notes that the total budget allocation is projected to grow by 9.8 per cent in FY 2017/2018. However, as a share of GDP, total expenditure will drop from 21.8 per cent to 21.7 per cent in FY 2017/2018. The highest growth in allocation is projected in the ICT sector by 62.6 per cent, followed by lands, housing and urban development by 48.1 per cent, interest payments by 35.4 per cent, works and transport by 27.3 per cent, energy and mineral development by 26.2 per cent and security by 23.3 per cent. 

On the other hand, there will be a decline in the following sector allocations: health by 29.6 per cent; justice, law and order by 13.9 per cent; and social development by 10.4 per cent.  The details are in table No. 4.

The committee noted that the budget priorities for FY 2017/2018 included the construction of oil roads, food production and productivity, export promotion through value addition and enhancement of revenue collection. 

I would like, Madam Speaker, to focus on a few sectors that I have received additional resources for. 

Works and Transport Interventions

The committee noted that Government has allocated additional funds to the Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) amounting to Shs 1,122.62 billion to cater for the construction of roads under the Hoima-Wanseko project. It was clarified, however, that the Hoima-Wanseko project comprised of 15 roads as indicated in table No. 5.

The committee noted with concern that:

1. 	The additional allocation of Shs 1,122.63 billion to UNRA for FY 2017/2018 is excessive, given the usual absorption challenges associated with the lengthy procurement process in the country.

2. 	Apart from two roads (Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko and Lusalira-Nkonge-Ssembabule), the rest had neither the feasibility studies nor the detailed designs completed.
	
3. 	The unit cost of construction per kilometre for Hoima-Butiaba-Wanseko Road, of Shs 5.934 billion per kilometre, is far above the average cost, which requires UNRA to clarify further. 

The committee recommends that UNRA creates separate projects for each road to enable effective monitoring and accountability for the resources allocated.
 
The committee recommends further that Government reviews the projected allocation to UNRA for FY 2017/2018 with the view of coming up with a realistic amount, which will be absorbed under the oil roads.  This will free up resources for other constrained sectors. 

In future, Government should avoid raising people’s expectations by indicating roads to be constructed in a budget when there is no capacity to do so. Some roads appear in the budget and later disappear without Government’s explanation yet such roads are critical in developing the country. We gave examples of roads in areas around Kampala that have been appearing. Therefore, this time we have asked UNRA to cost all roads and present a separate schedule. I am supposed to have attached this schedule here, but we did not attach it. However, we now have the list of all roads, costs and timeframes provided to the committee. 

Agriculture Interventions

The committee noted that the National Agricultural Advisory Services (NAADS) Secretariat was allocated an additional Shs 27.53 billion for seeds and planting materials for beans, maize, cassava, cowpeas and bananas. The committee observes that in the recent past, the management of seedlings distributed through NAADS and Operation Wealth Creation programmes have faced major challenges like poor handling of seedlings, registering a high loss of seedlings and low survival rates of just 58 per cent.

Madam Speaker, you will note that this Shs 27.5 billion is an increase on top of the usual budget of Shs 300 billion to NAADS. To correct this problem, the committee recommends that part of the budget for seedlings and seed inputs be reallocated to strengthening the agricultural extension services, which should be responsible for quality assurance of the seedlings before payment is effected. 

The strategy of promoting locally based nursery beds should also be enhanced to avoid handling losses. On this particular one, NAADS have been sending seedlings from long distances to be delivered in our villages. As a matter of policy, we should promote nursery beds within our localities and seedlings should be procured from there. 

In addition, the policy on supplying farm inputs should be reviewed by enabling farmers make a marginal contribution of 20 per cent in order for them to attach greater value to the materials supplied.

The committee further recommends that Government should fast track implementation of the national agricultural extension policy and strategy. Government should avail resources to the local governments to operationalise the single spine extension system. You will recall, honourable members, that various local governments have been recruiting staff under the single spine extension system. However, apart from salaries, these extension workers do not have facilitation funds to enable them move to deliver services. 

We are, therefore, recommending that an estimated budget provision of Shs 39 billion is provided throughout the whole country to support at least two extension workers per subcounty. This can be done through procuring a motorcycle and other operational funds to enable them meet farmers and give advice to them.

Water and Environment Interventions

The committee observed that the irrigation intervention budget provisions are spread out in different sectors and yet have common targets of providing water for production. The irrigation funds are allocated to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries but also to Ministry of Water and Environment and to NAADS. 

The committee recommends that instead of scattering irrigation resources in different sectors, Government should pool all the resources under a competent body to effectively coordinate and manage the irrigation funds. In addition, Government should first de-silt all existing water valley tanks before embarking on construction of new ones.

The committee noted that irrigation funds are proposed for the construction of valley tanks in some regions, mainly covering the water stressed areas, and to support the already established irrigation schemes such as Olweny and Rwengaanju. 

The committee noted that effects of climate change cut across the entire country. On the other hand, the entire country is covered with water bodies such as lakes, rivers, streams and swamps that can be utilised for irrigation. The committee, therefore, recommends that irrigation interventions should be seen to be covering the entire country not some isolated areas as it seems to be.  

The committee further recommends that Government should provide the long awaited irrigation policy and strategy to Parliament before the budget estimates for FY 2017/2018 are laid before Parliament.

Given the gravity of the effects of the frequent drought in the country, the committee recommends that the irrigation infrastructure should be part of our priority national infrastructure development programme and should be reviewed annually and more resources allocated.  

Well established irrigation infrastructure in the entire country will ensure an enhanced and sustainable GDP growth, improve production and productivity, create and stabilise jobs, ensure food security and increase domestic earnings and savings. In order to ensure a sustainable irrigation intervention, the committee recommends that Government should strengthen the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA), in order to restore and conserve all water resources - lakes, rivers, wetlands and underground waters. We noted that NEMA is significantly marginalised in terms of resources. 
 
Value Addition

The committee noted that the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation was allocated an innovation fund amounting to Shs 50 billion. The committee was not able to obtain information pertaining to the operationalisation, nature and criteria of distribution of the innovation fund. The committee recommends that Government tables to Parliament information about the innovation fund before the annual budget estimates for FY 2017/2018 are submitted to Parliament.

Madam Speaker, the committee noted that the allocation of Shs 50 billion to Uganda Development Fund for capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank is insufficient to have meaningful impact if private sector investment is to be revived. The committee recommends that an additional Shs 50 billion should be provided for recapitalisation of Uganda Development Bank in FY 2017/2018.

The committee noted that an allocation of Shs 20 billion has been earmarked to recapitalise Uganda Broadcasting Corporation (UBC). The committee recommends that Government first addresses the current managerial and administrative challenges before recapitalising Uganda Broadcasting Corporation.

Other General Sector Concerns 

Rent for Government MDAs

Over the years, Parliament has recommended the rationalisation of resource use by advising Government to consider construction of buildings to house Government MDAs. At one time, there was a presidential and Cabinet position to centralise the management and allocation of funds towards the construction of Government offices. Matters have been compounded by landlords charging rent in dollars. With the fluctuating exchange rates, some MDAs have found themselves using almost all their non-wage allocation to pay rent while others are in arrears and at the verge of being evicted. 

The committee, therefore, reiterates its previous recommendation that Government should find a solution for office space for MDAs by-

a) 	Providing adequate resources to MDAs with land to kick-start construction of their homes in a phased manner using the allocations within the MTEF; and 

b) 	The Ministry of Lands and Urban Development identifying a suitable location for the construction of office space enough to accommodate multiple Government MDAs. 

The Government common location will allow the concentration of Government services at a single point for efficient service delivery to people, especially to those that do not own any piece of land. This can help build synergies among agencies. Government can draw examples from countries like Botswana, Malawi and Malaysia that have established Government enclaves.

The committee noted that the Ministry of Defence budget has an excess allocation of Shs 500 billion that was erroneously provided. The committee recommends that this amount of Shs 500 billion be removed from the MTEF. (Applause) This money relates to the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) for our troops in Somalia. Therefore, it was erroneously stated with as an extra Shs 500 billion. We are recommending its removal. Unfortunately, we cannot allocate it to anyone because these are United Nations (UN) funds. 

Budget Allocation to Local Governments 

The committee noted that the allocation of resources to local governments in the medium term does not reflect the importance that Government puts on fiscal decentralisation as an effective mechanism of delivery to the citizens. The projected budget indicates a declining trend both in absolute terms and as a share of the total budget. In FY 2016/2017, only 13 per cent of the total budget was allocated to local governments and in FY 2017/2018, it even declines further to only 11 per cent of the total budget that is allocated to local governments. 

The spirit of the fiscal decentralisation strategy was to give local governments autonomy and flexibility in budgeting, to address issues and challenges that are unique to individual local governments, thereby improving service delivery. A study carried out by the Uganda Local Government Commission in 2015 recommended that for local governments to effectively provide service delivery, 38 per cent of the total budget should be allocated to local governments.

The committee recommends that Government should scale up its allocations to local governments towards the recommended share of 38 per cent of the national budget, to ensure improved service delivery and a successful implementation of the fiscal decentralisation strategy. Table No. 6 is a demonstration of how much is allocated to the local governments and the percentages thereon.

Madam Speaker, based on the above, we have proposed some adjustments to the sectoral allocations as presented in table No. 7. It is important that I read these out for the Hansard. 

Public Administration Sector

Vote 206, Mission in Kenya 

We are proposing to bridge the funding gap of Shs 11 billion for the completion of Uganda House in Kenya, which was condemned property. However, this facility has the potential to increase our revenue by four times.

Vote 102, Electoral Commission 

This is largely wage enhancement and providing for operational funds for their new offices in the new districts. It amounts to Shs 41.7 billion. Madam Speaker, you will note that the wage structure for the Electoral Commission was set in 1999 and since then, they have not seen any salary increments. 

Accountability Sector

Vote 008, Uganda Investment Authority 

Shs 50 billion should be provided for construction of roads in Namanve Industrial Park. Again, for Uganda Investment Authority we propose Shs 10 billion to acquire investment land within metropolitan Kampala to attract investment. 

Vote 010, Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries

We propose Shs 39 billion as operational funds to facilitate extension workers for local governments to implement the single spine system. 

Natural Resources Sector 

National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) 
We propose Shs 6 billion to strengthen monitoring, supervision and enforcement activities. 

Ministry of Water and Environment

We propose Shs 30 billion to increase water access in rural and urban areas.

Uganda National Meteorological Authority 

We propose Shs 5.2 billion to cover a wage shortfall for staff already in post. 

Energy and Mineral Development Sector 

Ministry of Water and Environment

We propose Shs 8 billion counterpart funding under “Greening Uganda” for protection and restoration of degraded ecosystems. We already have a loan towards that project. 

Rural Electrification Agency 
The proposal is Shs 36 billion. This is counterpart funding for rural electrification projects. 

Social Development Sector 

Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development 

Shs 10 billion to kick-start implementation of the green jobs and fair labour market programme. 

Equal Opportunities Commission

The proposal is Shs 2 billion for purposes of gender and equity compliance assessment for all MDAs including local governments. 

Uganda Development Corporation 

We propose Shs 50 billion for capitalisation of this corporation as the law mandates. The law mandates capitalisation of Shs 500 billion but because the budget cannot permit that, we are proposing Shs 50 billion. 

Uganda National Bureau of Standards 

We propose Shs 6 billion to embark on the construction of our national laboratory. They do not have a building of their own and they have been suffering for quite a while. 

Ministry of Trade, Industry and Co-operatives  

We propose Shs 20 billion for compensation of war debt and revival of cooperatives across the country. This is covering various cooperative unions: Wamala, Masaka, West and East Mengo, Bunyoro, Busoga, Lango, Madi, Teso, Bukedi and Mid-North cooperative unions among others. 

Still under Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives, we propose Shs 12 billion for construction of regional silos and other storage facilities across the country to mitigate food insecurity and speculative trading. 

Justice, Law and Order Sector  

Directorate of Government Analytical Laboratory 
We propose Shs 2 billion to clear the current sample backlog. 

Works and Transport Sector 

A total of Shs 100 billion is proposed under the Uganda Road Fund to strengthen our capacity on roads maintenance, local government roads, emergency roads, new town councils, community access roads, the Road Fund Secretariat and road rehabilitation. 

Accountability Sector

Auditor-General

We propose Shs 6 billion to audit Karuma and Isimba power projects, a comprehensive audit of NAADS and audit of all PPPs and compensations. The auditing of PPPs is a requirement under the PPP Act and the Auditor-General has not been undertaking these audits. 

Public Sector Management 

For Ministry of Local Government we propose Shs 2 billion for non-wage recurrent and to clear rent arrears.

Still under Ministry of Local Government, we propose an honoraria of Shs 12 billion for subcounty councillors across the country. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, at the beginning I begged for your indulgence not to present part II. It is not because I am tired but I believe that you cannot stand another two hours of presentation from me. 

Therefore, in accordance with Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, I beg to move that the report of the committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2017/2018 to financial year 2021/2022 be adopted and the National Budget Framework Paper be approved with the proposed amendments. 

The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development shall lay on the Table the final version of the National Budget Framework Paper incorporating those amendments for the financial year 2017/2018 to 2021/2022 before presenting the annual budgets for financial year 2017/2018. I beg to report. (Applause) 

Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2017/2018 to 2021/2022. I beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper.

Madam Speaker, I was notified about the minority report from hon. Muwanga Kivumbi, who is a member of the committee. I received that notification before the report was released and with your indulgence, allow him to present that report. 

THE SPEAKER:  Before hon. Kivumbi comes in, I have established that the Land Fund will be entirely for issues of opening boundaries, compensation and acquiring titles. Therefore, that Land Fund report will go to the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. 

4.17
MR MUHAMMAD MUWANGA KIVUMBI (DP, Butambala County, Butambala): Madam Speaker and honourable members, first and foremost let me associate myself with the main report to a large extent - almost 95 per cent. I agree with the content of the main report –(Applause)– but for about five per cent, I do not agree. 

Madam Speaker, section 9 of the Public Finance Management Act provides for preparation of the National Budget Framework Paper, its submission to Parliament and consideration by the relevant committee. It is on this note that the National Budget Framework Paper was referred to the Committee on Budget.  

Areas of Dissent 

They are quite a number and include the following:
a) 	Consistency with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility
b) 	Treasury Operations
c) 	Clearance of domestic arrears
d) 	Withdrawals from the Petroleum Fund
e) 	Payments to cooperatives
f) 	Construction of valley dams
g) 	Control of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD)
h) 	Construction of health facilities
i) 	National rollout of Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE)
j) 	Government borrowing from pension funds
k) 	Poor loan absorption
l) 	Classified expenditure
m) 	State House scholarships
n) 	Unrealistic absorption by oil roads
o) 	UBC funding
p) 	Innovation Fund
q) 	Excessive allocations to Ministry of Defence
r) 	Construction of roads, streets and highways
s) 	Purchase of cattle for beef for slaughtering.

Charter of Fiscal Responsibility

The Charter of Fiscal responsibility sets targets of reducing the fiscal balance to a deficit of no greater than five per cent of GDP and maintaining public debt in net present value terms below 50 per cent of GDP by 2020/21. 

On 22 December 2016, Parliament approved the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. Section 5(2) of the Public Finance Management Act requires that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development publishes the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility within a month after approval by Parliament. 

Furthermore, section 9(3) of the Public Finance Management Act requires the minister to ensure that the Budget Framework Paper is consistent with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.
To date, no approved Charter of Fiscal Responsibility has ever been published. Hence, the Budget Framework Paper is inconsistent with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

The main report shied away from making this bold recommendation that I would like to advocate for; it said that it was constrained because this is the dictate of the law. Given the fact that in line with section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, Parliament is only expected to approve and not to reject, the Budget Framework Paper should be approved with the following conditions:

a) 	In line with section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, Parliament suspends consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper until the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development gives a report with an explanation as to why the National Budget Framework Paper is inconsistent with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.

b) 	In line with section 78(2) of the Public Finance Management Act, if it is established that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to ensure consistency of the National Budget Framework Paper with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility due to negligence or misconduct of a public officer, the public officer be held liable under section 79(1)(n) of the Act.

Treasury Operations

Treasury operations, vote 130, was established with the mandate of effectively and efficiently managing Government statutory debt obligations, investments and the Contingency Fund. The vote seeks to undertake the following:

    a) Create and maintain a high quality and updated database of Government of Uganda debt;
    b) Portfolio;
    c) Requisition for external resources/disbursements on a timely basis;
    d) Pay Government statutory debt obligations when they fall due;
    e) Administration of the Contingency Fund;
    f) Provide financial and accounting guidance in the management of Government investments;
    g) Produce domestic and external debt service and disbursement projections.

In FY 2017/18, Government intends to undertake interest payments of Shs 2.78 trillion, domestic refinancing of Shs 6.25 trillion, external debt repayments of Shs 915.8 billion and domestic arrear repayments of Shs 110 billion. Although these undertakings and their allocations are managed by the Treasury operations office, they are not reflected in the budget allocations and medium-term projections of vote 130, Treasury operations. 

To the contrary, only Shs 100 billion is reflected as proposed allocation to vote 130, Treasury operations. As a consequence, it is not a true reflection of the funds being managed by the vote hence the continued management failures. Therefore, we would like that vote to reflect the extent of the money they will manage under Treasury operations for ease in follow up.

It is important to note that in the financial years ending 30 June 2014 and June 2015, the Auditor-General in his reports on Treasury operations noted the following concerns that are still ongoing:

a) 	An increase in the unsustainable increase of direct charges on the Consolidated Fund arising from mandamus orders by courts, which negatively impacts on availability of funds for Government programmes. Mandamus payments were also being made without evidence or a writ of mandamus.

b) 	Inadequate internal audit to appraise the available internal controls, improve risk management processes and provide assurance on the value for money in the administration and operations of the programmes in the vote. 

c) 	Unsupported budget movements from external debt principal repayments to clear domestic debt interest.

d) 	Payments being made beyond the agreed instalments reflected in Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) between Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and would-be beneficiaries.

All funds regarding interest payments, domestic refinancing, external debt repayments and domestic arrear repayments should be reflected in budget allocations and medium-term projections of vote 130, Treasury operations.

Clearance of Domestic Arrears

The stock of domestic arrears has increased from Shs 1.434 trillion in financial year 2013/14 to Shs 2.7 trillion in financial year 2015/16. This increment is attributed to pensions and gratuity arrears, court award arrears and compensation arrears. Of the Shs 2.7 trillion, Government has failed to pay civil servants who are demanding for arrears for salaries (Shs 96.2 billion) and arrears of pension and gratuity amounting to Shs 597.9 billion. 

Madam Speaker, these are humble poor people in our villages who did decent work but they are not being paid their dues. Once they pay these people, none of them is likely to go and buy perfume. If you look at the table below, you realise that Government accumulated arrears in utility, rent, salary, compensation and others. However, my keen interest is on pension, gratuity and salary arrears. These are very poor people in our villages and they need their money. 

As part of revamping the economy, Government committed itself and said that arrear repayments will take the first call. This is what is in the Budget Framework Paper. However, to our dismay, only Shs 110 billion is proposed for repayment of domestic arrears against a stock of Shs 2.7 trillion.

Madam Speaker, that is why my modest proposal is that 50 per cent of the stock of domestic arrears, amounting to Shs 1.4 trillion, is cleared in the next financial year. This will spur revenue growth, motivate civil servants and facilitate the public towards 1 improved productivity and increase availability of disposable income for enhanced economic growth.

Withdrawal from Petroleum Fund

For the resource envelop of FY 2017/18, the Budget Framework Paper does not indicate any resources from the Petroleum Fund nor does it indicate the status of the Petroleum Fund and its expenditures. It also does not also indicate the ceiling of the total budget funding from the petroleum holding account. 

Furthermore, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development failed to table an annual report on the Petroleum Fund in Parliament by 31st December, hence violating section 61(1) (b) of the Public Finance Management Act.

Given the fact that the resource envelope does not include the Petroleum Fund, no funds should therefore be withdrawn from the Petroleum Fund.

In line with section 78(1) of the Public Finance Management Act, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should within one week make a report to Parliament with an explanation as to why the annual report on the Petroleum Fund was not tabled.

Cooperatives Development

Government indicated that cooperative societies would be revived as one of the strategic interventions in the agricultural sector in the FY 2017/2018. However to the contrary, in the financial year 2017/2018 budget, Government is to constrain cooperatives development by reallocating Shs 2.99 billion to improve private sector competitiveness. 

Furthermore, Government still owes 17 traditional cooperative unions outstanding compensation claims amounting to a total of Shs 53.9 billion (Appendix 1). As a consequence, several traditional cooperatives are financially constrained to meet their growth needs. This undermines the contribution of cooperatives particularly towards collective bargaining for farmers, accessibility to improved farm inputs, bargaining for favourable prices, identifying markets for farm produce and stabilising volatile processes for agricultural produce. 

Outstanding claims owed to cooperative unions amounting to Shs 53.9 billion should be cleared this financial year so as to financially boost the cooperatives to meet their growth needs.

Construction of New Dams

The committee has noted that we ought to construct new dams and I agree. I had carried this opinion before they made that concession in the committee. We all agreed that before they go for the construction of new dams, the money that has been allocated be shifted towards de-silting the already existing dams in the country. 

Control of Foot and Mouth Disease

During drought spells, FMD is rampant and difficult to contain in the cattle corridor areas such as Nakasongola, Mubende and Sembabule among others. This is attributed to the fact that communally grazed livestock move extensively in search of water and pasture. 

Unfortunately, the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries has a shortfall of Shs 4 billion to purchase and administer adequate FMD vaccine doses. Therefore, I advocate that the Shs 4 billion that the agriculture ministry lacks for this purpose be allocated. 

Construction of Health Facilities

In the medium-term, the Ministry of Health proposes to revamp and make functional all health centres IV, including upgrading health centres III and IV in the counties where they do not exist. Ninety per cent of the counties in Uganda have health centres IV (261 counties out of 290 counties) while only 29 do not have health centres III. Upgrading health centres III requires Shs 166 trillion, which is Shs 5.5 billion per health centre IV.

Madam Speaker, there are also plans to construct health centres III in 93 subcounties that have no public health facilities. This will require Shs 247 billion, that is, Shs 2.6 billion per health centre III. This is just for construction. Besides the costs being exorbitant, construction of new facilities indicates poor prioritisation. Most of the health facilities are operating below capacity due to staffing, equipment and drug shortfalls. 

Our position is that we halt construction of new health facilities in the medium term and funds be geared towards ensuring that all existing health facilities operate at full capacity in terms of staffing, equipment and drugs. 

Madam Speaker, we also find Shs 2.6 billion to construct a health centre III highly exorbitant because these are very small construction holdings. We, therefore, ask the ministry to avail Shs 140 billion for that –(Interjections)- Yes, it is Shs 206 billion for a health centre III and for the construction of a health centre IV, Shs 5.6 billion. We find that untenable and yet this is for a loan facility we have already approved in this Parliament.

National Rollout of SAGE

In the financial year 2016/2017, Parliament resolved that SAGE be rolled out countrywide so as to increase equity, support and empowerment of all the elderly people in Uganda. Shs 11.65 billion should be availed to rollout SAGE to cover 100 older persons in every subcounty in Uganda.

The committee recommended a rollout but they never recommended that the money should consequently move in that direction. My only intervention is that the money should be availed.

Borrowing from Pension Funds

The intention of Government to liberalise pension funds purposely to raise funds for long-term investments is of great concern. The funds are meant to guarantee the future of the contributors, not necessarily long-term investments of Government. Therefore, it is not prudent for Government to highlight pension funds as its alternative long term financing sources. Besides, Government has been proven to be poor at debt repayment.

Government’s presumed assumption that the funds are redundant is misconceived. The intention of the contributors has never been to complement funding of Government but to secure their future retirement. If the custodians of the pension funds are to consider lending, let them consider lending to the owners - the savers - but not to Government. 

Poor Loan Absorption

The majority of loans were approved over two years ago but their total disbursements have performed at a mere 26 per cent, a reduction from 28 per cent as of December 2015. This highlights poor absorption arising from inadequate preparation and the fact that projects being funded are not a development priority. This leads to constraints on local spending and subdued growth, especially in sectors with low absorption capacity. There is also an increasing trend of acquiring non-concessional loans that are commercial in nature for projects with no immediate financial return or profit. 

Madam Speaker, the table below indicates a sector by sector rate of absorption. Parliament should not consider any new loan request for any sector or MDA whose total loan absorption is less than 50 per cent. This will curb poor preparations and funding of non-priority development projects. The table there is very discouraging.

Classified Expenditure

I am glad to note that you have already pre-empted this by appointing members to those committees. I hope the chairperson did not smuggle –(Laughter)– I will not discuss classified expenditure because you have already fulfilled the recommendation, Madam Speaker. 

The Road Fund 

Although it was indicated that additional funding of Shs 112 trillion will be allocated to the construction of Hoima–Butiaba-Wanseko Road, the committee was later informed by UNRA that the funds were also meant for 14 priority oil roads. Of the 14 oil roads, only two roads had undertaken feasibility studies and detailed designs. Therefore, it is not possible for the remaining 13 roads to absorb funds in the next financial year, amounting to a total of Shs 851 billion. This would further stretch the fiscal deficit.

The two roads that were indicated to have feasibility studies and detailed designs include what I have already said. In FY 2017/2018, it was proposed that the roads be allocated Shs 303 billion and Shs 166 billion respectively. It is interesting to note that each of those roads is going to cost approximately Shs 6 billion per kilometre - approximately because it is over Shs 500 billion for tarmacking.

Madam Speaker, at this rate, this will be the most expensive road in the world. Therefore, our proposal is that Shs 851 billion should be reallocated from oil roads without feasibility studies and detailed designs to fund other priority budget items. The only money we can pass as Parliament should go towards road designs and feasibility studies. It is only after that that they can estimate the level of funds that they need. However, for us to give them money and say that there you are - 

THE SPEAKER: They will send it to a fixed deposit account. 

MR MUWANGA KIVUMBI: To generate interest. (Laughter)

Uganda Broadcasting Corporation Funding

I agree with the position of the committee on UBC funding and I will not elaborate on it further. I had also included something on the Innovation Fund in my report, but I agree with position of the committee.

Excessive Allocations to Ministry of Defence

Madam Speaker, this was a contentious issue. I sit in both the Committee on Defence and the Committee on Budget and we had to struggle so that this money is properly traced. However, I would like to correct the figures being given for us to deduct the right figure.

The money allocated was Shs 879.983 billion. Money from AMISOM is Shs 321,285 billion. That leaves –(Interjections)- If the ministry says that it is available, we shall have an excess of Shs 500 billion to reallocate. If they say that they do not have it, we shall have to deduct Shs 558.698 billion from the budget allocation. Chairperson, in your report, you are proposing that only Shs 500 billion should be deducted; we will lose Shs 58 billion. I therefore beg that that figure be corrected because an extra Shs 50 billion will be lost. The deductions should be Shs 558 billion. 

I will skip construction of roads and highways because it was stated clearly in the report. 

Purchase of Cattle for Slaughter

Shs 30.687 billion is proposed to be allocated to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries in the next financial year for promotion of priority animal products and productivity. These funds are meant for purchase of high quality animals for the abattoirs to get beef for export. 

These abattoirs are a private venture; there is no reason as to why we must allocate Shs 30 billion to finance the purchase of cattle that are fattened for beef. This is a purely private venture. Why should we allocate our meagre public resources to that when we have a deficit? 

The committee failed to establish whether Government entered a slaughtering PPP agreement and the supply of high quality animals is its principal contribution. Furthermore, the ministry does not have a slaughtering business hence the country will not attain a return on investment or profit on the animals supplied by the ministry for slaughtering. Therefore, Shs 4 billion of the Shs 30 billion should be reallocated to fund foot and mouth disease control and the rest should be re-allocated. 

State House Scholarships

Parliament has over the years, and to no avail, requested for criteria used to select beneficiaries under the State House scholarship scheme. As a consequence, the Ninth Parliament resolved to discontinue the scheme. 

While considering the National Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2015/16, Parliament resolved that the State House sponsorship scheme be gradually phased out and the funds put into the Higher Education Students’ Financing Scheme as provided for in the Higher Education Students’ Financing Act, 2014. However, it is proposed that in the next financial year, 7,500 students are to benefit from the State House scholarship scheme. 

When I challenged this figure, the chairperson of the Committee on Presidential Affairs called State House and volunteered more details to this effect. We realised that State House is still paying for pupils in primary schools and yet there is a Universal Primary Education (UPE) programme. Why should public money be spent when there is such a Government programme? We further established that State House still pays fees to students doing secondary school education yet there is a Universal Secondary Education (USE) programme. 

We also established that money still goes to students in tertiary institutions. We established that 4,000 students are on State House scholarships in universities. This left us wondering because each year, Government only sponsors 4,000 students countrywide in all institutions of higher learning and there is no criterion for this kind of scheme. Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this House rejects the budgetary line that is meant to go towards this scheme. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson of the Budget Committee and all the members, including those who presented the minority report. I just have some clarifications that I need from the Government.

One, if it is true that we are going to import beef and later export it, how can we promote the economy of another country while pretending that it is beef made in Uganda? Is that what we are doing as a country? Why don’t you buy animals and supply to the country so that we can sell our own beef? 

Secondly, listening to the chairperson, I realised that the Ministry of Finance has not given us an update on how the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) fit into this budget. I think the chairperson was being very diplomatic when he said health had reduced by 29 per cent but he did not tell us what is left; is it two or three per cent? How are we going to meet SDG Goal No.3 on health if we are making no provision? 

I would also like to know, how can we keep money floating in the case of the 15 roads? Is the construction going to start this year and be completed? Is that possible? Why don’t you give the money to the water people who need ferries? You could pay for our ferries as we wait for the 15 roads. You cannot do 15 roads in one year; it is not possible. You cannot even start on them.

Honourable minister, I would like an update on the SDGs because we resolved here in September that when you bring the Budget Framework Paper, you brief us on how it meets the SDGs. You are completely silent on that; we need answers. 

Also, assure us about the 15 roads and where the money is going. It is really a shame that we are supporting the Chinese economy and now we want to start supporting the Brazilian economy when we have no jobs in this country. Is that fair?

4.54
MR RAPHAEL MAGYEZI (NRM, Igara County West, Bushenyi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me make a comment in regard to the local government and public service sectors. 

Madam Speaker, recently you received a delegation of subcounty councillors appealing to you to address their bad situation. I would like to thank the committee for making a provision of Shs 12 billion for allowances for the subcounty councillors. It is a humble beginning of about Shs 30,000 per month for these councillors and it reflects a good spirit from Parliament. In that regard, I would like to request that if the final budget does not reflect this Shs 12 billion then we should reject it.

In the same vein, I would like to appeal to Parliament to consider a waiver on the allowances of the district councillors. They are earning only Shs 250,000 but it is taxed every month. Even if we do not increase it this year, if we said that for the time being Government suspends tax on these councillors’ allowances, it will be good for them.

Madam Speaker, it is good that the committee has highlighted the decline in the percentage share of the budget that goes to local governments. Ten years ago, the budget that went to local governments was 30 per cent of the national budget. Progressively, it has gone down and now we are talking about only 11 per cent. 

Madam Speaker, this is inconsistent with Government’s commitment to develop power and services for local governments. Eighty per cent of primary healthcare, rural water and other services required by ordinary people are provided by the local governments. How can we provide them with only 10 per cent of the national budget? Why are the ministries interested in keeping the national resource to themselves?

Madam Speaker, my proposal is that with effect from next financial year, five per cent should be added to the district budgets every year until we at least get to between 20 and 25 per cent. 

Looking at unconditional grants, colleagues you have the Constitution and the very last page of the national Constitution, the Seventh Schedule, provides a formula for unconditional grants. The districts’ unconditional grants are not supposed to go down when there is an increase in the general price level of commodities. It is a shame for the Government to say that inflation has gone up by about five per cent and yet they cut the districts’ unconditional grants. It is totally unconstitutional. 

We, therefore, need to be firm and say that every year Ministry of Finance should make sure there is a five per cent increase in the districts’ transfers. I would like to propose that we take up this issue of fiscal planning because in view of urbanisation, Uganda cannot be different from other countries. That is –(Member timed out.)

4.57
MR LAWRENCE ONEGIU (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I would like us to ask ourselves how we can promote agricultural productivity when we do not have good health. Health must be given priority in order to address agriculture, education and other sectors of the economy. However, in this budget, I see that there is a decrease in the health budget.

We need to do two things as a country; one is to increase productivity and two, increase economic opportunities in rural areas. However, how do we increase productivity in a country, which is agro-based and depends on rain-fed agriculture? That is a priority area which we need to consider, and the only way to do that is by making water for production accessible to people. 

What is causing food shortage now is the fact that we do not have water and the only way to bring this water to the people is through irrigation. Therefore, this budget should prioritise irrigation, which can be done through renewable energy including solar, and anything to do with taxes on solar facilities should be reduced so that people can access such facilities easily. 

Another issue is on planning. We are agro-based and so we need to plan for our land for agriculture and other competing demands. Planning for our land should be a priority in this budget.

Finally, there is the issue of infrastructure - roads, health and electricity among others – which will help to boost income. I think that is important. In this Budget Framework Paper, I have not seen the security roads, which we have been talking about, but instead I have seen other roads and yet these are priority areas. We must know that we are an agro-based economy and we depend on rain-fed agriculture, so we need new technology. Thank you.

5.00
MS BEATRICE RWAKIMARI (NRM, Woman Representative, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to contribute to the debate.

Madam Speaker, as a person I am very disappointed to hear that the budget allocation for health is declining. Maybe Members need to know that the budget is actually declining from Shs 1.8 to Shs 1.2 trillion. We all know that health is fundamental for the socioeconomic development of this country. Instead of trying to attain the Abuja Declaration of 15 per cent, we are reducing! 

In the financial year 2015/16, the health budget allocation was Shs 8.7 trillion. However, as we speak, it has now reduced to Shs 5.7 trillion. Surely, as a Parliament, we should all stand up and refuse to pass this budget unless the budget for health is increased.

Madam Speaker, you all know that there are no medicines in our health facilities. We also know that health workers are leaving this country for Rwanda and other countries for better salaries because we cannot properly remunerate them. I would like to thank hon. Kivumbi for raising this issue. 

Further, I would like to call upon everyone – We are all here because we have good health. My colleague has talked about agriculture; you cannot dig, trade or do anything if you are not healthy. Therefore, we should do everything possible to ensure the health budget increases.

Madam Speaker, I heard the chairperson of the committee talking of Shs 500 billion, which is still floating in Ministry of Defence. I would like to propose that this money be brought to the health sector because that sector still needs more resources. I also heard them adding money to other sectors as if the health sector does not need it.

Madam Speaker, women are still dying; we still have a very high maternal mortality rate in this country. We still lose 16 women a day and not to mention the babies in their wombs. When I hear people talk about reducing the budget for the health sector, I feel very sad. 

Therefore, I would like to call upon Government to make sure that the budget for the health sector increases. Otherwise, some of us are ready to do anything within our powers to ensure that this budget is increased instead of it being reduced. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.03
MS JESSICA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank the Budget Committee for the report presented. 

Based on the current biting challenges that we have, I support the committee’s recommendation that we should have food production and productivity as one of our priorities. We said that we need to have a clear strategic plan on how we are going to fight food scarcity in this country. Therefore, it is high time this House received a plan to direct the country on how we are going to minimise this challenge. 

We also need to have specific plans that should be financed in this coming budget. Minus this, Madam Speaker, as people are dying the labour force will not be maximally used. Therefore, since we are the human resource to implement this budget, we may not achieve very much.

Secondly, I would like to focus on this issue of roads. I have read carefully what is in the report, that many of the projects are not going to be implemented. In Adjumani District, the issue of Afoji and Atiak is a thorn in our flesh. I agree with the committee’s observation and recommendation that some of these promises and expectations need to be reviewed. Therefore, I would like to request that Government should take it upon itself to go and inform the people about when these projects are going to be undertaken. 

Our road was set for 2017 and this is 2017. People have been promised and they are now accusing Members of Parliament for failing to follow up on these promises. If those statements were made to just get votes, now that they cannot be implemented in 2017 Government should go and withdraw its words so that we know that these things cannot be implemented.

On the issue of irrigation, I agree with the committee that it should be spread all over the country based on research, even where rain is stable. There are certain parts in specific districts, including Adjumani, where you can get four sub-counties without reliable rains. Therefore, I totally agree that irrigation should be a priority area.

Madam Speaker, what we have now as a policy on health is that we are not going to concentrate on health centres II. However, in this report –(Member timed out.)

5.06
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report presented. 

I have got just two comments and the first is on domestic arrears. As you may recall, this year during the reading of the budget, the President emphasised that domestic arrears should be cleared in the first quarter of this financial year. However, up to now, the domestic arrears are over 15 per cent of the budget and they have crippled the economy. You have seen banks closing. 

When we talk about domestic arrears, it means Government has applied indirect borrowing from the public. As we draw up the budget, it will be budget indiscipline to have uncleared domestic arrears. It would mean the budget has been flaunted; the procedures are not being followed.

I have the following requests to make: First of all, I would like to request that for the previous domestic arrears, the Treasury issues promissory notes to local companies so that that those are cleared. Secondly, in the coming financial year, Government should embark on establishing local letters of credit for local companies so that the local suppliers are assured of their money. This has happened before in cases where the Government issued letters of credit to local suppliers because they are catered for within the budget. 

Madam Speaker, I am of the opinion that merely cautioning accounting officers does not cause things to happen. Civil servants like teachers have borrowed money against their salaries and banks are charging interest and yet Government does not pay interest on domestic arrears. Therefore, I urge Government to also start paying interest on domestic arrears because those people may have borrowed money from commercial banks, which are really moving against them. I beg to propose.

5.09
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the committee for presenting this report. 

I have listened carefully and was wondering when the chairperson talked about the Namanve substation. That budget is very okay and I am happy with it. However, I also wanted you to add the power substation in Kanungu, which the President promised. It is meant to serve the three factories, which exist there and are very important for the economic development of this country, not only Kanungu. We get a lot of employment opportunities. Therefore, I do not know why it is not in this budget yet we have been talking about it all this while.

Madam Speaker, borrowing has really become too much. I am very much worried because it is even going to increase to about Shs 7 trillion  -(Interjections)– I have to get worried because this is my country. We borrow this money for roads, which take long to start; for instance, for the Rukungiri-Ishasha Road, we passed a loan request here in 2014 but the road has never kicked off and yet we are paying interest on that money. I believe there are equally other projects for which we borrowed money and the money is lying idle. This Rukungiri-Ishasha Road is a serious matter. We should not take loans for granted and start borrowing money every day because we can get it. We need to sympathise with our country.

Madam Speaker, hon. Muwanga Kivumbi has said that in the last Parliament, we resolved to roll out social protection programmes in all the districts. I am very frustrated to see that this budget is not showing it very clearly. This money can help somebody who does not know where Kampala is but he or she can live, pay school fees for the children and buy clothes. However, here we are underrating it.

I know we do not have money, Madam Speaker, but look at the money budgeted to build a health centre IV, for example; I heard the hon. Kivumbi saying that according to the report, it is about Shs 5.6 billion. How can we spend such money on just a health centre IV? That is too much money.

Madam Speaker and honourable members -(Member timed out.)

5.12
MR PETER OCEN (Independent, Kole County South, Kole): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the Committee on Budget for presenting this report. 

My concern is about the local governments. When we talk of service delivery, we mean services that are delivered through local governments at both the district and subcounty levels. I wonder so much when the same budget being proposed for delivery of services is at the same time being reduced and yet all of us hail from these local governments. The indigenous members of the communities are now asking us about the service delivery we keep talking about. 

Madam Speaker, as we talk now, high mortality rates are not seen in Kampala or elsewhere in urban areas, but when you go deep in the villages, it is extensive. Women and children are dying and yet at the same time the health budget is getting reduced.

We have health facilities which have not been operationalised but they have been upgraded to health centres III and IV because it is Government policy that every subcounty and county must have a health centre III and IV respectively. How are these going to be operationalised if the budget is going down?

Madam Speaker, it is my wish that the budget for local governments be raised as well as the budget for the health sector. Thank you.

5.15
MR JACOB OPOLOT (Independent, Pallisa County, Pallisa): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the issues raised. 

As hon. Karungi stated and also as the minority report reflects, I would like to refer us to what we resolved in the Ninth Parliament about the rollout of SAGE and the commitment Government made to include every 100 oldest persons in all the subcounties in the country. Unfortunately, much as the Government made this commitment, it is becoming a back-and-forth struggle. 

We therefore wonder, if you commit to provide about Shs 27 billion in a particular year, why wouldn’t you provide it? Who else is expected to provide for such money? In the provisions for next financial year, for example, we are short by Shs 11.6 billion, which means both the new districts implementation and the national rollout cannot be achieved.

Therefore, I would wish to hear from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development on what this means, in terms of the planning for this country. If you committed yourself and the donors supporting the programme planned for counterpart funding but then you do not fulfil your part, it is very embarrassing. It shows you are not sincere in your commitment and, therefore, it is very difficult for anybody to plan based on your commitment because they will not expect you to fulfil it. 

Madam Speaker, the way this programme is being implemented is clearly discriminatory. Most parts of the country have been left out. That means more older persons are left out and only a few will benefit. When we resolved on a national rollout, we were trying to make sure everything is done equitably so that there is harmony in the country, other than a situation where some districts look at others as the advantaged and benefiting at their expense. 

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I wish to hear the renewed commitment from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development so that we can be sure on the way forward. I also wish to hear about the roadmap for the national rollout so that we have a clear message for our people on when they should expect the national rollout of SAGE. This will allow all eligible older persons to be reached. Thank you.

5.18
MR LEE OGUZU (FDC, Maracha County, Maracha): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I only need to seek clarifications on a few things. 

Last year, at the height of the food insecurity in our country, we demanded to withdraw funds from the Contingency Fund but that money was not availed. When I read through the presentation of the chairperson, I did not see anything in particular about it. I would like to know what would happen to the Contingency Fund in this financial year.

Secondly, we open our boundaries to refugees from other countries. When they come, they degrade the environment and share resources like roads and hospitals with the host communities. However, when I listened to the presenter, I did not hear of any specific development assistance programme for host communities. I would like clarification on what this means going forward and what it means for the host communities since their resources are shared and constrained.

Thirdly, I would like to hear particularly from the Minister of Finance because we have been losing money in the road sector. We have had cases where people get compensated every time some kind of infrastructure like power, water or roads pass through an area. Are you planning for a national integrated master plan, which will define infrastructure corridors, so that going forward, we do not have to spend on compensation thus saving Government money? Thank you.

5.20
MR JOSHUA ANYWARACH (Independent, Padyere County, Nebbi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In May 2007, we lost very many Ugandans in a bomb blast in Somalia. It was surprising to note that one of them was called Wanda and he was from Kamuli, your own district. Another one was called Wilber from Kiruhura and another was Kilama from Awach Subcounty in Gulu. These young guys died because they had gone there for a peacekeeping mission. 

The peacekeeping mission under the UN - AMISOM - has been so costly to Ugandans in terms of personnel, because our own innocent children have been killed, and even in terms of the amount of money we have appropriated from this Parliament and sent to Somalia. Surprisingly, we have absolutely no updated records of the amounts that have been sent back to us in terms of compensation.

Madam Speaker, we know very well that member states that have sent their soldiers or other personnel under the peacekeeping mission are compensated by the UN. You appropriate anything for operations, salaries depending on the scale of your country and these monies are compensated. Right now, Kenya is demanding for US$ 26 billion for only one year’s operations. How much has been compensated or paid back to us? 

Therefore, when we see Shs 500 billion, which is purportedly hanging, I think the Somalia mission has been used to corrupt this Government and to steal our money in all ways possible. Therefore, Madam Speaker, do not see that Shs 500 billion as a misplaced amount. Government should give audited information of how much we have received from the UN.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, we made a resolution here that our poor parents, our old grandfathers nationwide, begin receiving money under SAGE. It is only Shs 25,000 paid out to each of those in Uganda but in Kenya it is Shs 75,000. In Finland, as we –(Interruption)

COL KULAYIGYE: Madam Speaker, every Uganda soldier that has been wounded or killed in the AMISOM operations got compensated –(Interjections)– Can I be allowed to continue -

THE SPEAKER: Order. 

COL KULAYIGYE: I will give you information, honourable member. First of all, what happens is that AMISOM sends a medical team that does assessment and that process is still going on. Is it in order, therefore, for a Member to misinform this House that our soldiers have not been compensated?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this House has not received a report of the death compensation of the soldiers. If you did, we would know. (Applause) We do not know.

MR ANYWARACH: Madam Speaker, my most respected colleague, Col Kulayigye, is still new in this House. If anything, he should read about how the AMISOM operations are done and how member states are compensated and refunded for the money that they appropriate for that peacekeeping operation. We even do not know whether those soldiers you are talking of have been compensated because up to now - (Member timed out.) 

5.24
MR EMMANUEL SSEMPALA (DP, Makindye-Ssabagabo Municipality, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would like to thank the presenters. 

If I understood the report right, you said that there is a schedule for roads. I would like to have a look at that schedule because my constituency and Wakiso District in general has most of the roads that are congesting Kampala. It hurts for somebody to drive for two hours from Masaka to Kampala and then spends another one and half hours from Kyengera to town. Therefore, I would like to have a schedule and see what is happening. 

Secondly, if I heard the minority report right, I would like to suggest that the Shs 850 billion that can be saved from the oil roads be transferred to UNRA. This is because from the infrastructural committee, where I sit, we have been made to understand that they have a shortfall of Shs 818 billion. If we gave them this money, maybe it would make a lot of sense.

Thirdly, is the Minister of Health aware that Wakiso District, with over three million people and four municipalities, has only Entebbe Grade B Hospital? We would like to –(Interjection)– Of course, State House is almost taking it although the district authorities are still contesting that. I would like to have a position on the health facilitates in the country.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to see this budget developing policies that put money in the pocket of the common man. If millions of people in the villages can earn a monthly income of at least a minimum of Shs 200,000 per person, you will see the industries prospering because they will create an effective demand in the economy. Right now, money that is being distributed is not trickling down to the people. When they get the money, the next step should be to start the import substitution industry. 

We are getting substandard products from all over the world. Let us start our own industries, start consuming substandard products from our own industries and develop the industries instead of allowing those people to take our money. We should also –(Member timed out.) 

5.28
MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA (DP, Bukoto County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for the report and also thank a member of the committee for the minority report. 

The committee has indicated in their report that the funds for irrigation are scattered between Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Water and Environment. The committee has also recommended that a competent body be established to pool resources together to get the funds. The committee, however, has not indicated which body they are talking about and how competent it is going to be. 

I also wonder whether the committee thinks that these ministries are not competent and they want to establish another body to run the irrigation fund. On that one, I need clarification. However, I feel that water resources should be under the Ministry of Water and Environment to take care of water and ensure that the resources are well catered for and then the Ministry of Agriculture uses the water for irrigation. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to know from the presenter of the minority report what kind of health centre III and health centre IV would cost Shs 2.6 and Shs 5.6 billion respectively. We have seen people hiding under such figures to steal money. It is important for all of us to get a clear explanation because when I go back to Bukoto East, I want to explain to my people that we are getting a health centre III at such a cost and these are the implications. The responsible ministry or the committee should explain that. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

5.31
MS MARY KABANDA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the opportunity. I want to thank the committee for the report and the committee member for the minority report. 

I am so disappointed to hear that the budget for health has been reduced. A recent report from the United Nations and the World Health Organisation indicate that HIV/AIDS has nearly doubled here in the central. United Nations and the World Health Organisation have intentions of having Uganda AIDS-free by 2030. Therefore, we must join our hands with them. If we reduce the budget for health, we cannot achieve that. 

Secondly, there are village health team workers that do a lot of work yet they are not paid anything. Some little money should be put in the budget, as was suggested for the councillors, to pay those people. Many years ago, they were given bicycles but those bicycles are now old. They are doing a great job out there, so we should think about them too. 

I also noted that the climate is changing and everybody see this. However, here in Uganda we do not have an irrigation policy although money has been allocated to it. Madam Speaker, I request that before the money for irrigation is released, we first draft an irrigation policy to use as Ugandans because there is none. 

Lastly, the committee has been silent on the food policy in primary schools. There is no money allocated to that at all. The Minister of Education, the First Lady, has been talking about a food policy in primary schools whenever she goes out. How are we going to ensure that every child in primary school gets lunch when the budget has not allocated any money to implement that policy? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: You know, we are talking about irrigation and I think we are going to irrigate maize and beans, but we have an obligation under the Sustainable Development Goals on climate change. Where are the trees you are going to irrigate? Yes, we are going to irrigate maize and beans and get food, but what are we doing about climate change? Under Goal No. 13, you are required to take urgent action to combat climate change and its impact. In your budget, apart from irrigating food, there is nothing about climate change. 

5.35
MAJ. (RTD) GUMA GUMISIRIZA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Madam Speaker, I want to thank you for giving me the opportunity to make some contribution. I am called Maj. Guma and I come from Ibanda North. 

First, I would like to say that this is perhaps one of the most important debates that we should engage in and which should attract the majority of us because it is a debate concerning the sustenance of Ugandans. Unfortunately, a number of us are in the corridors and the attention given to this is not as sufficient as I thought. I am saying this because this is the most important debate by Members of Parliament - discussing the economy and ways and means of resource allocation. 

Much of the discussion also centres on the sharing rather than on the ways and means of raising what to share. Therefore, I find it extremely unfortunate, and I pity Ndugu David Bahati and his senior minister because they are managing a shrinking cake; they are managing a resource envelope that is increasingly getting smaller vis-à-vis the number of Ugandans and our needs. Less attention is therefore being paid to the ways and means of raising money to cater for the various competing needs. Attention is instead being given to sharing rather than the priority of revamping the economy. 

Madam Speaker, I have been here with you for a while and many times we have raised all these issues. The Hansard has it on record that the economy is not on the correct path. Now, a few turbulences like climate change are causing a lot of tremors. In fact, wait until mid-2017, even the issue of food may be a challenge. Just food - I mean chakula - will be a challenge, although it is already a challenge in certain parts of the country like Teso and Karamoja. 

Hon. Raphael Magyezi ably made a point that district allocations have remained small for many years and yet the majority of our people live there. Therefore, it is high time that Government increased allocations to various districts of the country. In the previous election, one presidential candidate wanted to manipulate the minds of councillors –(Interjections)– It was one of the presidential candidates; I do not remember his name. He wanted to use the issue of councillors and manipulate their political thinking. This is the point hon. Magyezi was making. These councillors get peanuts and yet we subject it to tax. 

Finally, Madam Speaker, the planners, hon. David Bahati and the consultants who are accompanying him, should pay attention to the fish subsector. There is a professional write-up about fish that says if Lake Victoria was properly managed, the country’s budget would be in balance. I have finished. (Laughter) 

5.39
MR ISMAEL OROT (NRM, Kanyum County, Kumi): Madam Speaker, the budget should always target outputs - what the money will bring later, which we are going to appropriate. We are now looking at a budget, which is theoretical, but we need a budget which is practical. In the area of agriculture, for example, they have not touched on the issue of zoning - what can do very well in a certain region vis-à-vis the other regions - so that the issue of silos can be practical. Otherwise, the silos can end up being empty and food insecurity will continue. 

There is the issue concerning extension staff. I served as an LCV for the last 15 years before I joined Parliament and I know that the extension staff are not enough. You will find a parish chief, for example, governing five parishes and this is happening all over the country. The budget should consider how we can add more parish chiefs like in the old days where a parish chief was effective on the ground and service delivery was implemented.

Madam Speaker, Uganda is very productive and people are energetic, but they need a lot of guidance. My colleague from Wakiso said that the Treasury looks dry now because there is nothing to be sold by the common man on the ground. However, if the common man is empowered on the ground, the money will reach the Treasury and the country will have liquidity. Therefore, we should not bring a theoretical budget here. 

Our role as Members of Parliament is to assist Government to deliver good services so that the Government can stay longer in leadership and power comfortably. Otherwise, the communities are very poor. When we talk about famine in Teso region – that has been elaborated on, but look at health; Madam Speaker, can you believe that a caesarean birth can cost a family about Shs 450,000 upcountry and they end up selling a cow or garden to raise that money? When the technocrats in our hospitals learn that the budget for health has reduced, they will get demoralised. 

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance should find money and utilise all the money instead of saying that some money is hanging somewhere and yet it would deliver a good service to the population. Thank you very much.

5.42
MR JOHNSON MUYANJA (NRM, Mukono County South, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I sit on the Committee on Public Service Committee and Local Government and I know that in the Ninth Parliament, you allocated money for bicycles, but only half of the districts were given bicycles. The LCI chairpersons are not happy with the law of lining behind them but they are ready to go for the elections. Can we consider giving the remaining 59 districts bicycles because it requires only Shs 9 billion; when we look at the huge amounts of money we have, we can at least save Shs 9 billion for this purpose.

Secondly, Madam Speaker, there is the issue of roads in subcounties. When you look at the proposed estimates for road maintenance, the subcounties are allocated less than Shs 1 million every quarter. We will all agree that when this money goes to the district, it becomes a problem. We, therefore, request that money for subcounties be increased from Shs 1.2 million every quarter to at least Shs 5 million. In public service we managed to save money from seminars, workshops and even travel abroad.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, you can see that in the presentation there is too much money for motor vehicle maintenance. When you look around in Uganda House parking, we have over 700 Government vehicles parked there and some of them are reserved for the technical people to buy cheaply. 

This Parliament should demand for all Government vehicles to be pulled out from garages and parking lots and at least be taken to Namboole Stadium from where we can collect billions of money. Madam Speaker, you can find a brand new pick-up parked and sold at Shs 400,000 and within two months you find it on the road costing over Shs 20 million. That is my humble request to this Tenth Parliament. I thank you. 

5.46
MR HATWIB KATOTO (NRM, Katerera County, Rubirizi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Government is losing track; for example, during his campaigns, the President promised that at least each and every village will get two sources of clean water for drinking. However, as I talk now, we have reached the extent where people in the village are unable to access drinking water or even water for bathing. 

In my constituency, I have resorted to buying water sources using my own money. When they send money to the districts, they are told that they should not buy water sources and places where tanks can be put. However, how are we going to get clean water sources? People need clean drinking water.

Operation Wealth Creation has turned into “operation wealth destruction and poverty creation”. We thought the army would improve on this –(Interjections)– No, how can you bring seedlings to a person who will not plant them and you force him or her to sign? At the end of the day, the seedlings dry up and yet Government has injected a lot of money into the suppliers. Madam Speaker, the Shs 2.753 –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, honourable colleague. Madam Speaker, on the 18th I received an SMS and a letter in which Brig. Kayanja was communicating to Maj. Ochong, who is in charge of Operation Wealth Creation/NAADS in Kasilo County. The message was that Members of Parliament should facilitate the two farmers who are going for training in Hoima. 

When did we, Members of Parliament, become funders of such projects? When did we budget for Members of Parliament to provide money to facilitate the farmers to be trained in Hoima? 

MR KATOTO: Thank you for your information. Madam Speaker, such nasty things are happening in our constituencies. A farmer may not want coffee but because of connivance, these people bring coffee. So it is put under the shade until it dries and yet the Government pays for these supplies. Are we creating wealth or creating poverty and destroying wealth? When I go to the issue- (Member timed out.) 

5.49
MR DENIS SABIITI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to comment on the 15 roads in the Albertine region. They are not going to be constructed in the coming financial year. I presented a detailed paper to the Budget Committee showing what is going to be spent in this coming financial year, 2018/2019, and then in 2019/2020. Therefore, the money you are talking about is for construction of roads, which have reached advanced stages of procurement, where a contractor is about to come on board. The total number of roads is 50 - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, are you taking issue with the current position? 

MR KIVUMBI: Madam Speaker, the current speaker is a member of the Budget Committee. He is an ex officio member and chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure. The honourable member was part of the committee meeting where we were presented with a list of roads and only two roads had road designs while the rest did not have even a feasibility study done. 

Madam Speaker, the honourable member also had very disjointed information before the committee, otherwise we would have spared him. He was one of the chairpersons who did not have correct figures. Is he in order, therefore, to come here and misrepresent facts and say that all the 15 roads have contractors?  Are you in order to misinform Parliament? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, first of all, you are a member of the Budget Committee; I do not know whether you should even be speaking. 

MR SABIITI: I am not. 

THE SPEAKER: You should not even be speaking. 

MR SABIITI: I am an ex officio member and I only made a presentation to the Budget Committee. 

THE SPEAKER: Even ex officio members are members. Yes, you are a member of the Budget Committee. 

MR SABIITI: Can I continue? 

THE SPEAKER: No, this is your report. 

5.52
MS JUDITH NABAKOOBA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mityana): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me the opportunity. I would like to clarify - 

THE SPEAKER: No, you are also a member of the Budget Committee. You are the chairperson. Let us hear from the member from Kaberamaido. 

As she gets ready to come up, I would like to announce the presence of a delegation from Dokolo North. They are represented by hon. Paul Amoru and hon. Cecilia Ogwal. We were there this weekend. You are welcome. (Applause)

5.53
MS MARIA GORETTI AJILO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the member who presented the minority report. I have two issues to comment on. 

The committee talked about the revival of the cooperative movement - the farmers who are the base of our production because we know that we are an agricultural country. Before you talk about reviving the cooperative movement, the Shs 20 billion compensation as compared to what the minority report talked about – the Shs 58.3 billion - is not going to help the revival of the societies and the cooperative unions. 

If you really want to revive the movement, compensation should first be taken as a priority. Most of these unions and societies are already so crippled because they have suffered over the years due to consequences of civil strife and their assets have all been lost. Over the years, they have been asking Government to have their assets compensated. 

These unions and societies are not engaged in any production. They are not doing anything. Teso Cooperative Union, where I come from, is already asking for Shs 6 billion, and they have been asking for it for the last 10 years to no avail. Therefore, if you are serious on the revival of the cooperative movement, let the first priority be compensations. 

You talked of extension workers. Alongside agricultural extension workers, the revival of the cooperative movement should see the provision of cooperative extension workers too, so that the societies are operated using the cooperative principles.

The second point that I want to comment on, which others have talked about, is Operation Wealth Creation. Teso region has been zoned for citrus growing but as my colleagues have already said, the provision of these seedlings is already problematic. A colleague has talked about how the seedlings are brought when they are already dry. 

In Kaberamaido in September, people just woke up in the morning and saw a truck arriving at a trading centre. There was no consideration for those who had applied for that enterprise. They only dealt with the people that they found around. They looked up anybody who could sign for it while they have already done their accountability. The seeds were abandoned and yet a lot of money is being spent on the Operation Wealth Creation –(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give this House is that while Teso has been zoned for citrus growing and seedlings are being supplied by Operation Wealth Creation, the factory that is being targeted is specifically supposed to consume a certain type of citrus or orange fruit. However, when they supply seedlings, they supply anything. 

Recently, they declared that certain varieties are not supposed to be consumed by the factory and this has discouraged so many farmers. Some of them have even cut down their trees. As they supply the seedlings, they should supply those that can be consumed. Thank you.  

MS AJILO: Thank you, colleague, for that information. Like my colleague has just said, not every variety - (Member timed out.) 

5.57
MS LOY KATALI (NRM, Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and the members for coming up with the report. I would also like to thank my colleague on the opposite - 

THE SPEAKER: Are you the vice-chairperson of the finance committee? 

MS KATALI: Yes. 

THE SPEAKER: Please, sit down. (Laughter)

5.58
MR RICHARD GAFABUSA (NRM, Bwamba County, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the chairperson of the committee and also specifically hon. Kivumbi for the minority report. I was so touched by the surgery of the minority report. 

I would like to talk about allocation to the local governments because this is where we expect much of the service delivery to come from and we are all engulfed in this circus. When we go back to the districts and constituencies and look at the health sector, the roads, education and all services, the meagre resources allocated to the local governments does not enable them deliver these services as required. 

All of us are usually questioned by the people about these services. Most of them do not wait even to look at what comes from the centre. I am told that this same Parliament had previously considered this and a recommendation was made that we need to give at least 38 per cent of the national budget to the local governments. However, I am disturbed that continuously, the allocation is going down and has reached a mere 11 per cent. I urge this House to allocate more money to the local governments so that we are able to provide these services to the people. 

I am also disturbed by the issue of poor loan absorption. It is paradoxical because we are talking about inadequate resources and at the same time we are talking about lack of capacity to absorb these funds. So, what are we talking about? I entirely agree and urge Members to support the recommendation by the honourable member that if a ministry, department or agency is unable to absorb or utilise at least 50 per cent of the monies allocated to it, we should not continue borrowing money for them. Let us allocate money to those departments and ministries that are able to deliver and to absorb the funds. Otherwise, we will keep rotating in the paradox of no money and at the same time having inadequate capacity to spend and utilise resources. I thank, Madam Speaker.

6.01
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee chairperson and also the person who presented the minority report. 

This year, a policy on early childhood development was passed by this Government, but I am not very sure that I have heard about funds that have been allocated for early childhood development. This is something that the Ministry of Education and Sports and the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development promised was going to take off. We need to hear from the ministers. When are we staring this? We were told that all schools will have early childhood development centres; where is the money to start this?

Recently, our boys were in Gabon and fundraising was going on. I have heard of increments allocated to other areas like agriculture for irrigation but there is no budget line for sports. We are again waiting to put fireworks when the time comes. How do we get funds for these boys? They need to start the training now and that budget should be allocated. When these people are out there, they are carrying the flag of Uganda; they are not going there as individuals. I think that we need to look at this. 

I would also like to support the idea of the baseline survey, especially in the social sector. We are right now talking about NAADS/Operation Wealth Creation, which gives people seeds which they do not need. We need to demand for a report on how much wealth has been created. What is down there on the ground? Have our people benefited? We need to find that out before we even talk of passing this budget. This is because we are enriching certain people. 

The new strategy is favouring people who have something better. What about some of us who represent the poor of the poorest? When will they benefit from this Operation Wealth Creation? They will not even be fixed among the farmers who are going to be trained. Madam Speaker, as we talk of passing the vote for Operation Wealth Creation, which is meant to promote prosperity, I think we need to demand for accountability of what has been done because a lot of seeds have been wasted. 

I would also like to support the idea of SAGE being rolled out to all districts. At least let us start with 100 and let this money be provided so that our people who worked for this country, those who are suffering with children orphaned due to HIV/AIDS, are given support.

This Parliament has talked about the pensioners. I do not know what is happening to their arrears. We were promised some time back and now this budget has again come but the pensioners are not well reflected. I think we need an answer because these old people are going to die and leave this money without benefitting from it. (Member timed out.)

6.04
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The reason why the budget is not performing well is because we have left out the most important item - development versus consumption. The biggest avenue of corruption in the country is through procurement. When money is lost through procurement, you will borrow more money to do little work.

Currently, the interest rate and repayments come third after education and health. If we borrow up to Shs 7.3 trillion, interest payment alone is going to be about Shs 365 billion. If you add the principal payment, you may go to about Shs 800 billion. Imagine, if you borrowed for a road, instead of doing a road for US$ 300,000, which is about Shs 700 million, you are doing it for Shs 5.5 billion. That means the money wasted through stealing is Shs 4.8 billion. This is the problem; it is procurement. Unless we come up with a formula to deal with the minimum costs, we shall not achieve much.  

When I was the chairman of the Committee on National Economy, that is, in 2001 to 2006 - hon. Guma was one of my members and he knows this - we did a survey on roads in Ethiopia and in eastern and southern Africa. I think Prof. Latigo was also one of my members. It came out clearly that roads in Uganda are too expensive because of theft. All over those regions, the roads cost between US$ 180,000 to US$ 220,000. Recently, I carried out research again in Ethiopia and the cost is still US$ 200,000 per kilometre. 

What is the problem? Bitumen is from the same area, petroleum, chips are all over – in fact, stones are everywhere in Uganda; we do not import them, and labour is very cheap. So why are our roads so expensive? It is us, the Members of Parliament, who are allowing this to continue. We need to get up and interrogate the cost of a kilometre of a road.

Madam Speaker, as hon. Guma said, we needed time to discuss this. There is this issue of SAGE for the elderly; there is no difference between the elderly in Bugisu, those in Kabale and the ones in Karamoja. (Applause) If the money is little, let us divide it equally and that will help everybody. Even if they get Shs 5,000, they will buy half a kilo of sugar and a bar of soap. (Applause)

The same also applies to education loans. The loans have become a centre for corruption. With education loans, everybody should qualify; as long as I am a Ugandan and I passed my exams, I should be eligible. (Member timed out)

THE SPEAKER: One minute for the elderly.

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for recognising the elderly. (Laughter) I was still talking about scholarships. It is a potential area for corruption. That body they have instituted - Let me ask, if we have all passed, is it the way that I have written my application that qualifies me for a loan, or the way I laugh or present myself? Why don’t we put in place a mechanism and say that if a student has not got Government sponsorship, if they scored a certain number of points they are entitled to a loan. That will clear the system for all our children to secure a loan. If we do not do that, we will have a big problem. 

All the bodies we are creating only increase corruption. There is a parent from Bulambuli that has gone to solicit for a loan but they have taken his Shs 600,000 and no loan has been accessed and yet they are about to chase his child from Kyambogo University. I have evidence and I am ready to tear up that institution unless they make it good. 

Borrowing without approval from Parliament - this Minister of Finance has gone very far. These days, they borrow using the Attorney-General. I am going to bring documents here to prove that. This is very dangerous. Parliament is supposed to approve all borrowings and that is why we are seeing these loans going high at a very fast rate. I think we are going to get done -(Interruption)

MR BAHATI: Madam Speaker, is it in order for a senior member of this House to allege that the Government of Uganda is borrowing money without the approval of Parliament? Can he substantiate here and bring the papers or for now he withdraws that statement. I do not know any loan that the Government of Uganda has procured without the approval of Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the 1995 Constitution altered that position of the Government borrowing by itself and made Parliament a partner in borrowing. If you have evidence that they have been borrowing without us, please tell us. 

MR NANDALA-MAFABI: Madam Speaker, I have been looking for such an opportunity -(Laughter)- and tomorrow the first thing I will do when I come in is to submit some documents. However, all of you have seen one of the borrowings that took place. Crane Bank was given Shs 200 billion yet you remember we capitalised Bank of Uganda with Shs 1.1 trillion. The Shs 200 billion which went to Crane Bank was taxpayers’ money! The Constitution of Uganda says you will not guarantee a loan, you will not do anything without parliamentary approval; so what is that? (Applause) Madam Speaker, tomorrow I am going to bring more evidence. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a point which hon. Nandala raised concerning the cost of roads. I do not know whether we cannot pick up from our reports from the previous Parliament and see how to move. Today we had about Shs 6 billion in Wanseko, next time we may have Shs 10 billion. 

MR JAMES KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, this is not only in one sector; I think it is in all Government departments. Hon. Kivumbi has mentioned a point, which we argued about in the committee, and I am a member of the committee. A maternity ward cannot be constructed in a health centre III in Uganda at Shs 2.7 billion at subcounty level. Just think about it - Shs 2,700,000,000 for only a health centre III! It is shocking even for someone to imagine this and put it in the medium term framework. 

There must be a standard for construction in Government. A health centre IV is built at Shs 5.7 billion and a technocrat writes that in a paper and then Parliament approves it! We need to assert ourselves concerning these documents which technocrats bring to us. We must scrutinise them and advise on how to go about them. 

Construction in Government is a way of stealing money because they do not have a standard. If we know that there is no standard, it is now up to our Parliament to carry out research and say, “enough is enough; this should be the minimum we can appropriate to health centres III, IV and roads”. That is how we can stop this.  

THE SPEAKER: Think about it so that by the time we close, we should have a strategy to address this because the costs are astronomical. 

6.14
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I wish to commend the committee for having proposed that at least we need to have a comprehensive plan for irrigation, maybe by setting up a board that will take care of irrigation, unlike going the presidential way - the rudimentary way of using a bicycle, which cannot work in this century. You realise that even when the President was riding a bicycle, he had more than seven people assisting him - one lifting the jerrican, another one putting it down. That cannot help Ugandans. 

Zimbabwe receives rain twice a year, but it has been a food basket for Africa and Europe because of irrigation. Honourable members, instead of approving loans and borrowing money to support refugees - Of what importance is it to our people? Why don’t we think about our people and ourselves? We are already refugees in our own country. 

We need to go for preventive measures other than curative. It is a pity, looking at the budget for primary health care, that part of the little money that is supposed to go for primary health care is retained centrally in the name of development. When you look at these health centres, they are still constructing buildings and this means you must eventually connect them to power and water. The budget for primary health care is not increasing and as a result, hospitals are now in total darkness. You saw on TV –(Interruption)

MS ALUM: Thank you so much, honourable member, for giving way. The information that I would like to give you is that because of limited money to the districts for health centres III and IV, recently in my district a health centre III had no running water. The borehole had broken down but the in-charge did not have money to repair it. I had to come in because pregnant women were delivering but there was no water to help them clean up. I paid Shs 1,400,000 to make sure the health centre III functioned again.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Finally, we need to think about uplifting the standards of health workers. These people have been receiving Shs 66,000 as lunch allowance. Even if you are given that money in the village, you cannot get a decent meal –(Member timed out.)

6.17
MR MOSES KASIBANTE (Independent, Rubaga Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairman of the committee for a comprehensive report and hon. Muwanga Kivumbi for a more conclusive report. 

Madam Speaker, my first concern is with the State House scholarships. When hon. Kivumbi was talking about it, I imagined the Government of Uganda partitioning Ugandans into two categories. There are those with children who only qualify for UPE, USE and the like. For UPE, the capitation grant per child is Shs 10,000 per annum and a year has got three terms, so that is Shs 3,000 per term. A term has three months, so that means that each child gets Shs 1,000 per month. A month has 30 days, so when you divide that by Shs 1,000, you get Shs 23 per day. That is one category.

Another category is those that go to State House. His Excellency was one time responding to queries to do with State House scholarship procedures and he said “These are people who come to my house and disturb me that they want school fees; what can I do with them?” How many of our constituents can access State House? At one time, I was arrested at Nakulabye when I wanted to go to State House and demand for what was due to me, moreover I am a whole honourable Member of Parliament.

There is a category of Ugandans that go to State House to disturb the President of Uganda. The lowest paid per term in this category gets Shs 700,000 in a primary school. They go to the best schools in Kampala and in the country. In fact, those in university go overseas -(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the honourable member for giving way. As a Committee on Education and Sports, we agreed that State House sponsorship should stop and all the money should go to the loan scheme.

Secondly, we have met head teachers, we have met Catholic brothers heading schools and they really laugh at what is happening. I would like to give an example. You find a child in St Mary’s College Kisubi on State House sponsorship and his father is a rich man who picks his son in a Benz. He is capable of paying fees for his son, but he is on a State House scholarship. 

THE SPEAKER: I would like to clarify that it was not just an education resolution; it was a resolution of this House.
 
MR KASIBANTE: As hon. Muwanga rightly said, the Ninth Parliament scrapped State House scholarships in favour of the rest of Ugandans on the basis that not all Ugandans can access the President at his residence.

Madam Speaker, the issue of feeding children at school has totally been ignored. The last time the Minister of Education and Sports spoke about this, she advised parents to buy food flasks. Imagine a Ugandan who cannot afford school fees of Shs 10,000 being advised by the Minister of Education and Sports to buy food flasks. I have tried to do some research; the cheapest food flask in a supermarket goes for around –(Interruption)

MS WINFRED KIIZA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for according me this opportunity. I believe Members are here presenting pertinent issues concerning the budget and therefore the economy of this country. It is unfortunate because all our ministers are supposed to keep taking notes and ensure that the budget concerns that Members raise are taken care of. 

Is it procedurally correct for us to continue discussing yet the people who are supposed to keep taking notes and ensure that the Ugandans –(Interjections)– I realise that the ministers are not interested in the budget, they are not taking it as a matter of concern and they are not taking it seriously. Therefore, is it procedurally correct for us to continue discussing?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, one of the Members of this House today said that this is one of the most important debates this year where Members are giving their views on the Government’s proposals and they are also making proposals on the budget. Members are not satisfied by the presence of three ministers in the House.

Honourable members, I think Government should respect this House. This is their Budget Framework Paper. Members are making very important contributions and these are serious decisions for the country. Therefore, we want the Government here. House suspended until tomorrow. Tomorrow, instead of finishing, we will have to continue. 

(The House rose at 6.24 p.m. and adjourned until 1 February 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 
