

Tuesday, 10 January 2017

Parliament met at 11.04 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. Welcome back from the recess. I hope you had time to touch base with the electorate. 

During the recess, I had an opportunity to visit a few of our tourist attractions in Western Uganda. I would like to encourage Members to promote domestic tourism. In particular, I went to Semliki National Park where we have the natural hot springs. We would like to see more Ugandans and more visitors go there. 

I appeal to the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities to do more serious marketing because opportunities are great but we are not tapping them.

Secondly, during the recess we had the good news that the Uganda Cranes have again been ranked as the best team on the African continent by the Confederation of African Football. Our very own Denis Onyango is the tenth best goalkeeper in the world; you can imagine (Applause) He was also voted the best African player on the African continent. We would like to congratulate him and the team but also to remind Members that when we last qualified for the finals, we had agreed that we contribute Shs 500,000 each.

I will be going to Gabon supported by one of the corporations. I would like to go with their cheque. If Members do not mind, can we agree that the funds be deducted immediately from what you know so that we can have the cheque, support and give them more courage. Is that okay honourable members? 

HONOURABLE MEMBERS: Aye. 

THE SPEAKER: The Clerk is directed to deduct Shs 500,000 from each of our emoluments so that we have a cheque ready by the end of next week. Thank you. 

Honourable members, I also received communication to the Executive Director of the Uganda Road Fund in relation to the second quarter releases for the financial year 2016/2017 for road maintenance funds in your constituencies. 

Please, take an interest and find out what has been sent to your constituencies. I hope you have district road committees because you are supposed to follow up on those funds and their utilisation. 

I also want to announce that starting next week, we shall be sharing the Chamber with the East African Legislative Assembly who are due to sit here early in the year. 

In the past, they used to come when we are away but now because of the Budget Framework Paper, all of us will be here. They will be sitting in the Chamber in the morning and we shall be sitting in the afternoon as we have been doing. Please, welcome them. They will be here from 15th to 27th  January 2017.

I received a letter from the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs requesting extension of time to deal with the agreement for the establishment of the Eastern Africa Standby Force in the East African Community Protocol on Cooperation in Defence Matters. This matter came up when we were closing the Ninth Parliament. I will give permission to the committee to complete that work and report. 

Honourable members, I would like to remind the committees and the chairpersons that we are not expected to take money from the agencies for work. The Parliamentary Commission budgets for both your internal and external work. It would be very embarrassing if any of you is called before the Public Accounts Committee to explain how you received money from an agency. Please, desist from taking that money. 

I will allow hon. Silvia Akello to raise a matter of urgent national concern.  

MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and happy New Year honourable members. Following your communication, I get concerned; we received that communication from Uganda Road Fund about the second quarter release but the districts are receiving this money in the third quarter. We are expected to be receiving the third quarter release.

Why is the Road Fund releasing the second quarter in the third quarter? That has hampered the work of the districts. I am the Chairperson of Serere District Road Fund Committee. We wonder why Uganda Road Fund releases money meant for work for the previous quarter in the current quarter. And then at the end of the financial year, the money is released in the last week of the fourth quarter and they will not be able to utilise the money; it is then returned.

The Minister of Works and Transport and the Leader of Government Business must take this seriously together with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to bring to the attention of the Road Fund - (Interruption)
	
MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker and honourable members, happy New Year. What the honourable member is saying is pertinent. If you read the Road Fund Act, it is several times violated by Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. When the Road Fund collects all the money sent to all the districts, according to the Act, the money that remains can be invested and then they generate more money to run the Road Fund. 

The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Road Fund are not in tandem with the collection of this fund. It seems this money is being diverted. We must take interest in this matter and find out because the roads in the rural areas are doing very badly.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that is the concern, which I think should be taken seriously. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Committee on Physical Infrastructure to take an interest in this matter and I think we have debated it before. Who has control over the authorisation? I do not know whether the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development can update us at some stage because we have talked about this matter before. 

11.13
MS SILVIA AKELLO (NRM, Woman Representative, Otuke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am reading a statement on behalf of Otuke District and Lango sub region on the Karimojong illegal settlers in Otuke District. 

On the 23 December 2016, a group of cattle keepers identified as Karimojong from Kotido crossed over to Otuke District in Olilim Sub-county. Currently, over 5,000 cattle keepers with more than 10,000 livestock have occupied Olilim and Ogwete sub-counties in Otuke District.

All the identified internal migrants are male youth aged between 10 and above. The men who are there are armed with bows and arrows. Reports from the locals indicate that several others are armed with guns following repeated incidences of gun shots right from the time the settlers arrived in the area.

Madam Speaker, in 1987 and even most recently, from 2002 and 2003, the Karimojong invaded the area. The Langi local families lost property such as livestock, homes, food crops and many families were displaced. It took the intervention of Government, working closely with the local leadership, to restore security and order in Otuke under Lira District. In 2009, Otuke was granted district status having been carved out of the greater Lira District.

Local Government leadership structures and functional administrative units were established, which laid grounds for resettlement, preventing similar incidences from happening in future. The Anti-stock Theft Unit was established in Alir in Ogwete Sub-County and since then, the citizens and leaders of Otuke District have observed the Animals Act, which prohibits illegal movements of livestock and decentralisation policy, which does not allow unauthorised migration to a community without its local leaders’ permission. 

This helped to restore order and sanity until the 23 December 2016 when the Karimojong started coming back to Otuke District, overriding what is entitled in the law above without any district or leadership permission.

Madam Speaker, Otuke, like any other districts has local leadership structures headed by the Chairman LCV and other leadership organs like the Resident District Commissioner (RDC), the District Internal Security Officer and others. In 2016, the RDC of Otuke resigned his position to contest for EALA seat, leaving this administrative organ without even a deputy to manage public affairs. Hence, any sort of movement and settlement of a big magnitude has to be properly discussed and agreed upon by our leadership.

However in this case, the Karimojong migrants, also identified as citizens of Kotido District, accompanied by their RDC held a meeting with parish leaders and Chairman LCIII of Olilim Sub-county. They discussed the problems of the Karimojongf and the community rejected their proposal to settle in Otuke. However, the Karimojong and their leadership forcefully settled in Olilim Sub-county and beyond. At the moment, they have even moved beyond one district. As a result, the people of Otuke District are restless and threatened. They have vowed to forcefully also evict the Karimojong if no action is taken by Government due to the following reasons, Madam Speaker:

In just a short time the Karimojong have settled in Otuke District, there is a shortage of grazing places for livestock given the fact that the migrants have moved in with over 10,000 livestock and still increasing in number. Worst of all, they are looting the animals of Otuke District residents wherever they come in contact with theirs. 

Women and girls are threatened by the Karimojong’s presence with fear of being abused by the very many Karimojong men who are migrating into Otuke day and night without their female companions. (Laughter) 

Madam Speaker, this is worsened when schools open because parents will not allow their girl children to face the risk of being sexually abused while on their way to and from school by the Karimojong. In 1991 when I sat PLE, we were only two girls in the whole sub-county of twelve primary schools. This trauma can continuously be on other people and I who were affected.

They have destroyed our crops, uprooted the cassava plantation, which were given to us by the Operation Wealth Creation recently and burnt down the fields which have been used by the local people. We cannot dig because the fields are too dry since they are burning the grass right away. With the already existing famine, the people are in total despair. Since this is the clearing season of gardens, the people of Otuke cannot go to the fields due to fear of conflicts. The Karimojong have rather resorted to burning fields which is not good for agriculture especially at the beginning of the agricultural season like this.

Madam Speaker, all water points have been cut off since the Karimojong have built their kraals or shelters around the water surface making the local people not even to access. Our people are now fetching borehole waters to give their livestock because they cannot access the water sources.

Madam Speaker, the livestock, which migrated in Otuke have no record of vaccination against diseases and this is a threat to the health of our livestock and human beings of Otuke. 

In an attempt to peacefully resolve the matter, a security meeting has been held with the Resident District Commissioners of Lira and Kotido, the RISO, the Lango Parliamentary Group, the Anti-stock Theft Unit, Operation Wealth Creation Officer, the Regional Police Officer, the local leaders, the community and the local people of Karamoja.

As leaders of Lango, we support neighbours and believe that as Ugandans, they have equal rights. However, they have no right to jeopardise the rights of other citizens especially when it comes to the ownership of their lives, property and usage of their land. As an outcome of the meeting we held on 4 January 2017, recommendations were made that the Karimojong should leave the place forthwith and the security people are supposed to take charge.

We, therefore, strongly urge the Government to come in and support the leadership of Otuke and Lango to quickly solve the problem before it goes out of hand. Government should find a permanent solution to this problem to avoid future frustrations towards the people of Otuke District and Lango Sub-region. Madam Speaker, I rest my case and thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Akello on behalf of the people of Otuke. Honourable members, I do not really think we can debate this matter now. We want the Government to come with an answer because there are many areas touched in this matter. Let us have the Minister for Karamoja Affairs if he has a response now but we shall require the Prime Minister to speak as well. Do you have a response now?

11.24
THE MINISTER FOR KARAMOJA AFFAIRS (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Member for raising the matter. It is true there is a lot of drought in Karamoja Region and it has forced most of the Karimojong herdsmen to move around in search of pasture and water.

This matter has already come to our desk and we are discussing it. The good news is that so far, no harm has been done to the people of Otuke. The meetings are on-going and the technocrats have reached where they have reached and as the politicians, we have decided to step in. 

On the 17 January 2017, we will have a meeting in Otuke, specifically, to address that issue but as we talk, the Karimojong are Ugandans – [Mr Odur: “Order.”] If we can entertain people from South Sudan and accommodate them, then what about the people from the neighbouring districts? (Interruption)

MR ODUR: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As you heard from the statement, we held a meeting and a number of cassava gardens have already been looted. There are also a number of animals that have been taken over by the Karimojong and this is on record. Is it in order for the Minister for Karamoja Affairs to stand here and say, “There is no harm done” when it is on record that the properties have been looted in Otuke? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, since you are meeting on the 17 January 2017, please, come with the response to the complaints raised by the people of Otuke. They are talking about their livestock, cassava, insecurity and the fears of the women. (Laughter)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Madam Speaker, I am much obliged. I will come with the details. However, please, help me do my work; let the Members of Parliament also give the details of those people and the number of cattle that has been stolen by the Karimojong.   

THE SPEAKER: So, we shall expect a report on the 18th of January.

MR WAMANGA-WAMAI: Can the minister also tell us about the valley dams? He is talking of pasture but there is no water –

THE SPEAKER: No, please, let us stick to what the Member from Otuke has brought here. Honourable members, thank you. We shall expect a report from the Minister for Karamoja Affairs on the 18th of this month after they have had their meeting with the Members and local people.

Honourable members, I have received notice of two motions; so, I will adjust the Order Paper. There is a motion to pay tribute to the Cranes and there is also a Notice of Motion for a Resolution of Parliament to investigate circumstances under which rewards were made to 42 public officers for winning the tax arbitration case between the Government of Uganda and the Heritage Oil and Gas.

At the appropriate time, we shall allow that matter to come up. (Applause) 

LAYING OF PAPERS

SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE 2 FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2015/2016

11.28
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay Supplementary Schedule No. 2 for the financial year 2015/2016.

THE SPEAKER: We send it to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL ON THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2016
	
THE SPEAKER: The supplementary expenditure will be taken to the Committee on Budget and not the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back. 

Where are the commissioners to lay the report on the Public Accounts? Commissioner Winifred Kiiza, please, lay the papers?

11.29
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winifred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table a Report of the Auditor-General on the Public Accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the financial year ended 30 June, 2016.

The Specific accounts are: 
    i) The Annual Performance of the Office of the Auditor-General
    ii) The Annual Report on Central Government and Statutory Corporations
    iii) The Annual Report on Local Governments 
    iv) The Annual Report on Value-for-Money Audits. I beg to lay. 

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, Commissioner Winifred Kiiza. They are sent to the Public Accounts Committee for perusals and report back. Item No. 4.

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

11.31
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, Happy New Year. I beg to move that the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016 be read the second time. 

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? It has been seconded. Justification?

COL (RTD) BUTIME: Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda decentralised administrations in the country. There is devolution in this country and we cannot continue to run the country without other lower Governments at decentralised levels.

Local councils and executive committees are the lowest points of service delivery in Uganda and Uganda today suffers from service delivery.

The purpose of this Bill is to make sure that there is leadership at the village and parish levels. The delay in LC elections has eroded the very spirit of the Constitution and the Local Government Act. 

The mandate to govern at village and parish levels has withered away and there is breakdown of law and order in certain areas. However, I am not very sure that some areas where law and order is not doing well is as a result of the leadership at LCI level.  

Madam Speaker, the Principal Judge of Uganda has openly complained about lack of the LC courts. This has been heard loud and clear and it is very important that the LC village and parish elections take place.

As you are aware, the LCII court is the court of first instance for land cases and it is also an appellant court for cases, which emanate from LCI. In order to empower the village committee chairpersons and their committee members to do their work properly, there is every necessity that these elections should be held soonest. 

Madam Speaker, I am not going to argue; the mode of these elections should follow the law, which is in place. All I am asking for is simply to make it easy to hold these elections without spending huge sums of money, which are not available after all. 

The display of the voters’ roll will be for two days; the Electoral Commission is to determine objections to the voters roll according to Section 168(b) of the Electoral Commissions Act. Campaigning is for only one day. 

The country is ready. During Christmas session, everywhere I went, people were demanding for these elections to take place and I was in very many places and not necessarily my constituency but throughout the country. Members of Parliament themselves have been asking for the day when these elections will be held. So, it is high time this took place. 

Finally, about the funding of these elections, this is a matter which lies, as we agreed - the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is prepared to work together with the ministries involved in this election to make sure that funds we are asking for are made available. 

There is nothing wrong with being thorough but it is also important to be frugal as far as expenditure is concerned. I thank you, Madam Speaker. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER:  Thank you very much. 

11.38
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to wish all Members a happy New Year and to thank the minister for the statement and for bringing this law to this House. Indeed, as the minister has mentioned, Ugandans needed the elections carried out much earlier than now. The question has been, when? We are glad that finally, we are talking about the matter and that soon these officers will be voted in because we have been dealing with illegal officer bearers. 

However, Madam Speaker, as we talk about holding elections, I would like to be informed, which body is going to organise these elections? I am aware members of the Electoral Commission were appointed by this Parliament but I am not sure that they have been sworn in. 

Secondly, the term of the person handling the affairs of the Electoral Commission, my good friend, Rwakojo, expired. Even if he decided that we hold the elections tomorrow, who will be in charge of those elections. We want the world to know because organising elections is the mandate of the Electoral Commission. So, if the Commission is not yet fully constituted, who are we planning to entrust the elections with?

THE SPEAKER:  Honourable members, I just want to assure the country that the Appointments Committee of this House carried out the responsibility of vetting and sent in the report to the appointing authority. The rest now is in your hands, Chair of the committee. 

11.40
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Raphael Magyezi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I beg to lay on the Table the original copy of the report of the Committee of Public Service and Local Government on the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016. I beg to lay. 

I beg to lay on the Table a set of minutes and accompanying documents of the committee for the meetings held in preparation of this report. They include the reports on the public hearing, which we held with members of the public. I beg to lay. 

I want to confirm that the report has been uploaded on the iPads and I hope you have it. I am told the network is very slow; we shall give it a hand-shake so it can work very quickly. 

Madam Speaker, our report is in three parts. There is an introduction with the object of the Bill and methodology, the second part is our findings, our observations and recommendations and the third part is the conclusion. 

By way of introduction, the Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016 was read for the first time on the 21 December, 2016 by the Minister of Local Government. It was referred to the Committee on Public Service and Local Government in accordance with Rule 118 and the committee examined the Bill and now presents its report. 

The object of this Bill is to amend the Local Government Act Cap 243 so as to reduce the time for display of voters’ roll from 21 days to two days for election of village and parish councils. 

Secondly, to provide for the Electoral Commission to determine objections arising from the display of the voters’ roll in accordance with section 166(b) of the Local Government’s Act. 

Thirdly, to reduce the time provided for campaigns at village and parish council levels from at least seven days to at least one day and to provide for related matters. 

In terms of methodology, the committee met and held discussions with the following stakeholders: Ministry of Local Government; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs; Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Affairs; and the Electoral Commission officials. 

And secondly, we held a public hearing and received submissions from the following:
i)	The Democratic Party.
ii)	Members of the general public (see annex appended).

We reviewed the following documents and reports:
i)	The Constitution of Republic of Uganda
ii)	The Local Government Act, Cap 243 (as amended)
iii)	The Electoral Commission Act, 2010.
iv)	The National Women Councils Act, Cap 318; 
v)	The Kampala Capital City Authority Act, 2010; 
vi)	The Electoral Commission’s report on the 1997/98 Local Government Councils’ elections and;
vii)	The Constitutional Court ruling in the Rubaramira Ruranga v. the Electoral Commission and Attorney-General (Petition no. 21 of 2006).

Findings, Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, we have a number of things on which we zeroed our discussions with stakeholders and our reading:

One, we looked at the importance of local councils and effects of their delayed elections. What is the role of these local councils? How do they affect our governance and what has happened as a result of delaying their elections?

Uganda adopted devolution as a system of governance and vehicle for service delivery in October 1992. This was followed by enactment of the Local Government (Resistance Councils Statute) of 1993 which clearly stipulated the structure of governance and roles of various actors under the decentralised governance system. Devolution was embedded in the Constitution in 1995 and it was given full effect by the Local Governments Act of 1997.

Under the decentralisation policy, powers and functions over service delivery were devolved to local governments and local administrative units. The system provides for a clear line of responsibility over service delivery and administration from the village to the district.

The local councils and their executive committees at the village and parish level are the lowest points of service delivery and the pivot of all government operations. According to sections 48 and 49 of the Local Governments Act, the LCs are responsible for the following:

i)	The local government administrative units are the level of government closest to the population - they are involved in day-to-day governance of their areas of jurisdiction.
ii)	Initiating development plans; under the decentralisation, planning process begins at the village and parish level.
iii)	Monitoring government programmes; the LCs are the link between Government and communities. They provide reports and information on progress of government projects and programmes in their areas.
iv)	Strengthening security, law and order; community policing, maintenance of law and order requires active LCs which command respect by the population.
v)	Community mobilisation; the LCs are necessary for organising and mobilising community members to participate in various government programmes.
vi)	Vetting and verification of citizenship of the residents; LCs play an important role of recommending residents for official documents and recruitment to various posts.
vii)	Local administration of justice, particularly by the local council courts, is under the LCs.
viii)	Initiating local self-help projects – the bulungi bwansi – including mobilising local resources for community-based development schemes.

Despite these roles, no elections have been held for a long time.

During the public hearing, the committee was informed that the delay in holding LC elections resulted in serious governance and development challenges, including:

    (a) Poor governance

Because the LCs lack the mandate of the people, they have become too weak to effectively monitor government, fight corruption and provide good governance of their areas. Some LCs no longer hold any meetings, they no longer keep any records – and in some cases the chairpersons and the executive have abandoned fort and are not functional. The executive committees have turned into a one-man show in a number of areas, thereby undermining the democracy envisaged under decentralisation.
 
    (b) Increased insecurity and lawlessness 

The LCs are part of the mechanism to enforce security, law and order in society. Absence of duly elected LCs may be partly responsible for the breakdown in law and order. Some LCs have become part of the problem of insecurity, colluding with wrong elements.

(c)	Legality of decisions taken by LC has been under constant threat of litigation.

(d)	Absence of these structures has jeopardised the local administration of justice since local councils assist to adjudicate certain cases at that level. Their absence may be one of the causes of the increased backlog of cases in courts of law.

(e) There is lack of accountability and scrutiny over funds collected by the LCs like permits, fines, fees, stamp charges, and so on. In some cases, especially urban areas, LCs have imposed illegal taxes of up to 10 percent on land transactions and have continued to extort money from the citizens who need letters of recommendation from the local leaders.

Observations

(i)	Failure to hold LC elections is a breach of the Constitution (Articles 61, 181); the Electoral Commission is mandated under Article 61 to organise and conduct elections for all local government councils every five years.  

(ii)	LCs are an important grassroots level of governance of Uganda and the foundation block of the decentralisation policy. The absence of properly constituted LCs for the last 16 years poses a serious challenge to governance, service delivery and administration.

Recommendation

(a) 	Election of all LCs should always be part and parcel of the national elections calendar. They should be gazetted together with other elections and they should be held regularly.
(b) 	Government should make the necessary arrangements to ensure that the LCs become functional – hold regular meetings, keep records and become fully functional on levels of governance.
(c)	The Ministry of Local Government should take necessary measures to stop illegal activities and illegal taxes imposed by LCs on land transactions and other services.  

Multi-party Dispensation and the LC elections

The last elections of LCs were conducted in 2001 under the Movement system of individual merit. In 2006, the country returned to the multi-party dispensation. The Electoral Commission attempted to organise and conduct elections of LCs and issued guidelines for the elections. These were challenged in the Constitutional Court by Rtd Maj. Rubaramira Ruranga (Constitutional Petition No. 21 of 2006). He argued that it was unconstitutional to hold elections for the LCs under a Movement system after the country had shifted to the multi-party system. Court ruled in his favour and ordered that the law be amended to cater for the multiparty dispensation during elections of the local councils.
 
The effect of the court ruling in this case is that in a multiparty democracy, which this country has embraced, it is not the individual merits or demerits that are important. It is rather the programmes of the party which the candidate represents that are important. They are the ones upon which the electorate base their decision to choose a candidate to vote for. Therefore, candidates should be nominated by the parties (or they should stand as independent candidates) and they should be given adequate time to fairly present to the electorate their parties’ programmes. 

Observations

    i) The committee observes that the court ruling in the Rubaramira case is important and must be given due attention. Government is obliged to ensure that as long as the country is under the multiparty system, the elections of LCs and other elections must meet the requirements of this arrangement.

    ii) The committee observed that this being election at village level, it is assumed that the candidates, both flag-bearers of the different parties and independent candidates, are well known by the voters because they are at that level.

We, therefore, did bear that in the mind and made the following recommendations: 

        i) The Electoral Commission should ensure that there is sufficient time given for all stages of elections and settling of any disputes arising therefrom. 
        ii) The political parties should be fully involved in the LC elections and be given adequate time to nominate their candidates and campaign for their programmes.
        iii) The right of individuals who wish to stand as independent candidates should be respected and such individuals should be given adequate time to canvass for votes.

Mode of Elections

Madam Speaker, the committee learnt that the mode of elections by lining up, drew strong concerns from some members of the public and organizations.  Last year in September, this House amended the law to provide for lining up as the mode of elections, but in order to cut costs, some members of the public proposed that people be allowed to use simple paper slips or exercise books as ballot papers at that level. 

We listened to various stakeholders, especially those who thought lining up has a number of disadvantages as shown below: 
    i) It is backward, archaic and not good for modern democracies.
    ii) It causes conflicts and hatred among family members, neighbours and the community.
    iii) It is inconsistent with the right to privacy for the voters at the time of casting the votes.
    iv) It is unsuitable for certain categories like the sick, elderly and the disabled who cannot stand in the line for a long time.
    v) It brings intimidation, fear, intrigue, disenfranchisement of some leaders, especially some religious leaders who may fear to be seen taking sides. Such a system may deny some people their right to vote.

We listened to both sides and there are those supported lining up and their arguments are seen below. The following were given as the main advantages of the lining up method:

    i)  It is cost effective, cheap and affordable.
    ii) It minimizes invalid votes because all voters line up and are counted.
    iii) It is suitable for voters who are illiterate because there is no need for the voters to read or write anything.
    iv) It is transparent, easy to organize; counting of votes and declaration of results is done there and then, hence results in less petitions and complaints.
    v) It minimizes personal conflict because, unlike the past elections, this year’s LC elections will be on the basis of political parties and their ideologies and programmes, not individual personal merit.
    vi) It minimizes voter bribery because voters fear to be followed by candidates in case they take a bribe from a particular candidate and yet are seen voting another candidate.
    vii) It takes a short time as voting is done at the same time and venue by all voters at ago.

Madam Speaker, the committee wishes to make the following observations: 

    i) The mode of elections of lining up is already provided for in the law and permitted by the Constitution. It has ever been successfully used in this country.
    ii) Reverting to the secret ballot method would be costly and would mean postponing the elections to a much future date. The current budgetary constraints of Uganda cannot be ignored or underplayed.
    iii) This is a national election and only the Electoral Commission is mandated to organize and conduct the elections, including providing materials to use as ballot papers. Use of locally generated, non-serialized and non-uniform materials would open up the election to costly irregularities.
    iv) The use of local parish chiefs and administration staff as electoral officials was prohibited and ruled as illegal by the Constitutional Court in the Rubaramira case.
    v) Continued failure to hold LC elections, poses constitutional and governance challenges to this country.

Therefore, we recommend the following:
        i) The Electoral Commission should organize and conduct elections of Local Councils by voters lining up behind the candidates, or their agents, portraits or symbols, as provided in the law.
        ii) The Electoral Commission should take measures to increase sensitization of voters on their civic rights and duties and to strengthen enforcement of regulations against disruption of the election activities.

Women’s Council Elections

Madam Speaker, we observed that the Bill does not talk anything about the elections of women councils. The Committee found that the women council elections just like the Local Council elections have not been held in a long time, in this case since in May 2003. The absence of dully elected women councils is contrary to the Constitutional provision of affirmative action. It also means that the issues of domestic violence, defilement, rape, child neglect, women empowerment and other gender concerns have not been fully attended to due to lack of effective women representation at lower levels of governance. Full democratic decentralisation requires gender balance and redressing issues of marginalisation.

The Committee learnt that the budget earlier earmarked for LC elections was inadequate to carter for women elections alongside local council elections.

We, therefore, observed the following: 
    i) There cannot be fully constituted local council election and local council committees without the women councils.
    ii) This is a matter of law because in the Local Governments Act, the Executive Committee at LC1 must have the Chairperson of the Women council as the Secretary for women and public health.
    iii) Holding women council elections concurrently with the local council elections would result into cost saving on various items like civic education, training of polling officials and managing the polling day exercise.

Not having duly elected women councils would reverse the gains Uganda has made in gender equity and affirmative action for marginalized groups, which is applauded worldwide, as a key achievement of this country. We, therefore, would like to recommend that:

        a. The Electoral Commission should organise and conduct elections for women councils together with the elections of the local councils.

        b. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should provide the necessary resources for women council elections as I will explain later.

        c. In future, Government should ensure that elections of women councils are held at the same time as those of other special interest groups.

Elections of Local Councils of Kampala Capital City Authority (KCCA)

Madam speaker, the KCCA Act 2010, provides for division urban councils, ward urban councils, village urban councils and street committees in Kampala. However, the KCCA Act does not stipulate how the members of these councils should be elected. 

It should also be noted that the law does not clearly define the street committees, as some streets are just roads and others paths, while some other streets cut across several villages. For example, Gaba Street that moves from Clock Tower up to the lake cutting across various villages. How would you elect such a committee? 

Observations

It would be erroneous and grossly unfair to disenfranchise the people of Kampala by denying them the right to elect leaders of their localities. Leaving out KCCA in the local council elections would be unjustifiable.

The committee notes that the KCCA Act under section 13, provides for application of the Local Government Act, with the necessary modifications, for election of councillors of KCCA. Whereas this is possible in the case of elections of the KCCA Ward and urban village councils, the existing legal framework does not define street committees and how they should be constituted.

The committee recommends that:

i. 	Elections should be held for KCCA ward councils and urban village councils at the same time as the election of LCs for the rest of the country.

ii. 	The minister in charge of Kampala should expedite the necessary amendments of the KCCA Act to pave way for elections of the street committees of Kampala. For now in these elections, we shall not be talking of street committees.

Civic Education

Article 61 (g) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda mandates the Electoral Commission to formulate and implement civic education programmes relating to elections. Members of the public expressed concern at the fact that the Commission tends to leave this duty to civil society organisations, some of which have their own agenda. 

Moreover, civic education has been replaced with voter education, which is only carried out at the time of elections. It is often given inadequate time and facilitation and is seen as a source of earning for those involved in the exercise.

The committee observed that civic education is necessary to enlighten the population about their civic rights, duties and responsibilities. There is need to have adequate continuous civic education instead of waiting for elections.

Civic education is a cardinal role of the Electoral Commission; any shortcomings by agencies accredited by the Commission to carry out civic education remain the responsibility of the commission.

The committee recommends that:

i. 	The Electoral Commission should carry out regular, continuous civic education. This would make civic education less costly and more effective.

ii. 	The Electoral Commission should provide sufficient time to educate the electorate about the forthcoming elections of the LCs.

iii. 	Government should consider mainstreaming civic education in the school curriculum to build civic consciousness and understanding among the youth.

Registration of Voters

The committee was informed that it was necessary for the Electoral Commission to carry out fresh registration of voters for each village. The Commission explained that the register of voters used in the previous national elections was not suitable for the LC elections because that register was for polling stations that were different from those of the LC elections. 

Furthermore, in the case of LC elections, people are expected to register in the areas where they reside and where they are willing to be registered as members of those village councils. The underlying word there is “willing” because that was Rubaramira case against the Electoral Commission.

The Commission agreed with the proposal in the Bill to reduce the time of display of the voters’ register, to save on cost and time and confirmed to the committee that they had the capacity to settle disputes arising from anomalies on the voters’ register and produce an updated voters’ register promptly.

On the number of villages and parishes in which the voters are to be registered, the Commission pointed out that there were additional administrative units, which were created after August.

When members started raising these questions about the LC election, in some areas, some of these villages were quickly divided as you will see in the table. The table shows the administrative units, the numbers that were as of August last year and within a few months at the end of December.

The sub county, town council, municipal divisions increased by 60. The parish and ward councils increased by 140 and the villages or cells by 506. 

Some members of the public also informed the committee that in some areas, structures, which were created for other administrative purposes, have turned into villages. 

The example was given to us of security zones in Makindye Division, in Kampala, which were created by the Resident District Commissioner to enhance security in the division but which have subsequently become villages of their own.

The committee notes that registration of voters is a key activity to ensure a free and fair election. The exercise should capture changes in the voters as a result of death, migration and changes in age, for a specific known locality. The important point here is that according to last year’s registers, people have come of age and want to vote, others have migrated or died and the Electoral Commission will carry out a registration of voters in their areas of residence and the register will be displayed and members will make sure that they are captured in that register.  

Continued creation of new LC and administrative units without going through the established procedures causes strain in managing elections and other Government programmes. The village may be big but there are procedures in the Local Government Act through which you must go in order to create a new village or parish or sub-county.

The committee recommends that the Electoral Commission should carry out fresh registration of voters per village for residents who are willing to be part of the respective village councils. Display of voters’ register should be done at each village for a period of at least two (2) days because they would have participated in the display.

Objections about the voters’ register should be handled by the Electoral Commission as given in the Local Government Act section 168 (b) and that is in line with roles and powers of the Commission in the Electoral Commission Act. 

Only administrative units which were created with the approval of the Ministry of Local Government as provided in section 7 of the Local Government Act should be considered for elections of village and parish councils.

The Ministry of Local Government should issue and publicise guidelines on creation of new local governments and administrative units and ensure that they are implemented. People need to know how you go about creating a new sub county.

Government Funding

This captured a lot attention during our discussions. Do we have the money, how much is it? The committee found out that there was inadequate funding for local council elections. 

Although the Local Government Act was amended several times in order to streamline the management and functions of local governments and administrative units, the challenge of financing the local councils remains serious. In 2010, Government found that the cost of organising and holding the LC elections was about Shs 505 billion. This was not manageable given the limited resource envelope of the country. 

Government introduced an amendment of the Local Governments Act, which was passed by Parliament in 2012. That amendment removed the need to transmit hardcopy registers to all parties and candidates, among others. The cost was reduced to about Shs 42 billion, which Government argued was still too high. 

In 2015, Government introduced further amendments to the law, specifically requiring elections of LCs to be held by the lining up method. Parliament approved that amendment. This resulted into a significant reduction of the cost of conducting village and parish level elections to about Shs 37.5 billion, according to calculations from the Electoral Commission.

Madam Speaker, in view of the above and considering the need to have these elections conducted in the shortest possible time, Government deemed it necessary to effect another amendment of the Local Governments Act. In December 2016, a Bill was tabled to further remove or reduce some cost centres. Government submitted a certificate of financial implications, committing Shs 10 billion for the exercise. 

In our discussions, the Electoral Commission made it clear that the Shs 10 billion would only cater for an election exercise of all activities conducted on one single day and not on separate days as provided in the Bill. 

The Attorney-General explained that that arrangement of having all activities; registration, nomination, campaigns and elections on the same day would cause serious legal challenges. 

During the committee’s consultations with the relevant ministries, Government confirmed the availability of funds to conduct all Local Council elections, as long as Parliament passed the necessary amendments and gave the required legal framework. That was the statement of the minister of finance and I am sure he will want to confirm it to the House.

Observations
	
i. 	The initial budget of Shs 505 billion which was for voting by secret ballot was excessive. The need to hold elections must be balanced with the resources available to the country so as to ensure affordability of the elections.

ii. 	Much as steps have been taken to reduce the budget, there is a minimum level of resources that should be availed to the Electoral Commission so as to ensure fair and credible elections. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that notwithstanding the constrained budget, Government should avail Shs 15,969,759,172 which is required by the Electoral Commission to conduct all local council and women council elections, as follows:

i.	LC elections including Kampala -	Shs 10,749,248,472
ii.	Women council elections 	– 	Shs 3,250,080,700
iii.	Additional activities 	– 	Shs 1,970,430,000
	Total			-	Shs 15,969,759,172

The detailed budget is appended to the report.

Timing of the Elections

Madam Speaker, under the Constitution, the Electoral Commission has the mandate to appoint and gazette the date of the elections. Nonetheless, the committee noted that enthusiasm and anxiety has already been generated among the public. At the close of 2016, Government assured the country that the elections would be held in January 2017. 

Some members of the public propose that Government goes ahead and conducts elections in January 2017 as promised. Others suggest a much longer period of one year, so as to give adequate time for all electoral activities.

Observation

The committee observed that there are a number of considerations which must be taken into account in order to have a successful election.
 
We must bear in mind the anxiety of the population to have their new leaders with the mandate of the electorate. We cannot overstretch it given the long time the country has taken without duly elected LCs. Therefore, to say that we extend these elections forever, we run a very dangerous path in terms of what the population expects of us.

Secondly, there is need for Parliament to go through all steps in its procedures to pass the Local Government (Amendment) Bill 2016 into law.

There is need for time for the President to assent to the Bill.

There will also be need for time for the Electoral Commission to go through the preparatory activities, training officials, and recruitment among others.  

There is need for time to provide for women council elections to run concurrently with the LC elections since the Bill had only catered for the LC elections.

There is need to ensure adequate time for civic and voter education.

Further, there is need for sufficient time for the political parties to organise their programmes and choose their flag bearers for a healthy competitive election.

There is need for sufficient time for those wishing to stand as independent candidates to participate fully in all electoral activities. 

There is need for adequate time for registration of voters, display of voters’ roll, nomination of candidates, campaigns, actual voting and announcing of results and the post-election exercise.

Recommendations

The committee therefore recommends that the elections be held within the next 60 (sixty) days, in any case not later than 15 March 2017.

The committee also recommends that the official campaigns of elections of LCs and women councils should take at least one (1) day.

General Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, regarding the Local Governments Act, it has been amended 12 times since 1997, and it is still being amended, in a bid to streamline management of local governments and administrative units and to accommodate emerging policy changes. Some of the original amendments were subsequently amended and some of these amendments were later reversed by other amendments. 

Navigating this Act at the moment is one of the most difficult thing and making references to it is extremely tedious. We, therefore, recommend that Government should undertake a comprehensive review of the Local Governments Act, initiate the necessary changes and produce a consolidated up-to-date version of the Act. 

Secondly, on the newly created districts, urban councils and sub-counties, there are a number of new districts, municipalities, town councils and sub counties which started operating with effect from July 2016. 

These require councils and committees for efficient delivery of services and management. The youth councils in the new local governments and representatives of the workers at district and other local government levels too were not elected. There are gaps in some councils at district and lower levels, which need to be filled. We are not talking of LCs I and II but their structures of the local government. 

The committee recommends that Government should take necessary steps to organise and conduct elections so as to fill in the leadership gaps in all local government units including the newly created districts, municipalities, town councils and sub-counties.

Madam Speaker, in conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament considers and approves this report and that the “Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be passed into law. I beg to report. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, with your indulgence, permit me to humbly recognise and present to you Members of this committee who worked tirelessly during the Christmas and New Year festivities. You gave this committee only 14 days and in those days they have done the work. We would like a handshake - (Laughter) The Members are:

    1. Hon. Godfrey Onzima, Aringa North- Vice Chairperson
    2. Hon. Doreen Amule, Amolatar 
    3. Hon. Spellanza Baguma, Kyenjojo
    4. Hon. Sam Byibesho, Kisoro Municipality
    5. Hon. Jovrine Kaliisa, Ibanda District
    6. Hon. Johnson Muyanja, Mukono County South 
    7. Hon. Silvia Akello, Otuke District
    8. Hon. Noah Mutebi, Nakasongola County
    9. Hon. Ismail Ogama, Lower Madi County
    10. Hon. Peter Okot, Tochi County 
    11. Lt Col. Flavia Byekwaso, UPDF.
    12. Hon. Julius Mukoda, Mayuge District
    13. Hon. Rehema Watongola, Kamuli Municipality

Finally, it is very important for this Parliament to know that we are two members -

THE SPEAKER: Something small, honourable member, the DPs are burning because it seems you took away their Member. 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the purpose of the Hansard is to keep correct records. I am the DP Whip of the 10th Parliament. Hon. Peter Okot from Tochi County is a member of the Democratic Party and he is not independent. Such records can cause problems and we have seen it before. Is the chairperson in order to read my Member as an independent Member well knowing he is a Member of the Democratic Party? (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: I heard the name and the constituency; I did not hear the party.

MR MAGYEZI: Madam Speaker, for the record, hon. Peter Okot is a Member of Parliament for Tochi County and is a Member of the Democratic Party. He is a Member of this committee.

Finally, I would like to present to you some two other Members who have come up with a minority report in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, Rule 194: hon. Betty Nambooze, Member of Parliament for Mukono Municipality. She is a very active Member of this committee. Hon. Roland Mugume, Member of Parliament for Rukungiri Municipality and member of this committee. 

Madam Speaker, from the bottom of my heart, I would like to appreciate my colleagues, the Members of the committee. They gave this work their full attention and showed their maximum patriotism and love for this country.

Madam Speaker, I beg to move that this report be approved and the Bill be passed into law. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and the Members of your committee. It was important to read the names, honourable members, because sometimes the voters think we have disappeared. 

When I was in Ibanda, I even explained to those people that I was the one who instructed hon. Jovrine Kaliisa to stay in Kampala to handle this Bill. It was because they said they hadn’t seen her. I told them she was doing her work in Kampala. That is why it was important to name the Members so that the country knows that they were here during the recess.

Honourable members, before we receive the minority report, in the VIP gallery we have Madam Hodan Addou, UN Country Representative. You are welcome. She has come with Agrippina Nandhego, Programme Specialist of the UN Women. You are welcome.(Applause)

I also would like to welcome a delegation from Mukono County South, mainly from Kome Island. They are here to watch the proceedings. They are represented by hon. Muyanja Ssenyonga and hon. Peace Kusasira. You are welcome. (Applause)

Can we quickly have the minority report?

11.30
MS BETTY NAMBOOZE (DP, Mukono Municipality, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I move under Rule 194 of our Rules of Procedure, to present to the House this minority report written by hon. Roland Mugume and I. 

Madam Speaker, last December, the Minister of Local Government brought to Parliament a Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016.” The Bill was accordingly referred to the sectoral Committee on Public Service and Local Government, where both of us are Members. 

The overall object of the Bill, though not stated in this report, is - 
    1. to cheaply facilitate LCI and LCII elections in the country by way of amendment; 

    2. to provide for the Local Government Act to be amended such that the number of days for the display of registers be reduced from 21 to two days and to provide for the Electoral Commission to determine the objections arising from the display of voters’ roll;

    3. to reduce the time provided for campaigns from seven to one day and to provide for other related matters.

These are our observations, Madam Speaker:

It should be recalled that this is the third time in five years that the Minister of Local Government is seeking leave of Parliament to amend the Local Government Act, with a promise to deliver Ugandans the long overdue LCI and LCII elections. 

It should be noted that on all occasions, Parliament has obliged on her part and amended the law. However, all legislations in regards to the LCI and LCII have been passed in vain since the Government has not lived to its promise.

Government has, on all occasions, attributed the failure to hold elections to lack of funds. Madam Speaker, this exposes inefficiency on the part of the Ministry of Local Government and creates suspicion as to the motive of Government in occasioning such delay if not deliberate lack of intent on its part to hold LCI and LCII elections. Effectively, it constitutes gross breach of the Constitution and laws relevant to the electoral democracy in this country. 

The Electoral Commission

Article 69(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda empowers and requires the Electoral Commission to, among other functions, ensure that regular free and fair elections are held and to as well as organise, conduct and supervise the elections and referenda in accordance to the constitution.

Further, the Electoral Commission bears the responsibility of appointing dates for all elections and referenda, which Eng. Badru Kiggundu failed to implement throughout his term. He never even presided over a single LCI election during his entire term.

To this end, the Electoral Commission has on its part failed on its mandate by not prioritising the LCI and LCII elections in the last 16 years. 

Further, Article 181 (4) and (5) provide in regard to the election of local government councils that;
“(4) All local government councils shall be elected after five years.
(5) Elections of all local government councils shall take place at least 60 days before the expiry of the term of the existing council but shall not coincide with presidential or parliamentary elections.”

In light of the above and as decided in Constitutional Petition No. 21 of 2006 between Rubaramira Ruranga and the Electoral Commission and the Attorney-General, the state of affairs presents immense violation of the Constitution to the extent of treason. 

To this end, Madam Speaker, someone must be held liable and responsible and since we cannot indict the whole nation, then the Chief Executive of the nation should be held culpable.

Unfortunately, the Government has reduced Ugandans to the level of pleading and bargaining with them to hold the said election even though it is provided for in the Constitution. 

As Shadow Minister, I have every year reminded the Government in my alternative policy statements, to organise and hold elections for LCIs and LCIIs. I wish to add that even the elections proposed are being planned outside the law since they should have been held much earlier than today.

If Government sees no value in the LC elections, then they might as well consider changing the Constitution, through a constitutional amendment, to get rid of the LCIs and LCIIs. The least Ugandans deserve at the moment is an effectively and efficiently organised election with a clear apology from the Government through the Leader of Government Business.

Madam Speaker, as of today, there is no functioning body of the Electoral Commission as the commissioners appointed and vetted by this House have never been sworn in. The Electoral Commission Secretary usurped powers of the Electoral Commission and this became a one man Electoral Commission. This violates Articles 60(1) and 61(1) (b) of the Constitution. 

The organiser, plan so far of the LCI and LCII elections has no mandate at all to do so. It is upon that background that we find it prudent to dissent from the report of the committee.

Local Councils

The Local Governments Act, 1997 creates local government structures at various levels right from the village to the district. 

These structures include the village level, the parish level, town, division or sub-county level, the county level IV which was abolished and the district level which is LC V). The LCI, LCIII and LCV are elected by universal suffrage, while the LCII is elected by the LCIs of the parish – I will leave out the LCIV because it was abolished.

Article 176(3) provides that the system of local governments shall be based on democratically elected councils on the basis of universal adult suffrage. 

Article 181(4) further provides that all local government councils shall be elected after every five years. Madam Speaker, these are constitutional commands.

However, it is over 16 years since we had the last LCI and LCII elections in the country. At the moment, the country is operating without these basic governments. This is being done in total disregard of the Constitution.

There is need to examine what will happen to things and issues that have been handled by expired governments at LCI and LCII.

Government Funding 

Over time, Government has sought to amend the Local Government Act to reduce the cost of organising the LCI elections, which was projected at Shs 500 billion in 2010 and was still considered untenable in 2012 when the cost was reduced to Shs 42 billion. Further, amendments to the law resulted into a reduction to Shs 37.5 billion in 2015 according to the Electoral Commission. 

Government though is further demanding that we amend the law to bring the figure down to Shs 10 billion in 2016 and for which Government submitted a Certificate of Financial Implication.  Shs 10.7 billion has been recommended for the LC-I elections, Shs 3.25 billion for the Women Council Elections and Shs 1.97 billion for additional activities.  

According to the Electoral Commission presentation before the committee, 500 villages will be excluded from this exercise as there are budget constraints. 

Madam Speaker, we think that it is quite unfair for us to go for elections when we have excluded 500 villages. These 500 villages have not even been named and yet one of them may be in Kamuli, Mukono or Kyanamukaaka. (Laughter) 

A study of the budget provided by the Electoral Commission for conducting the elections however presents unrealistic figures on different items, casting doubt as to whether the intended exercise is in good faith. 

Much as civic education and publicity are a must and vital for an election of this magnitude and in light of the fact that there are so many suggested changes, only Shs 272,500,000 has been allocated for that purpose. This is so little compared to the Shs 327,900,000 allocated to subsistence allowances for staff conducting the same exercise. 

With a total of 58,171 villages, this translates into only Shs 4,684 per village for civic education. Is that possible, Madam Speaker? Even these loud speaker owners in the village cannot take that amount of money for a single announcement.

Will the same apply to such hard-to-reach areas like Ssese, Buvuma and Kkoome which have 84, 52, and 17 islands respectively? These have been allocated Shs 52 million for the LCI and LC II elections.

Shs 337,346,900 has been allocated to polling materials for the villages and parishes all totaling to 65,681 which translates into Shs 5,136 per unit. 

It is glaringly clear that the allocated funds will not suffice in proportion to the number of people in the various electoral areas, for example, Kitega Village in Mukono Municipality, which I know very well had 10 ballot boxes in the last presidential elections yet it is still treated as a single administrative unit. 

Kitega has been allocated Shs 4,000 and Shs 5,000 for electoral material. The same applies to Baggala Ward in the same area which is still considered a single village despite having grown to the level of being represented by a councilor. 

During our interface with the people, hon. Ssewanyana presented before the committee a village called Nabisalu in his area, which has 12,000 voters. There has been a miserable failure by the EC to create viable administrative units. This spells a total failure of the exercise and lack of commitment by Government to deliver electoral democracy. 

According to the Ministry of Local Government, the Decentralisation System is based on the five tiers. For the interest of this House today, the policy recommends that every 60 households constitute an LC I. Therefore, with villages of up to 12,000 people, it is clear that the policy is no longer being applied and we need to create new villages in order to have smooth elections in relation to the policy. 

Women council elections

It is worth noting that much as the women council elections spread beyond the villages to the whole nation, only Shs 3.2 billion has been allocated as opposed to Shs 10 billion allocated to local elections. 

Madam Speaker, when women go to vote for the councils, we shall start with the village elections, then the parish, to the county, to the sub county, to the district and then the national level. Therefore, if they are going to conduct an election that will run up to the national level, how come women are being given not even half of the money allocated to LC I. 

This points to marginalisation of entities of the would-be beneficiaries of a democratic process and affirmative action and setting up women for conflicts during elections. 

Mode of Election

The system of lining up has been favoured on the unfortunate premises that it is cheap and is already provided for under the law. However, this drew strong and valid concerns from the public, organisations and other entities that the committee had the opportunity to interface with. 

The system is unfavourable and archaic on the account that it has many demerits in pursuit of democracy.

As noted earlier, the LC chairperson is a member of the LC courts, which are relied on to deliver basic justice at the grassroots. It is only human that a chairperson with full knowledge that another member of the electorate did not vote for him will fail to deliver justice in the event that this person is brought before the court later. 

It will only breed vengeance upon members who in exercise of their right to choose a leader will have to line up behind certain candidates other than those who would win the election. It is an ingredient for conflict, sometimes bordering on genocide between people of unlike political minds. 

Madam Speaker, this type of election is also prone to influence peddling. I would like to give an example of the late Cardinal Nsubuga, in one village in Rubaga, in 1987 – the head of the laity had stood as a candidate and another catholic was also a candidate in that election. By the time the Cardinal came, all the people had lined up behind the head of the laity. When the Cardinal saw that this man was standing alone, he stood behind him in consolation. Interestingly, all the people who had lined up behind the laity run away and lined behind the Cardinal – (Laughter). 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members. Hon. Nambooze, please conclude your report. 

MS NAMBOOZE: Madam Speaker, just imagine what will happen in Kiwatule, for example, if the residents there see you lining behind a candidate; they will definitely want to join the Speaker of Parliament. 

It is the duty of Parliament to make laws for the good governance of the country. Why then should we promote this archaic and potentially dangerous law in view of its disadvantages? Being provided for in the law does not mean that it is still worth keeping and following. It has also been noted, but overlooked in the committee report, that the system would bring intimidation, fear, intrigue, and disenfranchisement of leaders and consequently deny many people their right to vote. This is in addition to being unsuitable for certain categories of people. 

Shortfalls in the Bill

The Bill before Parliament, with due respect, is shallow. It does not address comprehensively issues to do with a democratic election in Uganda. The Bill refers to display of registers but as of now, there has never been a compilation of the village register. It does not cater for the new voters who turned 18 years of age after 2016. It does not envisage voters who have migrated to different areas. The proposed amendments do not provide for quorum, venue, time, tallying methods and transmission of results and modes of challenging the elections. The Bill seeks to vest powers to determine complaints arising out of the display of the registers to the Electoral Commission, which is erroneous. 

    1. We therefore propose that Parliament rejects this Bill in totality. 
    2. We recommend that Government should allocate appropriate funds as requested earlier on to facilitate proper and democratic secret ballot elections of LCs. 
    3. Therefore, the minister responsible should bring a supplementary budget to cater for the same. 
    4. The Leader of Government Business, on behalf of Government, should apologise to all Ugandans for having kept the population and the country with illegal leaders and violating the Constitution. 
    5. The Minister for Local Government should bring an amendment to the law to cater for secret ballot voting. 
    6. Government should make a commitment that the elections shall be conducted within the next three months. 
    7. That this minority report be adopted and we do so pray. (Applause). 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Nambooze, for your minority report. Honourable members, you have heard from the main report of the committee and the minority report. It is a very small Bill. Can we just have comments for 15 minutes?

12.52
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and let me take this opportunity to wish everyone a happy New Year. I would like to thank the minister for bringing up this Bill and the committee for the well balanced and thorough report with all the right recommendations. 

Madam Speaker, we may go with the lining up for LC elections because it is already in the law, but listening to the chairperson justifying it as a cheap and transparent system that minimises corruption, one wonders whether Uganda should not adopt it at all levels of elections, including parliamentary and presidential. What is good for the goose should also be good for the gander. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to support the recommendation that fresh registration should be done at the village level because we know that only a section of the voting populace registered for the national elections. So it would be proper that fresh registration be done. 

I support the recommendation that adequate civic education be carried out and eventually find a place in the national school curriculum so that we can build a citizenry that is responsible and conscientious and patriotic and is aware rather than waiting for the time of election just to do window-dressing.

However, one wonders; what time is there for adequate –(Member timed out_)

12.54
MR JAMES KABERUKA (NRM, Kinkizi County West, Kanungu): Madam Speaker, I also would like to wish you a happy New Year. I congratulate you all, as colleagues, from the previous year.

Madam Speaker, I thank the committee for the good work done. Allow me mention something, especially when it comes to making these LCs relevant; the relevance of these committees should be seen in the day-to-day activities. However, as a Member of Parliament, I have dos and don’ts – I would beg that we insert the conditions by which these committees, once they are in place, should do and they should be replaced before the term because every institution should have a gazetted framework under which it works. This is because in most cases, the chairman becomes a “king”.

According to the Local Government Act, the village members who are aged 18 years and above are members of the village council but the village councils do not sit. Can we have them also being inserted so that they can at least meet quarterly.

Madam Speaker, we are talking about patriotism; bulungi bwa nsi has been left to nobody - what can the citizens do in case the chairman does not enforce bulungi bwa nsi? And listening to the Shadow Minister for Local Government, we need to do something because we should not make a law every day to suit the circumstances. For example, if we leave these 500 villages and others that are not known, are we going to come back here and make appropriate – I would propose that we incorporate those villages and we plan accordingly as a country. 

MR MUHEIRWE: Madam Speaker, in my constituency, I have a village called Nyairongo. It has six polling stations with 4,000 voters; it has a radius of three kilometres and it is still a village. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order, please.

MR MUHEIRWE: Since we have waited for more than 15 years, why don’t we really give time to code more villages so that we leave no stone unturned? This is the information I would like to give my friend so that we base on that to make an informed decision. It is only one case but there are many which are like that. Thank you.

MR KABERUKA: Thank you, honourable colleague. (Member timed out_)

THE SPEAKER: You donated your time. (Laughter)

12.58
MS HELLEN ASAMO (NRM, PWD Representative, Eastern): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also wish you and the honourable members a happy New Year, 2017.

I appreciate the report but I did not hear what it says about how long we shall stand in this line. You know, when we go to vote, they tell us it is from 7.00 a.m. to 5.00 p.m. So how long will be standing until the counting is done? (Laughter) We need to be clear. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MS ASAMO: Madam Speaker, as the women of Uganda, the women councils have not also been elected for the last 16 years. When I listened to the budget, the women councils are going to be elected from the village to the national levels. It is not very clear in the report as to where we are ending with them. What happens to these who are at the higher level? We need to understand that challenge because the budget seems not to touch that. Are we just giving them a taste of an election and leave it at that?

Madam Speaker, the women council should be elected before the local council even if it is on the same day. That is because if I fail to be in the women council, I can stand for the local council. We do not want to deny the women as if we cannot be chairpersons; we are very capable.

I also would like clarification; whereas it was identified that there is a challenge for people with disability to stand on the line, the report does not give a recommendation on how they will participate in the local council elections. If I am crawling from down, am I going to crawl on the line and remain seated there or are you going to deny me my privacy by coming to ask me – as some people usually do; they think they can think on our behalf, saying, “After all, these are not very responsible -” (Hon. Sseggona rose_) My minutes will be used up. Madam Speaker, that has to be clarified in the report.

Madam Speaker, as we talk about the register, I think it is critical that these registers come out because some people are usually in a village which is at the boundary – so they can be at either side or end up in both registers. And if they finish counting from here, it is very easy for me to go and be counted on the other side. So that also has to be clarified.

When the minister gave a sort of time table, he did not bring out the issue of when the parties will organise their leaders. I am aware that my party already did a bit of election of the flag bearers but some of them have died. We therefore need to give ample time for the parties to ensure that their flag bearers are put in place and are able to handle that.

I am not a very good supporter of lining up – I will give an example: When the Rt Hon. Prime Minister, Dr Rugunda, stood in Kabale – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Okay, half a minute for us to hear about Ndugu Rugunda. (Laughter)

MS ASAMO: When hon. Rugunda stood in Kabale that time when he was still a Member of Parliament, it was Emmanuel Ruta, a disabled person, who came as the last person to cast the vote. He was not very good with the opponent because he entered in as a disabled – with the slow speed we take and all this - they asked him, “Who?” And he said, “I am going for Rugunda.” And it was not palatable in terms of relationship with the other person. I, therefore, really feel that the secret ballot is more conducive. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to remind us that we sat here as a House, deliberated on this matter at length; we gave it a lot of time -(Applause)- and we took a decision on lining up; it is a decision of this House.

1.03
MS JESCA ABABIKU (NRM, Woman Representative, Adjumani): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister and the committee for the report. However, based on what we have listened to carefully, adopting lining up as a mode of voting is a last resort. Therefore, I think we should avert this in future; we need to prepare for these things adequately because we know the consequences and we know what it means going through an election and at the end remaining in the community. 

Madam Speaker, I wish to know from the committee and the minister how much money we will save as we use this mode of voting. Since this mode needs a lot of sensitisation and adjustments, I pray that we take the recommendation of the committee seriously of giving adequate time for each of the activities. I am not convinced about the two days for the display; knowing that human beings are not static, people keep moving from one place to another. Therefore, I would like to propose that instead of having a minimum of two days, we should have at least five days. 

Also concerning the issue of combining elections of women councils together with that of the LCs, I support this and therefore, we need to flag this to the level of sensitisation.

I would further like to request the minister and the committee to clarify on the mode of the sensitisation or civic education that will be used to reach to all the villages. Everybody is anxious about these elections but we want the end result to stand for all. Instead of hurrying for these elections, let us plan to engage all the stakeholders.

Lastly, concerning the issue of villages, I need clarification about the number of the villages that will be pending for these elections to be done. Madam Speaker, we took over 16 years and in each Parliament, this has been an issue –(Member timed out.) 

1.06 
MR ROBERT MIGADDE (NRM, Buvuma Islands County, Buvuma): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is quite unusual for someone to support both the minority and majority report; I am constrained but have to support both reports. If you listen to hon. Nambooze narrating what happened in 1986, and we have many Members of Parliament here who won in almost every village, if you are to go and vote there, I am sure many voters would change their mind and line up behind their Member of Parliament.

One would say that at the end, you came last but it is all about counting; so people would look around and see where their Member of Parliament is lining up.

At the moment, I am not against lining up because we passed that law. This is not the best approach much as we can use it. I would like to give you an example from Buvuma Island: in the last elections, in the five islands, only one per cent of the population voted because the election materials reached the island at 3.00 p.m. and they never voted. Much as there was room for those members to attend to voting right from 9.00 a.m. up to 4.00 p.m., but it was only few people who managed to vote. What about if we streamline a period and we account between this and that period, how shall we facilitate these people to vote?

Madam Speaker, my concern is how we facilitate the voters to vote? I represent the fishing community, they go fishing at 3.0 p.m. and the Electoral Commission may designate 4.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m. as the counting period, are we anticipating that no one will go fishing that day because they are waiting for the Electoral Commission to count votes?

Not many people understand issues of the islands but when we look at the budget of the Electoral Commission, I have areas where you may take eight hours to reach the polling station and you may consume about 500 litres of fuel to reach there; the Electoral Commission may not facilitate the electoral officials to reach there. The budget where they are providing of Shs 4,000 per Local Council –(Member timed out.)

1.10
MR MEDARD SSEGGONA (DP, Busiro County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker and my colleagues. I would like to thank both the committee and minister for the good attempt. I am, however, concerned that we seem to be doing a cosmetic job and a ritualistic one. We seem to be stampeding ourselves that we have taken so long to conduct these elections and therefore, we must conduct it in whatever means and whichever way we do it. As Parliament, we have a noble duty; the date for this election is not statutory, why must we stampede ourselves?

Secondly, I am not one of those who think that because we passed a law providing for lining up, we cannot amend it. We can still amend it even on this Floor now. It has happened in the past in the constitutional amendment in Article 8(a) which introduced national interest. It was amended on the Floor at the second reading. I remember that proposal was brought by the former hon. Chrispus Kiyonga, who fortunately is not here.

Article 68 of our Constitution provides that every public election must be by secret ballot. When you read Article 68(1) and (2) you will agree with me that a secret ballot is imperative. “At a public election or referendum, voting shall be, subject to the provisions of this Constitution, be by secret ballot using one ballot box at each polling station for all candidates in an election and for all sides in the referendum.”

Subject only to the provisions of this Constitution unless you find a limiting provision in the Constitution, you cannot limit. If you do so you would be amending the Constitution by infection. This is the perfect opportunity for us to amend the law, which we have just amended. 

2) “Immediately after the close of the poll, the presiding officer shall proceed to count at the polling station, the ballot papers of that polling station and record the votes cast in favour of each candidate or question.” 

Parliament may by law, exempt any public elections other than Presidential and Parliamentary elections from the requirements of Clause 1, that it shall be by secret ballot. I am alive to this; go back to Article 8(a) on public interest.

Secondly, we have admitted in the report -(Interruption)

MS KAMATEEKA: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the honourable member who was part of the process of passing the law and for the reasons that were given and have even been outlined now, especially the consideration that there are no sufficient resources to run these elections on a secret ballot arrangement. Is it in order for the Member to mislead the House that we can now amend the law and go for as long as we want, without holding these elections if there is money for us to hold these elections? Is he in order to go against the decision and resolution of Parliament to which he was party?

Secondly, is he in order to want us to extend these elections having in mind the situation that we have been in, as a country and all the reasons that have been given?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to appeal to you to understand our responsibility to the country. I want us to remind ourselves that there was an attempt to conduct these elections and a citizen went to court and disrupted that process. Citizens have been waiting for an opportunity to elect their leaders. (Applause) Therefore, I would like you to balance the rights of the population against the costs and the law. We are working on behalf of the other people as well.

In many places where I went during elections, they asked me when they would elect their leaders at the local level. Please consider the population.

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for not ruling me out of order and indeed that is the difference of both personality and opinion between I and the hon. Kamateeka.

Madam Speaker -(Member timed out.)

1.17
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Going by your concern over considering the people that we represent here, I am of the view - we are going to witness bad scenarios especially in Kampala and some municipalities. For instance, where we have a village that has more than 20,000 voters, I do not see any space in Kampala other than Nakivubo stadium where we are going to have these elections conducted by lining up in one day for such a village. In Kampala, we have more than 200 villages with such populations as voters. 

I would like to suggest that for Kampala, since Parliament gave it a special status and gave it its own law – the Kampala Capital City Authority Act –(Interjections)- but I could refuse - (Interruption)

MS NAKIWALA: Madam Speaker, allow me to just give him information that in Kampala District for example, I am not aware of any village with even close to 20,000 people. In his area, Katwe I and Nabisalu - (Interjections) - I can give him information if he likes it, but the highest in his area is 13,000 - in Kibuye and Nabisalu. Thank you very much.

MR SSEWANYANA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. That is the only difference why I got more votes in that area than the minister; it is because I knew the exact number of voters and she didn’t. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I think Parliament should put Kampala District in special status because we are managed by a special law. Kampala should be considered to conduct this particular voting by secret ballot because the population where we come from is very aggressive. Making over 20,000 voters line up behind candidates in one village - you will witness chaos in Kampala, which will be bigger than walk to work and defiance itself. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.21
MR FRED BASEKE (Independent, Ntenjeru County South, Kayunga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the committee for the report presented. When you look at the background, they tell you why it is important to have LCs and the role they play in the community. One of them is service delivery.

LCs play a central role in managing and selecting people who benefit from most of the services Government offers. However, when one looks at the disadvantages of the lining system that the shadow minister mentioned, you realise it deprives voters of their right to participate in the election.

During this recess, I was in my constituency. While there, we talked about representing people. When hon. Sseggona stood here, asking for the amendment of the law, which had been passed in the Ninth Parliament, I supported him because most voters in my constituents whom I interacted with said, “as long as it is lining system, we are not ready to participate in voting.”

We can sit here as Parliament and say it is cost effective, we are going to line up but most people I talked to in the villages I went to said that as long as Parliament passes that law, they will not participate in the elections. As people’s representatives, we are here to represent the views of the people.

What I see right now is that we are looking at short-term prescriptions. As a country, we should be looking at making laws that are going to stand a test of time. As people’s representatives, if it requires an amendment, why not amend it to represent the people’s views? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

1.22
MR WILBERFORCE YAGUMA (NRM, Kashari County North, Mbarara):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. In the Ninth Parliament, we amended the Local Government Act to provide for the lining up of voters because LC I elections had proved very expensive. The elections did not take place.

When you look at the Constitution, and listen to what the public is saying, lining up is very unpopular yet we must have elections.

I would like to advise that before we talk about holding elections, we first amend the law to remove the provision of lining up. 

Secondly, let the Ministry of Local Government go back and think about cheaper means. Yes, I am proposing, Madam Speaker, that - (Interruption)

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, the Constitution of Uganda is very clear. Initially, the provision under the law was for a secret ballot. For good reasons, this Parliament examined the practicability, advantages and disadvantages of a secret ballot for LC I elections, and it came up with a verdict that it was not possible to hold elections by secret ballot. That is why we amended the law. We have not yet implemented the law that we amended; not even once. 

Is it in order therefore for my learned friend here and all others to suggest that we should revisit a law, which has not been tested, amend it again notwithstanding the provisions that allow it to be amended, and the clear provisions of the constitution, which provided for the possibility of that amendment? Is he in order, Madam Speaker?
 
THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I indicated earlier this matter has been examined from both positions on the Floor of this House, and the decision is taken. We cannot continue estimating back and forth. We are disenfranchising the people of Uganda. Let us take a decision once and for all. (Applause)

MR YAGUMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. My colleague was a Member of Parliament and a minister in Government, so one wonders why we did not have the elections, after we amended the law.

What I am saying is that I have consulted the people of Kashari North who sent me here, they are against lining up and I will not support it. Let Government print ballot papers and have elections by secret ballot.

Madam Speaker, we have just had the presidential, parliamentary, local government elections, why didn’t we talk about the money when we were talking -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, you were in this House. We talked about the money it was colossal and you were here. No, take your sit. 

Honourable members, this is a House of records - we have taken decisions but we have not amended them yet. 

1.27
MS ROSETTE KAJUNGU (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Although you said that Parliament passed this law in the Ninth Parliament, I am wondering whether the people who are going to be affected were consulted.

I would like to request the chairperson of the committee not to dismiss the issue of using local material. For example, you said that the law mandates the Electoral Commission to provide all the materials. What stops us from amending the law to say that the Electoral Commission can give powers to the people in the local councils to provide local materials? I hereby submit. Thank you. 

MR MAGANDA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am rising on a point of procedure. I read a Bill that was presented by the Minister of Local Government. I also went through the report of the chairperson of the committee.

Subsequently, the Bill did not bring out the issue of lining up as a matter that was supposed to be considered by the Parliament today. 

However, I am seeing the House drawing its whole attention of debate to lining up as a matter that was supposed to be considered today. 

I am trying to seek your opinion on whether procedurally; you can direct the debate to focus on the main issues that are supposed to come out clearly over this matter. That is the concern that I have. 

THE SPEAKER: The report of our committee touched on the mode of elections. That is why members are commenting on it. 

1.30
MR STEPEHN KANGWAGYE (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We have been to our constituencies and took a lot of time with our people. We have consulted and I can say that none of them supports lining up - (Applause) - to be realistic. So, if we are to make a clear decision here, we need to make it in favour of their concerns. 

First and foremost, as a Member of Parliament, I do not support the voting system of lining up because that is not how we were voted. We were voted by secret ballot and so we cannot allow those people to suffer. They said that the moment we approve it, none of them will appear to participate in the election. 

Madam Speaker, there is another challenge. We have new sub counties with new parishes, making new villages and we went through primaries - they have their own flag bearers and are ready. 

Sincerely, there are those ones who are not in clear records of the Ministry of Local Government as new villages. How will such villages be considered in this exercise? Thank you.

MR MAGYEZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is something important from the Member who is asking why we are discussing a mode of election, whether by lining up or secret ballot. 

I just want to point out that even in the Bill, the minister talks about the display of voters register and campaigns but there are also other related matters. The mode of election is only related to this particular election. I think we are not out of context. 

THE SPEAKER: But I had ruled on that matter.

1.32
MR PAUL AMORU (NRM, Dokolo County North, Dokolo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really concerned that we seem to be going round in circles. We need to agree and define what we need. You cannot eat your cake and keep it at the same time. 

At the end of last year, most of us made a rallying call that we could no longer wait to have these elections. And indeed we realised that for now, given the circumstances, we should hold these elections even by January this year. 


It is true that there may be a divided opinion but it is not also true to say that there is an overriding opinion that this election should not go on.

In my view, to accord respect to the record of this Parliament - it is just months ago when we spent a lot of time, as a Parliament debating the merits and demerits and realised that we should have these elections. 

I find it difficult to appreciate what direction we would like to take as a Parliament if on Monday we come and debate one thing but on Tuesday we come back and make another decision. 

Madam Speaker, my opinion is that, given the context and the circumstances in the country – elections of LCs should not be treated at the same level as the parliamentary and presidential elections. Polling stations are at parish level. So, people walk long distances -

THE SPEAKER: No, they are in the villages. This is a village election.

MR AMORU: That is for the main one but for the LCI, the elections will be conducted in the village. It is easy to know who is who because everybody is there. 
Let us agree on when these elections are taking place and the time so that the people come in and vote.

Lastly, we will not be lining up behind individuals; we will be lining behind parties.

Madam Speaker, my view is that it is not necessary to engage in a long discussion on this matter when we know that the country is right from elections. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Now, honourable Members, as hon. Namuganza comes, I want to remind the House that the reason we did not hold the elections is that they wanted it to be conducted under the multi-party system. To that extent, we agreed that we hold them under the party system. So, it is about parties and the independents, not individuals.

1.35
MS PERSIS NAMUGANZA (Independent, Bukono County, Namutumba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to support the proposal, if not yet a decision, of lining up. One of the issues Members here and people outside are raising is that it is a taboo in case your wife does not line up behind you. 

However, Madam Speaker, that is what I am waiting to see because we have ended up having people in offices where they are not supposed to be. If your wife cannot line up behind you, it is a very great signal to show the village that you are not fit to be in that office - (Interjections) - Madam Speaker, may I be protected as I complete my statement?

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable Members. Allow the honourable member to speak.

MS NAMUGANZA: Madam Speaker, I was saying that a person who cannot manage their own home is not fit to manage a village because a family is the smallest unit of the State – (Interruption)

MR KATUSABE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am at pain that my sister is trying to trivialise our national priority. What does the Constitution say? The Constitution does not guide that you have to cast your vote according to a family. 

Madam Speaker, even in this House, we have had a situation where a husband served with one party but the wife served with another party; it has been evidenced here. 

Madam Speaker, therefore, is my honourable sister in order to say the qualification to a national office should be based upon family or religious backgrounds? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I do not understand the order. Proceed, honourable member.

MS NAMUGANZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I was saying that a family is the smallest unit of the State and that a person who cannot manage their family affairs - (Interjections) – yes. That is why countries like America -(Interruption)

Madam Speaker, let me conclude. We are lining up against our parties - (Interjections) – I am concluding but hon. Kasibante, the Speaker, has not allowed you. 

There are Members who are NRM during day but at night, they are FDC. They are double dealers. Let us line up and expose the hypocrites. (Applause)

1.39
MAJ.GEN. PECOS KUTEESA (UPDF Representative): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to remind the House that in my first maiden speech, I asked these questions: do we have an aim? Do we have a timeline? Do we have targets to fulfil? 

It seems we have continued walking two steps forward and one step back, which is match-time in the military language. Do we have where we are going? This thing now, whether you are a civilian or not, when you go to the doctor, the doctor tells you what to do and there are things which are done. There are methodologies of doing work.

I was one of the first persons to see an LC I unit being created in Uganda and the question of legitimacy was instilled then –(Interjections)- it was in Kapeeka in 1981 and I was among the people who were watching. Here is what happened; people would come up and say we trust this gentleman to do this. That would legitimise what was being done. 

When it came to this level where there is vote buying and the rest of it; that is why people fear to line up. If it is my conscience - these voters are now voting their conscience, not cash. So, why are you trying to suppress that? 

I would like you people to understand –(Interjections)- I am not anti-technology. I know I am sorry but I know what is happening because I am on the ground. 

The good thing about the army –(Interjections)- I am in charge of the military establishment. Most of the reshuffles we are doing are really well-thought out before they come here. They are not by accidents. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like us to be focussed. Article 68 is clear, but when we amended the Local Government Act last time to prescribe for lining up, we complied with 68(6). So, we have already done it. By that law, we exempted the voting at LC I from secret ballots. That is what we did in that law. It is a settled matter.

Therefore, honourable members, I would like to put the question that the Bill be read for the second time. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

Clause 1

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col. (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.45
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col. (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Local Government (Amendment) Bill, 2016” and passed it without amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

1.46
THE MINISTER FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Col. (Rtd) Tom Butime): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report be adopted and that the Bill be read the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2016

THE SPEAKER: The Local Governments (Amendment) Bill, 2016 has been passed and title settled. I now put the question that the Bill be read for the third time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2017.”

THE SPEAKER: Title agreed to and Bill passes. (Applause) Let us go on to the next item. 

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2016
   
1.48
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 2016” be read the second time.

THE SPEAKER: Is Cabinet seconding it? Okay, it is seconded by a number of ministers. Give us the justification.

MS KYAMBADDE: Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the House do resume –

THE SPEAKER: No, just do the justification for the second reading.

MS KYAMBADDE: Sorry. I beg to move that the report be presented for the second reading.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you are supposed to explain why you are bringing that law in brief.

MS KYAMBADDE: Okay. I am sorry. Madam Speaker, the Bill is needed to give the force of law in Uganda to the treaty establishing the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA).

This treaty was ratified by Uganda in October 1994, in accordance with Clause 2 of Article 76 of the Uganda Constitution (1967) and also in accordance with Article 194 of the Treaty. 

However, it has not been domesticated and therefore, the COMESA Treaty does not have the force of law in Uganda. 

I beg to move that the report of the committee of the House is –

THE SPEAKER: You should call for the support of this House to your proposal.

MS KYAMBADDE: I seek the support of this House to have the Bill read.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Can the chairperson of the committee present our report?

1.50
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON TOURISM, TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr Kenneth Lubogo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. This report on the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 2016 has been on our system since mid-December last year. 

Following procedure, all Members received the Bill together with the attached schedule, which is the treaty. The Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry has considered the Bill and is delighted to submit this report to the House.

Madam Speaker, I would like us to restrict ourselves to the requirements of rule 119, when we are submitting this report to the House for consideration. 

The report is divided into four parts – the introduction, methodology, the object of the Bill and observations and recommendations of the committee. I may not necessarily read through everything but will go through what I think is very necessary.

Introduction

The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 2016 was read for the first time at the 19th Sitting of the 1st Meeting of the 1st Session of the 10th Parliament, held on Wednesday, 24 August 2016. 

The Bill was referred to the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry in accordance with Rule 118 (1) of our Rules of Procedure for consideration. 

In considering the Bill, the committee was guided by the cited rule of our Rules of Procedure.

Methodology

Madam Speaker, in processing the Bill, the committee met and received memoranda from different stakeholders. We interacted with the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives –

THE SPEAKER: The members can read about those stakeholders.

MR LUBOGO: I go to No.3 on objective of the Bill, which is important.

The objective of the Bill is to:
    (i) Give the force of law in Uganda to the Treaty Establishing the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), adopted in Kampala on the 5th day of October 1993 and ratified by Uganda in October 1994;
    (ii) Provide for financial provisions consequential upon Uganda’s membership to the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa;
    (iii) Make provision for giving the force of law to subsequent amendments to the Treaty and regulations made under the Treaty; and 
    (iv) Enable full effect to be given in Uganda to the Treaty by modification, where necessary, to the existing laws.

Observations and recommendations

Madam Speaker, the committee observes that COMESA is currently composed of 19 member states, which is part of 4(1) – I will not enumerate them but it is there in 4(1)a. 

In 4(b), Article 3 of the COMESA Treaty sets out the aims and objectives of the common market treaty as follows:

    (i) To attain sustainable growth and development of the member states by promoting a more balanced and harmonious development of its production and marketing structures; 
 
    (ii) To promote joint development in all fields of economic activity and the joint adoption of macro-economic policies and programmes to raise the standard of living of its peoples and to foster closer relations among its member states;
 
    (iii) To co-operate in the creation of an enabling environment for foreign, cross border and domestic investment, including the joint promotion of research and adaptation of science and technology for development;

    (iv) To enhance co-operation in the promotion of peace, security and stability among the member states in order to enhance economic development in the region; 
 
    (v) To co-operate in strengthening the relations between the common market and the rest of the world and the adoption of common positions in international fora; and

    (vi) To contribute towards the establishment, progress and the realisation of the objectives of the African Economic Community.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Uganda commenced the implementation of the COMESA Treaty on 1st July 2014. The implementation of the COMESA Free Trade Area was effected through the Finance Act 2014. 

The Finance Act, 2014 under Section 3, provides for the removal of import duty on goods produced or manufactured in a territory of COMESA member states where the goods comply with Article 48 of the COMESA Treaty and the rules of origin under the Treaty. 
The removal of import duty however, only applies to a COMESA member state that grants the same level of preference to qualifying Uganda exports.

According to the UN Tradecom Statistics (2015), the COMESA regional bloc remained the main destination for Uganda’s exports in 2015. Uganda’s export earnings from the COMESA region were $1.23 billion, in 2015 representing 54 per cent of Uganda total exports. Uganda continues to enjoy a positive trade balance with COMESA. 

Stakeholders views

Madam Speaker, as I pointed out earlier, we met with stakeholders; they gave us their views. 
The stakeholders who the committee interfaced with expressed full support for the Bill and recommended that Parliament fast-tracks the domestication of the COMESA Treaty in order for it to be applicable and enforced domestically.

The committee was, however, informed by the private sector that in order for Uganda to take advantage of its membership in COMESA, there is need for the Government of Uganda to address challenges that affect Uganda’s competitiveness in the COMESA market. The challenges include, high interest rates, which definitely curtail our trading potential; local content support; transport and energy infrastructure, which is poor; and the tax policies among others. 

Recommendations

The committee recommends as follows:

    (i) That Government fast-tracks the recapitalization of Uganda Development Bank (UDB) and the establishment of an agricultural bank, which will address the cost of financing sustainably. This will ultimately foster value addition and quality of Uganda’s products in the COMESA market; and
    (ii) Government avails market information about COMESA opportunities to industrialists and producers in order to enable them maximize opportunities presented by COMESA in order to compete effectively in the COMESA market.

Bill analysis

In analysing the Bill, the committee considered the effect of the clauses in it, on the implementation of the COMESA Treaty.

In clause 1, on the definition of word “minister” the committee’s observation is that the Bill, under clause 1, defines the word “minister” as a minister to whom the functions of the minister under this Act have been assigned by the President.

The committee observes that the definition of the word “minister” in the Bill is ambiguous and needs to specify and clearly provide for the right minister responsible for coordination and implementation of the COMESA Treaty.

The committee recommends that the Bill clearly provides for minister responsible for trade as the responsible minister for overseeing the implementation of the COMESA Treaty (Implementation) Bill.

On financial provisions, clause 9 of the Bill provides that there shall be charged on and paid out of the Consolidated Fund any payment required to be made by the Government of Uganda under the Treaty.

Article 166 of the COMESA Treaty provides the budget of the Secretariat whose resources are derived from annual contributions of the member states and such other resources as may be determined by the council. 

The committee observes that Uganda, as a member state of COMESA is required, under the Treaty, to remit a mandatory annual subscription fee to COMESA. 

However, Uganda continues to operate in arrears as regards its financial obligations under the COMESA Treaty. This leads to delays in the implementation and management of COMESA programmes and also hinders Uganda’s full participation in the regional organisation’s affairs.

The committee recommends that Government streamlines the processes of payment of its annual subscription fees to the regional and international organisations to which it is a member.

Madam Speaker, at this point, I want to say that Uganda’s bad subscription culture is not only to COMESA but also to many other organisations. Particularly for COMESA, there is currently an outstanding amount of $1.2 million 

On competition, Madam Speaker, under Article 55 of the COMESA Treaty, member states agree that any practice, which negates free and liberalised trade, shall be prohibited. They also agree to prohibit any agreement between undertakings or concerted practices which affect the prevention, restriction or distortion of competition within the COMESA market. 

In order to achieve this, the COMESA Competition Regulations were made in 2004 as a legal framework for the regulation of competition in the common market. Consequently, a COMESA Competition Commission was put in place in 2013.

The committee observes that Uganda has no law on competition. This has resulted into de-industrialisation, increased trade gaps, market monopolisation by few companies due to anti-competitive practices like price fixing, market sharing, among others.

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government should expedite the process of coming up with a Competition Bill and its enforcement should be well designed to curb anti-competitive behaviour by large companies, both at national and COMESA levels.

On the ratification of treaties, in Uganda, the law governing the ratification of treaties in Uganda is the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, 1995 and the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap. 204.

Article 123 of the Constitution provided for the execution of treaties, conventions and agreements as follows:
“(1) The President or a person authorised by the President may make treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements between Uganda and any other country or between Uganda and any international organization or body, in respect of any matter. 
(2) 	That Parliament shall make laws to govern ratification of treaties, conventions, agreements or other arrangements made under clause (1) of this Article.”

Consequently, Parliament, in accordance with Article 123 of the Constitution, enacted the Ratification of Treaties Act, Cap 204, which provides for the ratification of treaties.

Section 2 of the Ratification of Treaties Act states: “All treaties shall be ratified as follows: 
(a) 	by the Cabinet in the case of any treaty other than a treaty referred to in paragraph (b) of this section; or 
(b) 	by Parliament by resolution, where the treaty relates to: armistice, neutrality or peace; or (ii) in the case of a treaty in respect of which the Attorney General has certified in writing that its implementation in Uganda would require an amendment of the Constitution.” All treaties ratified by Cabinet are laid before Parliament.

Madam Speaker, I want to take this opportunity to give a scenario of what is happening elsewhere and that our case might not actually be the best.

For instance, in Kenya, the ratification process of international treaties is participatory in nature. Although, the Treaty Making and Ratification Act, 2012 of Kenya mandates the national executive to initiate the treaty-making process, negotiate and ratify treaties, treaties must be considered by Parliament before ratification is done (Section 8). 

When a treaty is submitted to Parliament for consideration, Parliament must ensure public participation in accordance with parliamentary procedures. 

Upon consideration of a treaty, Parliament may approve the ratification of a treaty, with or without reservations to specific provisions of the treaty. 

Where Parliament refuses to approve the ratification of a treaty, the government does not ratify that treaty. 

The committee observes that in Uganda the ratification process of international treaties by Cabinet does not permit the participation of Parliament and the general public. 

As a result, at the domestication stage – where we are now, Parliament finds itself bound by the already negotiated and ratified treaty and therefore, limits its input when processing domesticating Bills. 

The committee recommends that Government reviews the law on ratification of treaties so as to make the ratification process of international treaties, participatory. And if Government is not willing, we shall do it as a committee.

General recommendation and conclusion
The committee recommends that the Bill be passed into law subject to the proposed amendments.

The Bill, which is already with the Members, has the attached treaty. The report has been signed by the required number of members. I therefore, wish to submit it for consideration by the House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable chair and the Committee on Trade, Tourism and Industry, for your input.

Now, honourable members, we have an interesting situation, where we probably cannot make any changes to the treaty. So I do not know how much we can debate on things we cannot change. There is only one amendment to designate the Minister for Trade as the minister responsible. So, I do not know whether we should not just go to the second reading.

2.09
MR MBABAALI MUYANJA (NRM, Bukoto County South, Lwengo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I feel there is something we are lacking, much as there are earlier commitments to this COMESA Treaty.

As we speak, Uganda is more of an importer than an exporter. We are joining a bigger market, which is more industrialised and right now we are talking about the imbalance of trade, whereby our shilling is getting weaker day-by-day, because of the imbalance of trade. 
If we join this market right now when Government has just announced the need to start industrialisation in Uganda – if we are not yet industrialised yet we are a big market called COMESA, we are bound to lose.

At the same time, indeed there is the capitalisation of Uganda Development Bank, but we are not yet fully industrialised. So we do not expect industries in Uganda soon. 

Above all, the COMESA countries have got local content, which is not yet in Uganda. So the business community in Uganda is bound to lose more and more under this treaty.

Therefore, I feel it is premature for Uganda to fully join COMESA – much as there are earlier commitments - the market and the idea are good but I feel we should also pull up our socks and measure up to the COMESA members. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are already part of COMESA; this Bill is bringing the treaty to make it a domestic law here – that is all it is doing. 

Honourable members, the question is that the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 2016 be read for the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2016

Clause 1

MR LUBOGO: Thank you, Madam Chair. In clause 1, on the definition of the word “minister,” the committee submits that we redraft it to read as follows: “minister” means the Minister responsible for Trade.”

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 1 be amended, as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Chair, I wonder where Parliament appears in this provision because it is just talking about drawing money directly from the Consolidate Fund; shouldn’t we put a statement that requires Parliament to approve this expenditure?

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Minister, have you understood his query? Hon. Lugolobi, can you clarify?

MR LUGOLOBI: Madam Speaker, reading through this provision, I am not quite sure where parliamentary approval has been provided for before money is withdrawn out of the Consolidated Fund. It is just looking like an open cheque.

THE CHAIRPERSON: But we have the Public Management Finance Act for all withdrawals, probably because it is not in the treaty but you need to understand that this is the treaty for 19 countries.
MR RUKUTANA: Madam Chairperson, the observation maybe pertinent, but at this stage our hands are tied because this is a treaty already acceded to. There is nothing we can do because all the partner states go by what is provided for therein.

THE CHAIRPERSON: The question is that clause 9 do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

The schedule, agreed to.

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

2.17
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.17
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the COMESA (Implementation) Bill, 2016 and passed it with one amendment. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

2.17
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY (IMPLEMENTATION) BILL, 2016

2.18
THE MINISTER OF TRADE, INDUSTRY AND COOPERATIVES (Ms Amelia Kyambadde): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 2016”, be read for the third time and do pass. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the question is that the Bill entitled, “The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa Treaty (Implementation) Bill, 2016” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE COMMON MARKET FOR EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICA TREATY (IMPLEMENTATION) ACT, 2017”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. Honourable members, we do have some other work on the Order Paper, but I would like to suspend the House for 40 minutes. We will resume at 3.00p.m. so that we can continue with the other business on the Order Paper. The House is suspended until 3.00 p.m.

(The House was suspended at 2.19 p.m.)

(On resumption at 3.19 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR THE RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO CONGRATULATE THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL TEAM - THE UGANDA CRANES, AND MR DENIS MASINDE ONYANGO FOR BEING VOTED THE AFRICAN NATIONAL FOOTBALL TEAM OF THE YEAR 2016 AND THE AFRICAN PLAYER OF THE YEAR 2016 BASED IN AFRICA RESPECTIVELY BY THE CONFEDERATION OF AFRICAN FOOTBALL (CAF)

3.19
MR HAMSON OBUA (NRM, Ajuri County, Alebtong): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament, to congratulate the national football team, the Uganda Cranes, and Mr Denis Masinde Onyango for being voted the African national football team of the year 2016 and the African player of the year 2016 based in Africa respectively by the Confederation of African Football (CAF).

THE SPEAKER: Seconded? Seconded

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, the motion reads:
“WHEREAS the Constitution of the  Republic of Uganda, 1995 under the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy XVII, mandate the State to promote recreation and sports for the citizens of Uganda;

AND WHEREAS ARTICLE 8 (a) of the same Constitution provides for governance based on the principle of national interests and common good enshrined in the National Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy;

COGNISANT of the fact that on the night of 5 January 2017, during the 2016 GLOCAF awards, held at the Abuja International Conference Centre in Nigeria, Uganda through its national football team, the Uganda Cranes was voted the African national football team of the year 2016, after breaking a 39 year jinx to qualify for the 2017 CAF AFCON finals in Gabon;

AND FURTHER COGNISANT of the fact that at the same award ceremony, Mr Denis Masinde Onyango, Uganda’s national team first choice goalkeeper was also voted African player of the year 2016 based in Africa category beating off competitors from Zambia and Zimbabwe and in the process making history not only as the first Ugandan ever to win this prestigious award but also the first goalkeeper to attain this monumental feat;

NOTING THAT the success of the national team has been a culmination of the relentless effort of successive reigns of the management and administration of the Federation of Ugandan Football Association (FUFA) coupled with the support of the Government of the Republic of Uganda through the Ministry of Education and Sports, corporate sponsors and the loyal fan base;

FURTHER NOTING THAT the momentous accomplishment by the Uganda Cranes and Mr Onyango Denis Masinde is testimony of relentless hard work, discipline, determination, humility and focus;

AWARE THAT these awards will motivate and inspire Uganda’s national football team to greater heights as the team contends for a slot in the 2018 FIFA World Cup finals in Russia;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that:

    i. Parliament of the Republic of Uganda formally recognises the historic achievement of the national football team; the Uganda Cranes in emerging the African national football team of the year 2016.
    ii. Parliament of the Republic of Uganda specially recognises the outstanding accomplishment of Mr Denis Masinde Oyango in winning the coveted award of Africa’s player of the year 2016 based in Africa.
    iii. Parliament of Uganda recognizes the contribution of successive reigns of management and administration of Federation Uganda Football Association in progressively working towards this achievement.
    iv. Parliament of the Republic of Uganda accords recognition to the national football team coach: Milutin Micho Sredojevic and his entire coaching staff for guiding the Uganda Cranes to this momentous milestone.
    v. Parliament of the Republic of Uganda recognizes the unwavering effort of previous Ugandan Cranes players who set a benchmark for continuous improvement of football standards in Uganda.”

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Justification?

MR OBUA: Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues, many a times when good and great things happen in our lives and in the lives of our friends, including our political opponents in our respective constituencies, and in the life of our country Uganda, to say thank you, is not only inspiring but also encouraging and motivating.

This is exactly the spirit of this motion. It takes dedication, hard work, discipline, consistency, humility, planning and support to win such prestigious awards.

On this particular success, Madam Speaker, of Uganda Cranes being voted by CAF as the African national football team of the year 2016, replacing Ivory Coast of 2015 and the current champions of Africa, and Algeria of 2014, I first want to pay tribute to history. Especially paying tribute to the previous and former Uganda Cranes stars that set a foundation for the current crop of players to take up from.

I want to thank in particular, but not all: Ibrahim Ssekaja, David Obua, Andy Mwesigwa, Omwony, the late Abel Dayira our goal keeper who should have been here to witness this very important function, Edgar Watson, Jackson Mayanja, these are names that are synonymous with Ugandan football record; you cannot do away with them. We must salute them for building a strong foundation that the current crop of players has taken up from.

To the current Uganda Cranes players, Denis Onyango, Wadada, Iguma, Ochaya, Walusimbi, Jjuko, Isinde, Hassan Waswa, Awucho, Oloya, Luwaga, Kizito, Tonny Maweje, Farouk Miya, team Captain Massa - we want to thank them for building on a well laid foundation for making our national stadium Namboole home away from home; a fortress where dreams of big countries have been shuttered; you cannot just come and walk away with victory at Namboole and they have proved strong on that.

We thank them for qualifying for Africa Cup of Nations and for being voted the African team of the year. We need to pray for them Members because they are still part of the 20 countries that are contending for a slot in the 2018 World Cup in Russian out of the 209 countries.

On a special but rather sad note, it should also be put on the record of Parliament that Brian Omwony, one of our players who scored the first goal for Uganda in the AFCON qualifiers currently nurses a broken leg. 

We pray for his quick recovery, he is not on the list to Gabon but he did Uganda proud by scoring the first goal that has taken us to the finals. 

Many a time when an achievement is made; for instance, the Parliamentary football team of Uganda was the best in 2016 in EAC. That particular achievement cannot be separated from the Parliament of Uganda under the leadership of the honourable Speaker. 

You cannot salute the Parliament of Uganda for winning the East African Inter-Parliamentary football and netball competitions, and other disciplines without the Parliament of Uganda.

In the same way, you cannot separate the success of Uganda Cranes from the Federation of Uganda Football Association; from the Government of the Republic of Uganda, from corporate sponsors and the well-built fan base, the people of Uganda for providing stewardship, leadership and support to our national football team.

Over the years, Uganda has made fundamental strides and progress in its world rankings and at the continental level. Uganda is currently ranked No.62 by the Federation of International Football Association in the whole world. 

In the continent of Africa, we are ranked no.12 of all the 45 countries in Africa. There is progress; but that progress requires your support, my support, the support of this Parliament, Government of Uganda and the entire people of Uganda.

On the success and achievement of Mr Denis Onyango as the African player of the year based in Africa, replacing a Tanzanian player called Samatta of 2015, I congratulate him for making history as the first Ugandan football player in the history of African football, and the first goalkeeper.

We have had these awards but we have not gotten an opportunity where a goalkeeper is awarded this prestige of being the best player in Africa; he has made history. (Applause)

Whether you like it or not, within Africa, when you mention the name Denis Onyango, they will say he is from Uganda where you and me are from. So that is our pride. And to say thank you to him we shall encourage and motivate him, and we are optimistic that - he was also voted among one of the best ten goalkeepers in the whole world, one of the finest ten goalkeepers in the world is a Ugandan.

Honourable members, you break a record once and that has been done. I believe whoever comes in will now have to take it up from Denis Onyango.

Honourable members, one needs to trace the roots and the humble goal keeping career of Denis Onyango. We may think all has been well but I must emphatically say that his journey and life story is full of peaks and valleys. Rough and smooth surfaces just like many of us given an opportunity to talk about your history. 

However, we thank God that he has been guided. To put it on record, I know our team players are disciplined but out of the current generation of players we have from this country, no one beats Denis Onyango in discipline. 

He is the most disciplined and humble player and I am happy that it has also gone to other team players that is why they are able to achieve this.

I would like to salute him for fighting a good fight, for winning the race and for being crowned the best player in Africa. We pray that the sky becomes the limit of our national football team. They are currently camped in the United Arab Emirates, in Dubai. 

If I lay on the Table what I am going to wave under our rules of Procedure it becomes property of Parliament, these are properties of the Federation of the Uganda Football Association. 

This is the certificate that the confederation of African football gave to Uganda after Uganda’s national football team was voted the national team of Africa for the year 2016. (Applause) 

Honourable members, this is the portrait of the young and energetic citizens of Uganda who qualified for Africa cup of nations and later on were voted the best team in Africa for 2016.

I should also put it on record that before returning, the Speaker officially welcomed the team and received these two instruments. There is one final instrument that I should have shown but it is not here, the actual award. 

This award ceremony took place in Nigeria; the award was flown to Uganda and later on to Dubai to act as a source of inspiration and motivation to the team members who made us proud because that is where our national football team is camped. 

Honourable members, thank you and to the Cranes when they win, we celebrate together when they lose we mourn together. But we are optimistic in that group that has Mali, Egypt, Ghana and our opening game on the 17 is against the black stars of Ghana.

We have hope that the Lord will lay His hands on our national football team and they will play, represent Uganda and ensure that they progress to win and win in the Africa cup of nations. Thank you, honourable members. God bless you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move. 

3.38
MR ALLAN SSEWANYANA (DP, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker, I rise up to second this motion. First I thank the Speaker and Parliament for having recognised AFCON qualification as a great achievement by contributing Shs 500,000 each, to be given as a token of appreciation to the Uganda Cranes. That was very good of you. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, on Thursday, 5 January 2017, in Abuja Nigeria, Uganda Cranes goalkeeper Denis Onyango was awarded African player of the year based in Africa. For emphasis, this is an award which is not very common to each and every player in this world. We only have one award to be competed for by over 35 professional footballers around the continent. However, our man, Onyango Denis is the one who won it last year 2016. Onyango is also the first Ugandan to play in the FIFA Club World Cup tournament and he is the first man to have won the CAF Champions League. These are all records that have made Onyango become a great personality in Uganda as a sportsman.

Madam Speaker, on the same day, Uganda Cranes was awarded the CAF African team of the year which is also a great achievement because to be the best team in Africa, it means you are the best amongst the best on the continent. Africa has so many teams which you have been talking about: Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Senegal, Tunisia and others, but Uganda is the best now as we speak.

Madam Speaker, these two awards have made Uganda an outstanding country, not only in Africa, but the whole world. This morning, I saw pictures of great coaches around the world visiting the camp of Uganda Cranes just to have a look and talk to the team that is the best in Africa. That is a great achievement.

Uganda has the potential of producing many sportsmen and women, but we have very many problems that have made us lag behind other nations in producing great talents. If sports arenas in Uganda were preserved, we would make better Onyangos and more Onyangos of this world. 

Recently, in Masaka District, Uganda Golf Union was in shock after part of its land was given away by Government to Bank of Uganda. This is going to affect more sportsmen around this country. Very many greenbelts and sports fields have been taken over by so called investors in suffocation of our sports in this country. 

The Uganda Cranes Football team is poorly remunerated. As we speak, it is the least facilitated team of all the sixteen teams that are going to participate in Gabon. I saw the Minister of State for Sports, hon. Bakabulindi, happily saying that Government contributed Shs 1 billion, which is not even $1 million to the Cranes for the preparation for these games. It is very absurd for Government to give only Shs 1 billion. 

Madam Speaker, each member of the team was promised $15,000, but unfortunately, the players reported to have received only $10,000. One wonders where the $ 5,000 went. 

Madam Speaker, the Government of Uganda should provide loan facilities in form of microfinance to all football clubs that play in the national league and the second division as they have been doing to all other groups of people in the various communities. This will help such clubs to groom more Onyangos and other sports superstars for our country to be celebrating each and every year.

Madam Speaker, Government should think of honouring our only hero of the last 100 years in football who is Denis Onyango with a statue. You know these days Ugandans show appreciation with a handshake, especially those who do wonders for Uganda abroad. For us, we are only asking for a statue; I do not know at what cost that would be done for Denis Onyango. Madam Speaker, I beg to support the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. I invite hon. Galiwango. However, at the same time, I invite you to join me in welcoming the Second Vice President of FUFA: Mr Magoye, the CEO FUFA: Edgar Watson: FUFA Deputy CEO: Humphrey Mandu, Mr Ahmed Juma, the Technical Chairman and Mr Hudson Kirunda from the FUFA Communications Department.

3.45
MS CONNIE NAKAYENZE (NRM, Woman Representative, Mbale): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to second the motion. I congratulate the Uganda Cranes team on the achievement. As Uganda, we are proud that Uganda Cranes, after so many years, if at all it has ever been on record, has been the best team in Africa. I would like to salute them.

Madam Speaker, Mr Denis Onyango, in the same vein, has made Uganda proud by scooping the award of the best footballer based in Africa for 2016. Congratulations Denis Onyango and Uganda because this is for Uganda.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Uganda is a natural sporting country where young people struggle on their own to excel in sports. After they struggle, beginning with banana and synthetic fibre balls in the villages, eventually, they get to train on the real balls. However, when they excel, we all own them.

People have excelled in football like Denis Onyango whom we are celebrating in Uganda today. Athletes have emerged from nowhere and got medals, which we come out to receive. We have seen people promoting sports that we had never known about like kickboxing which was not so popular in Uganda. However, from nowhere, it has come up. It means Uganda is a naturally endowed country where people develop in sports and get to be known worldwide. 

Therefore, for those who have done that, I would like to applaud them. Thank you very much, Denis Onyango and all those Ugandans who have excelled in the sporting activities. 

Madam Speaker, sports is a very important instrument of national unity. Uganda Cranes unites all Ugandans regardless of affiliation to politics, religion or colour. Everybody gets to put on the same jerseys with the national team: black, yellow and red. Everybody supports Cranes saying Uganda Tulumbe. In this spirit, Uganda Cranes has made us proud because as a sport, it is unifying Ugandans and we pray that the spirit continues because it makes Uganda proud.

Madam Speaker, because all these have come through sports, sports is key in protecting and preserving human civilisation. We have seen that many other sports have been discovered to promote talents. Also, sports helps in promoting good health and physical fitness of the citizens. 

We would like to thank the Uganda Cranes because their success is encouraging many youths to participate in different sports activities which are good for health.

Madam Speaker, as the mover of the motion put it, the Parliament of Uganda is also exceptional. The members are also doing well to also live exemplary lives and stay healthy.

The promotion of sports plays a big role in economic development. It gives employment to the players, coaches and referees among others. It is also good for infrastructural development because when stadia and different fields are constructed, the nation develops.

Madam Speaker, given what I have talked about, I would like to bring to the attention of the House the fact that there is no funding for sports in this country. I will give an example where in the 2015/2016 financial year, the National Council of Sports only received Shs 3.3 billion and yet they needed about Shs 250 billion in the medium term for three to five years. This means that they need about Shs 50 billion every year. 

Therefore, sports is not developing fast, there is a constraint of inadequate funding. I would like on this note to urge Government to make sports funding a priority such that we build more stadia, develop more sportsmen and women for the good of our nation so as we can get more of the Onyango’s and Kiprotich’s among many others.

Madam Speaker, on that note, I would like to support the MPs contribution in support of the Uganda Cranes so that they can fare well in Gabon. ‘Uganda Tulumbe’ in Gabon. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. I will give two minutes for each Member.

3.52
MR BERNARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you very much. I would like to join the mover of the motion, hon. Obua and the two seconders in supporting this motion.

I congratulate the Uganda Cranes and Dennis Onyango Obbo – sorry, Dennis Onyango and not Obbo because the Onyango Obbo that I know is a journalist.

After waiting for 38 years, I think that it was well deserved that we wake up again on a winning note. Just like the previous speakers have noted, the game of football is one that we must value and support as a country because it holds a lot in terms of our social cohesion, economically giving a source of revenue for our country and the individuals who participate in it.

I stand here this afternoon as the Patron of Onduparaka FC –(Applause)- Madam Speaker, Onduparaka FC has its own fairy tale and as I speak today, I am happy to say that we have an Ambassador in Shaban Muhammad, the most valuable player of Uganda. (Applause)

Onduparaka FC is a club that we picked from scratch formed by these players, including Shaban Muhammad. I only came in to give them a push. As of now, Onduparaka FC is doing very well and they sit as No.3 on the table. It is one of the sponsored clubs – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Half a minute for the Patron of Onduparaka FC.

MR ATIKU: Thank you. The story of Onduparaka FC is long. We must support the game of football. I received a call from one of the players while they were in Dubai and he requested to tell the public that they are in Dubai but have no allowance, their coach has no facilitation. [MR WAMANGA WAMAI: “Tell them.”] The coach was actually talking of leaving the boys in the camp. 

I would like to ask where all this money that has been released recently is going. The $15,000 that was promised, why was it that only $10,000 was paid? Where is the $5,000? Honourable minister, where is the money meant to facilitate and prepare the Uganda Cranes for a competitive tournament in Gabon?

We are here talking of previous performance but the journey that will make Uganda shine is just ahead. Our camp is the most demoralised and least facilitated. As we dispose of this motion, we would like the minister to answer these questions because our boys need the money for them to be motivated to do a good job in Gabon. I thank you.

3.56
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I also stand to support the motion and congratulate the Uganda Cranes and Dennis Onyango on behalf of the people of Kumi Municipality, Teso and Uganda.

The year 2016 was such a great year for me. It is the year that I made it to Parliament and the Uganda Cranes as well made it to the African Cup of Nations. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I know that this Parliament may not give me a presidential handshake but I know that God appreciates what happens. 

When we talk about football, it brings joy to society. I personally part with money to sponsor some young footballers. I did this in December and it was such a wonderful thing to see them play in the Silas Cup.

Madam Speaker, I do not know whether Kamuli has any upcoming team so that I can prepare to bring my boys to play against yours. But all in all, our Government needs to dedicate more resources so that we see our people progress in football.

It is a wonderful thing to note that Dennis Onyango became the 10th best in the world, above my goal keeper, Petr Cech of Arsenal. This is a wonderful thing. I sort of grew younger last year because of all those good things that happened for the first time. I now feel very good.

I would like to bless this House. I am excited when hon. Atiku talks about Onduparaka FC because I am also going to do something in Kumi and our boys shall meet for football. I thank you so much. 

THE SPEAKER: Join me in welcoming hon. Patrick Nsanja who was in the Ninth Parliament. He was the Captain of the Parliament Football Team. At the moment, he is assistant coach of the Parliament Team. You are welcome, hon. Nsanja. (Applause)

3.59
MS SANTA ALUM (UPC, Woman Representative, Oyam): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to start by thanking you for recognising Onyango and the Uganda Cranes so that they can also get a handshake from Parliament - that proposal you brought this morning – (Laughter) – I want to thank you for it. It was a suggestion, which was unanimously adopted by Parliament. I want Government to borrow a leaf from that so that this should be extended to these wonderful men, who have done our country proud, when they come back. If other people’s hands are being shaken, why not these people who have made us proud? Therefore, as the captain of the parliamentary women’s team, that is my proposal. 

Madam Speaker, when we went to Mombasa for the parliamentary games, what struck me was that they had very many playing fields. However, when you move around our country, there are no playgrounds for our children and adults. That means that the talents we have will go to waste, except the few who will struggle on their own like Onyango did.

Therefore, as Parliament, we should take action and not just talk every day and year. I remember when Kiprotich won the gold medal, we spoke eloquently here and we advised Government on what to do. Up to now, I do not see any action geared towards –(Member timed out.)

4.02
MR JACK WAMANGA-WAMAI (FDC, Mbale Municipality, Mbale): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I take the Floor to support the motion and congratulate those self-made boys for what they have done for this country. Actually, they have corrected the bad picture that this country has had. 

These players have made it by themselves. When you look at what the country has put in, definitely it is not much. The likes of the Onyangos, Nzikurus, Akii-Buas, Kiprotiches are all self-made. You can see what is befalling our players in Dubai. By the way, they have won two games so far; they beat Slovenia 3-1. 

Therefore, we must congratulate these people and ask Government to finance them. When these people make a name for Uganda, the Bakabulindis of this world come and start rejoicing. You have not put in much into these fellows; Government has not put in much. Look at Watson, who tried to start a junior academy of footballers in Uganda, Government has done nothing to support him. All these players that you hear about have gone through football junior academies and they are trained. 

We must not forget Micho for what he has done; he has put in so much. As a Government, how much money have we put in? We are here rejoicing because they have done it for Uganda. Now you see somebody giving a handshake of Shs 6 billion to somebody for doing their job. That handshake should be given to people like Onyango and these players. That is why I will happily give that Shs 500,000 to the players who have made a name for Uganda. Thank you.

4.04
MR MATIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues and the rest of the country to congratulate out gallant boys and coaches for a job well done. 

I was part of the team you sanctioned in the Ninth Parliament to investigate the invasion of school land in Kampala. I am glad that the Ninth Parliament saved Nakasero Primary School playground and Buganda Road playground that were being invaded by masqueraders who called themselves investors. This is part of the problem we must deal with as Parliament and as leaders. This is because without sports fields, we can only dream about football and sports in general. 

Madam Speaker, the last time the Uganda Cranes qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations (AFCON), I was barely three years old. However, I have been around long enough to see this contingent of grandsons of Uganda dying one by one in the most despicable conditions. All of us must be ashamed because we take our heros for granted. 

The handshake from Parliament is actually well timed. I hope everyone will look at Parliament as the first motivator and pick up from there. We should not leave our sportsmen to rot just because their time ended. We should not allow this generation of players to take the route of the 1978 contingent. 

Madam Speaker, we must support sports. Part of the job Government can do is to remove taxes on sports equipment. (Applause) We have people trying to promote sports through academies, but part of the impediment is the cost of importing sports equipment. At the end of the day, those who can afford to import them bring substandard equipment partly because of taxes. I hope the minister can come to Parliament and formally request that we waive taxes on – (Member timed out.)

4.07
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (NRM, Samia Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank hon. Obua for moving this motion and I support it. I want to speak as a person who represents Onyango; he is from my constituency. 

The fact remains that Onyango originates from a very humble background. In Busia, Onyango is commonly referred to as Masinde. Recently, I was with him when he was baptising his children. The most important request is the development of talents. We have very vast talent but we are not tapping into it. 

Onyango originated from a sports programme that the Samia Bugwe put up called the Abananda Sports Gala. He was part of it up to secondary school, until he was identified when he was in Nakawa. The most important thing is that it was out of his own effort. There was no deliberate programme from FUFA or Government to tap into these talents. 

One thing that we would really want to urge ourselves about is the issue of FUFA. We have many people, even Members of Parliament, who put in effort to develop sports in their areas but they do not have support. There is no deliberate support. I wish that the main beneficiary, which is the football organisation, came up and encouraged these programmes so that we can bring out those children and nurture them. 

We have many people that I am proud to mention. I come from a border district and many of our boys are now trading in Kenya. Look at Wanyama; Wanyama comes from Busia in Nambale, which is entirely located in Busia, but he has been registered as a Kenyan and right now he is playing with Tottenham. This would be a talent from Uganda. However, because sometimes even these boys are frustrated along the way, they end up crossing over and also because there are facilities across that make them fully tradable, they become a resource to the countries they represent.

Also, along the way, I want to encourage us to have a programme that cuts across regions because it is as though there were some regions in Uganda that are good at particular sports. I encourage FUFA to do this. 

If we talk about the eastern region of Uganda, for example, and you look at the people who have been there before, it produces very good sportsmen and sportswomen. We have the likes of Kassim Ouma “the Dream”; he is from Busia. We had Paul Ouma, who was a very strong footballer in the 1970’s. We now have Masinde and there was also Maj. Gen. Nyangweso. These are people from the same village; so how many are still out there and have not been discovered? We are speaking of Onyango now, but there are other young boys who could become good players if we helped them.

I appreciate this motion but at the same time, Busia District Council is also sitting to recognise Onyango’s efforts. The council has already made a proposal, which we, as Members of Parliament, have supported – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let me add half a minute to Masinde’s representative.

MR MAGANDA: Thank you very much. They have decided to name a road within the municipality “Dennis Onyango Road” and this is a good step, which we applaud.

We are also setting up the Dennis Onyango Talent Cup Competition, which will take place every 26 and 27 December. This is where I need FUFA to come in because there is plenty of talent out there. Please send a representative to see the talent that is in Busia. Thank you.

4.11
MR ALEX BYARUGABA (NRM, Isingiro County South, Isingiro): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I congratulate our brothers, the Uganda Cranes, together with their coaches and managers for the fantastic award. I think it is the first one I have personally witnessed in my life. I am a fairly old man and I love sports, but I had never seen this. Therefore, my heart is leaping with a lot of happiness because I have at least for once witnessed fantastic news coming from Uganda and that makes my day.

Madam Speaker, we have lots of talent down in villages. Maybe one of the mistakes that we have been making was to concentrate in Kampala. The few times that the managers and big stakeholders have ventured out, we have got the Onyangos, the Omondis, the Mwesigwas –(Interjection)– There are no Byaruhangas, unfortunately. (Laughter) 

However, let us face it; I want to make an urgent appeal to the managers of our football and other sports to venture out. Take the example of Onduparaka; it is a recent development but as we speak now, we have one of their players representing them in the national team. Aren’t we proud of it? I urge you to venture out to regions outside Kampala, of course without forgetting the centre.

I would also like us to look at our stadia. I grew up knowing that the best stadium in the western region was Kakyeka. However, if you went to Kakyeka today, it is not worth looking at; it is an eyesore. This is very unfortunate and I think this is part of the problem. It is high time we put our feet down and said “enough is enough”. (Member timed out)

4.14
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo South County, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also would like to support the motion and appreciate what the Uganda Cranes have done, especially Onyango for the recognition he has brought to this nation.

On the same note, I want to pick up from where my colleague, hon. Byarugaba, stopped. There is a lot of talent out there and I want to call upon FUFA to recognise those of us who are outside Kampala. Personally, I sponsor a tournament that has now been running for the last 11 years. At the end of every year, this tournament is on and it has helped very many students, especially in my rural secondary school called Asinge. They participate in every Coca Cola tournament and this has enabled them get very many scholarships in different schools across the country.

I want to inform the House that two of my boys who play in that same tournament have been spotted by foreign scouts and even taken to Arsenal FC for trials. So, you can see that there is a lot of talent out there. I call upon FUFA, as hon. Julius Maganda said, not to stay in Kampala. Come to Tororo and you will see my tournament which is very popular and producing players that are now moving out of the country. 

I do not whether you have the records of the boys leaving the country but as far as I am concerned, the boys are starting to move out of the country. Let us do this so that we can have talent that can beef up Onyango and be rest assured of getting more trophies coming into the country. Thank you.

4.16
MS RUKIYA CHEKAMONDO (NRM, Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Obua for moving this motion. I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the Uganda Cranes family; they have done us proud and everybody is now speaking about them. 

I think the Uganda Cranes and FUFA should move outside Kampala as requested by Members. However, I know that the Uganda Cranes have experienced a tough time when going to train and when going out to solicit for funds. Madam Speaker, I take this opportunity to thank their families, their wives – You know that without a strong family, these people would not have gone out. If Onyango had a rough wife, for example, who would accuse him of going out for other things, what would have happened, but they allowed them to go and they prayed for them. I thank their families for giving them the freedom to go and do the work that has made the nation proud.

Madam Speaker, apart from the families, I also thank their friends and children. You know that even we, as politicians, if the family is not with you, you will find it difficult to do things. I know that behind the success of Onyango and FUFA, there were women, children, parents, friends, relatives and everybody else.

Madam Speaker, I request my friends in Parliament to build this spirit. While we carry out our activities in the district, if you have a strong team, call FUFA to be present. If you have any competition, call the FUFA team so that the children down there are encouraged. Maybe then as the Uganda Cranes team grows, we will have more people coming up to join it.

Madam Speaker, I thank FUFA and the Uganda Cranes family. I also thank Parliament for its support; that support should not end today but should be continuous. Thank you.

4.18
MS MARGARET BABA DIRI (NRM, Woman Representative, Koboko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Denis Obua for moving this motion. I would like to congratulate Denis Onyango for the great success he has registered on behalf of Uganda. You have made us proud. We are now on the world map of football. Thank you very much.

I would also want to thank the Uganda Cranes for succeeding for the first time after 39 years to qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations. If you calculate, that means they last qualified in the late 1970s. What happened all these other years? During this period, I would like to say that as Ugandans, we had really neglected sports and that is why we never succeeded. 

Furthermore, there was a lot of discrimination. The best players were thrown out; they did not give an opportunity to those who deserved to play. That is why we were left behind. However, today Denis Onyango has shown that out of the odds, we can succeed. That means there are more people like Onyango who can make us proud. 

I would also like to inform you that sports is a profession. You have to be trained from childhood and by the time you become an adult, you are an expert. Ours have been feeding like local chicken, which feed on whatever is available and by good luck, have come to the top. However, now that Uganda Cranes has made us proud, let us put in more effort to develop our sportsmen and sportswomen so that we can become proud again. Uganda is capable of even getting the World Cup. If we are now No. 20, I am sure we can defeat those – (Member timed out.)

4.21
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM, WILDLIFE AND ANTIQUITIES (Prof. Ephraim Kamuntu): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much indeed. I would like to appreciate the motion for a resolution of Parliament to congratulate the national team and Mr Denis Masinde Onyango for being voted the African player of the year. 

Madam Speaker, for 39 years, most of us have been praying for Uganda to qualify for the Africa Cup of Nations and they have accomplished it. They deserve our motivation and support because tourism and football go together. 

We had wanted to send off our team from Namugongo Martyrs Shrine. The logic behind this was as some Ugandans died for their faith, that level of patriotism is precisely what our team should reflect on as they go to play.

Madam Speaker, this morning, together with my colleague, Godfrey Kiwanda, we launched the year 2017 as the year of tourism, for unlocking Uganda’s tourism potential and emphasizing domestic tourism. Just as the football slogan is “tulumbe”, we also have “tulambule”, which means “let us explore” because this country is a great country. 

We, therefore, appeal to Members of Parliament that just as we promote tulumbe in football, we must also promote tulambule, emphasizing domestic tourism as the most reliable tourism because tourism is fragile. Whenever there are insecurities, only domestic tourism can be reliable. 

You are talking about handshakes for our football team; they deserve it and they need a handshake. Similarly, in the Ministry of Tourism, Wildlife and Antiquities we also need a handshake; and for our handshake, we refer to the Members of Parliament. 

Tourism is no longer interpreted as simply pleasurable and fun. Tourism is now serious business because it is part of globalization, transformation and promoting this country to become a middle-income country. Tourism deserves a better budget and if you give us a better budget, we will bring in more money as a primary gross sector.

Finally, we believe in football, Madam Speaker. It is a great sport. We have been talking about sectarianism having a terrible negative impact on our development. If you want a shining example, when a team is being recruited you recruit players on the basis of how good they are; you do not consider their religion, where they come from, but you simply consider competence in their performance. In the same way, if that spirit continues in politics so that service delivery becomes the gospel as it is in football, it will be fantastic. 

That is why we would like to promote it in our young people so that this spirit grows with them and they compete, win, lose and accept the results. If we did that, I am sure even the issue concerning the independent candidates would die out. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.25
MR ROLAND MUGUME (FDC, Rukungiri Municipality, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate the Uganda Cranes and Mr Denis Onyango. I can see Members from both sides smiling because of sports. 

I would like to inform this House that in western Uganda, in Rukungiri District, we have the best stadium currently. However, this stadium is not being utilised and yet it is available for whoever would wish to use. Therefore, I would like to call upon FUFA officials to use these facilities outside Kampala once in a while. The stadium is available and it cost approximately Shs 30 billion to construct it.

Madam Speaker, I would like to find out the criteria one can use to join the national team. We need to have a criteria and policy in place because we have good boys who can also play football, but these boys are not selected to join the team. I would like to inform you that in 1975, the best player in this country was Mr Katimbuta; he is now very old but he is alive.

Madam Speaker, we also need to recognise and thank the media fraternity in this country and some other individuals because they have tried to promote the Uganda Cranes. Therefore, we should thank them for the good job done. 

We need to also recognise the individuals who own football clubs in this country. To own a club is not easy; it is very expensive. A person like Smart Obed, a businessman who owns Soana Football Club, funds the club singlehandedly. Hon. Nsereko once owned a club and Lawrence Mulindwa too. Parliament could also recognise these individuals.

Lastly, I do not know whether there are any arrangements for Members of Parliament who would like to go and support our team in Gabon. In case there is any arrangement, the Minister should organise us so that we can go, watch and support our team. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

4.29
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Much has been said about Uganda Cranes and Mr Denis Onyango. However, if we are to cement this and have a long time of joy and happiness - Right now they are preparing for the Africa Cup of Nations, which is going to start soon and as we have already heard, they do not have enough funds.

Therefore, if he needs Parliament to pass a supplementary budget or to do anything to cement our joy in the next three weeks, so that our gallant sons who are there are supported, I think that this would be the best option. This is because as we speak, our celebration might be short-lived if the players are not well prepared because of lack of funds. The countries that are going to contest are talking in terms of $ 10 million, $ 12 million, $ 5 million as their budget for this cup but what are we talking about - Shs 1 billion. I think we need to do something.

Finally, they have recognised all those who have contributed in as far as sports are concerned but they forgot one important person, the late Idi Amin Dada. The late Idi Amin Dada should be recognised for his support in as far as sports are concerned because it was during his time in 1978 that Uganda qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations. He forgot to recognise that person. Let us leave our differences aside and recognise him because his contribution was really great. (Member timed out.)

4.31
MR MOSES BALYEKU (NRM, Jinja Municipality West, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker. On behalf of the people of Jinja, I would like to add my voice to the mover and seconders of this motion to appreciate the Uganda Cranes and Denis in particular for this tremendous award that he has brought to the country once again.

Madam Speaker, as Parliament, we would like to recognise and appreciate the entire sports fraternity because it takes more than one player to achieve an award of that nature. As Parliament, we have also been consistent in appreciating various people in the sports fraternity. At least we have not been like other government sectors; we have been consistent in appreciating all the athletes who have been coming here.

Madam Speaker, these people are going to Gabon but there is no fan travelling to Gabon. As Government, we cannot even organise a flight for people to pay and go. We cannot charter a plane and tell people to go to Gabon. People are asking, “How do we go to Gabon? Does one have to go to Europe first?” Our Government cannot talk to Kenya or Rwanda and say, “Help us with a plane; people can pay for their tickets.” (Laughter)

People are stranded in the country as they cannot go to Gabon. It is a shame on our side because we have a minister in charge of sports but there are no arrangements that have been made. As we speak, the Uganda Cranes will be in Gabon but their fans side of the stadium will be empty. Madam Speaker, you said that you are going. Maybe you should launch a campaign for those who want to follow you to support our team. 

We can now host the Africa Cup of Nations because we have qualified but where do we host it from? We have no stadia. We only have the dilapidated Namboole, Bugembe, Kakyeka. I heard someone from Rukungiri saying they have one but I think it must be substandard. (Laughter) We need to have stadia of that nature –(Interruption)

MR MUGUME: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform my brother, hon. Balyeku, that the Rukungiri stadium is not substandard. Actually, it is the best in the entire western Uganda. You can visit it. (Laughter)

MR BALYEKU: Madam Speaker, it depends on what the honourable member uses as a yardstick to determine the best. However, my point is that we need to have regional stadia in the north, central - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: As the minister comes up, I would like to inform hon. Mugume that when you are going to host an international activity, there are certain standards required and you are judged according to those standards. It might meet the western standard but not the other ones. 

Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, the country would like to know how much money you have provided for the Uganda Cranes. We shall want to know this before we close this debate. They are in Dubai without money.

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues. We received a request from the Ministry of Education and Sports about seven days ago and we have approved Shs 2 billion towards this endeavour. Thank you very much.

4.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR EDUCATION AND SPORTS (SPORTS) (Mr Charles Bakabulindi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I add my voice to congratulate the Uganda Cranes and our son, Denis Onyango, I would like to also salute this Parliament. The culture of supporting the Uganda Cranes did not start yesterday in this Parliament; you have increased your support and I thank you very much because you can now move a step further and each contribute Shs 500,000. 

Madam Speaker, to be declared the winner in Africa is not a simple thing. For a goalkeeper to be declared the best in Africa is not simple. It has been a long journey. I heard somebody saying that self-made people from nowhere have made it. I recall one time I came here and showed you the various competitions in primary, secondary and East Africa levels where the majority of these players have come from. 

I would like to add my voice to the Member who said that we need to salute the various clubs because all these players come from various clubs to join the national team. It has been a long journey and for a team to be declared the best, they do not look at only winning. There are so many parameters they consider and one of them is discipline. Therefore, that means that our Uganda Cranes are the most disciplined team on the continent and we need to salute them for that. 

When it comes to declaring a goalkeeper the best, it is not only about how many goals you have saved or conceded; they look at various parameters like how many yellow or red cards you got, how you study movement, how you save or come in. Onyango emerged the best and we are proud of that.

Madam Speaker, I said that it has been a journey and it did not start yesterday. You will recall very well that various games were played before we qualified for the Africa Cup of Nations. Government supported the Uganda Cranes’ qualifying campaign the first time with US$ 210,000 for the away game against Botswana and Shs 300 million for the away game against Comoros, which the Uganda Cranes won. 

I heard some people asking what Government has put in. They were only looking at this without looking back to where we have come from. It has been a long journey and we have been motivating the players.

Madam Speaker, my colleague, the shadow minister, said that we gave the Uganda Cranes Shs 1 billion. Some have been calling it Shs 1 million. I can tell you that the Ministry of Education and Sports, through Ministry of Finance, approved a supplementary of Shs 2 billion. You know what a supplementary means; before it comes, we have to first look around for the money. Moreover, Shs 1 billion had already been wired to the FUFA account and they are not complaining. The second portion of Shs 1 billion to make it a total of Shs 2 billion will follow next and that is for the entire tournament, up to Gabon. 

As we speak, we are still undergoing build-up matches. I would like these people to understand that it is a big effort. Somebody is asking me, “How many dollars?” Incidentally, we count in shillings and you know that. 

Madam Speaker, as my colleagues have stated, sports is a very expensive venture, and when we talk about sports, we are talking about 53 disciplines and football is one discipline. As such, when we are talking about looking for money to sustain sports and boost tourism and other activities, we should bear in mind the 53 disciplines. Indeed, we need a lot of money. All of you, colleagues, know how much is allocated to sports. 

Much as this “handshake” looks nice, there is need for sustainability. There is need to increase the vote so that even things that come up without a plan, for instance they qualified for Africa Cup of Nations but we had not budgeted for it so we had to look for the money - (Interruption)

MR NSEREKO: Thank you, honourable minister, for giving way. First of all, I would like to thank you for the contribution you have made. However, as sportsmen, we all know that the budget is always not that small. This is an international tournament and the country would like to seek audience from you to know how much FUFA asked from you as its budget and how much you have met. Thank you. 

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much. My first clarification comes from your last statement, that you were not prepared for AFCON but Uganda accidentally qualified. You look surprised as if everything that is happening is accidental. 

Secondly, you said there are about 53 disciplines. However, in Kampala, part of Nakivubo Stadium is sold off. In Masaka, part of the golf course is being sold off. Are you trying to reduce on the disciplines so that you can save money to fit the remaining ones in the budget? 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, dear colleagues. I will start with hon. Nsereko. Initially, the budget was Shs 6 billion plus. The good thing is that some of the officials are seated up there. 

We sat together with the National Council of Sports and the budget was brought down to Shs 4.53 billion. I called them again and said, “As an experienced person, we need to sit together and see which areas are viable.” We brought the budget down to Shs 2.65 billion. Therefore, it was not a matter of reducing; we were looking at items. 

By the time they went, some of the matches which were fixed as build-up matches were already undertaken. As such, the letters that went to Ministry of Finance were reading Shs 2.65 billion and Ministry of Finance said that they would look for Shs 2 billion. Straightaway, we wired Shs 1 billion and Shs 1 billion is following. We have been getting calls from Dubai and we are going to respond.

Secondly, when we are talking about the figures and the disciplines - I think I will have ample time to talk about this with my colleagues. The different disciplines have nothing to do with fields in Masaka or Nakivubo. I am talking about disciplines like rugby and netball. That is what we call them in the language of sports.

Madam Speaker, I would like honourable members to get this because my colleague was saying that we need to have a big budget. You can understand the situation that we are in. In March this year, we shall be hosting the World Cross Country Championships and I need Shs 4.8 billion. I am already negotiating with Ministry of Finance for this. It was budgeted for but you know, budgeting is one thing and releasing is another.

As we speak, under basketball we qualified for the Afro Basketball Championships. Those are all waiting to be sponsored. The She Cranes participated in the qualifiers for the Youth Netball World Cup, 2017 to be held in Gaborone, Botswana, and they won the bid; we need money.

You can see that if we are talking about development of sports, which I am proud of, there is need to have enough money and we can only get that money with your support in this Parliament. (Interruption) 

MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I remember in the previous Parliament, we celebrated the medal that was brought to Uganda by Kiprotich and also the various people that have made Uganda proud through sports. The Minister of Education and Sports during those times was very clear to this House that in the following years, there was going to be improvement in allocations in order to boost sports in Uganda.

Right now, the honourable minister is clarifying on the money that they have just got as a supplementary. A supplementary means looking at everything within the ministry to ensure that money is got and given to the team that is already in Gabon. I would like to seek some clarification from the minister. Since 2013 to date, in terms of presentations to Parliament, what progress has been made to show that as a country, we are progressing well in terms of sports budgetary allocations in Parliament? 

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. It is good that I have been with my colleague in this House for some time. Also, when you were approaching the Minister of Education and Sports then, I was the Minister of State for Sports and I am still around. You know the procedure; we do one thing and Ministry of Finance does another. 

You know that they all come from different committees of this House. Even the supplementary I am talking about under normal procedure is going to come here for approval. I would wish to see Parliament standing on its two feet and saying, “No, that is not enough; we would like to increase it.” I will be the proudest person on this earth.

Madam Speaker, somebody made a contribution here - I do not know whether it was my colleague, the shadow Minister for Sports. He said that the boys are in Dubai crying over allowances and that the coach is almost giving up. In as far as I am concerned, as the minister in charge, I am working on the balance. Secondly, they also said that they were promised $ 15,000 and were asking where the money is. 

The Speaker of Parliament has got a part to play, the Members of Parliament have got their portion to do and the Minister of State for Sports has got his role to play. However, the Federation of Uganda Football Association (FUFA) as the administration who received the money has also got a role to play, and they know how they distributed the money and how it was used.

I would like to remind Members that the $ 10,000 did not come directly from the Ministry of Education and Sports neither did we send it to FUFA. I hope that FUFA did its role properly and that they will be giving accountability from where they got the money. So far, the only complaint I heard, which I think they are addressing, was about the few people and I think they have addressed that. That is as far as the $ 10,000 is concerned. 

Madam Speaker, let me make the record clear because I attended that lunch at State House. The players were promised the $ 10,000 – (Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: I would like to ask the minister for some clarification. Are you not getting any money from the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA) and other international bodies? This is because when you talk about this local money, it is as if we are not getting any money from other international bodies. We would like to know more about that and how much.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, honourable member, for asking that question. Since the Chief Executive Officer of FUFA is listening, I will put the question to him after the sitting so that he tells me how much he gets from FIFA or other international bodies. 

In as far as the procedure is concerned, Madam Speaker, I am not accountable. I do not get money from FIFA or CAF and there is no way we can communicate with FIFA to ask them how much they are giving us - (Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the minister is in charge of sports in this country. Is he in order to expose his ignorance about the money that FUFA receives from international bodies yet he is the minister in charge of sports and he represents them? Is he in order? Is he really in charge? 

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the minister administers the funds from FIFA and all those bodies. Please, honourable minister, explain to us as you wind up.

MR BAKKABULINDI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and my colleague who raised the point of order about me showing ignorance. I do not know whether it was ignorance or misuse of the word. Unless you come out with a provision of any law, which compels me to say that whenever FIFA sends money to FUFA, I must get a copy - We do things using guidelines and regulations. I cannot simply impose certain sections without being guided. 

Recently, we passed a regulation, which compels all the organisations to comply, and this is the process that is taking place. After completing that process, we will compel all the organisations to declare what they have got from the external sources. However, as we talk, I am not entitled to know what FIFA or CAF is giving FUFA. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the motion as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now direct the Clerk to deduct Shs 500,000 from each Member immediately to raise Shs 200 million for the Uganda Cranes. Thank you.

Honourable members, I want to inform you that there will be serious “rain” on Wednesday and Thursday. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO INVESTIGATE THE CIRCUMSTANCES UNDER WHICH REWARDS WERE MADE TO 42 PUBLIC OFFICERS FOR WINNING THE TAX ARBITRATION CASE BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF UGANDA AND HERITAGE OIL AND GAS

4.53
MR MICHAEL TUSIIME (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish you all a happy new year. 

Madam Speaker, I move a motion for a resolution of Parliament to investigate the circumstances under which rewards were made to 42 public officers for winning the tax arbitration case between the Government of Uganda and Heritage Oil and Gas.

“Whereas in July 2010, Heritage Oil and Gas - (Interruption) 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, take your seats. I do not know what he is going to say.

THE DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Mwesigwa Rukutana): Madam Speaker, I am seeking a procedural clarification. This morning, the Office of the Attorney-General was served with a letter from Candia & D.W. Oundo Advocates attaching a court order in Constitutional Application No. 7 of 2017, where the parties are Sabiiti Eric v. the Attorney General. 

On perusal of the court order, the Constitutional Court issued an injunction restraining Parliament from investigating, questioning or inquiring into the impugned bonus payments and staying proceedings of whatever nature. We are respondents and we were served. These are private lawyers. The application is against the Attorney-General but it is true that it attaches a court order. 

Madam Speaker, the procedural clarification I am seeking is: since this is a court order issued by a competent court, I would like to be guided by you on how we can proceed in light of the provisions contained in this court order. 

On our part, as the Attorney-General’s office, we had our statement that we wanted to make on the matter. We would have loved to make the statement so that Members can debate this matter with full knowledge, but in the morning we were served with the court order. Madam Speaker, I am seeking your guidance on how we should proceed. 

Because this letter is addressed to the Attorney-General and to the Speaker of Parliament, I am assuming that Madam Speaker, you too have received the letter and the court order. I am, therefore, seeking procedural guidance, given the clear provisions of our Constitution and laws, on how we should proceed with this matter.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, I do not know whether the Speaker has been served because I have not received any service. I would like to know whether we have been served. I would also like to know what time that service was effected. If you could answer that, we shall proceed.

MR RUKUTANA: As I said, we too were served. We are not party to the proceedings but we are respondents. However, it is true that there is a court order attached to the letter emanating from the lawyers. That is why I thought it prudent to seek procedural guidance on how we can proceed because once there is a court order, it is a court order. 

I am entirely in your hands, Madam Speaker. I had to bring it to your notice because there is a court order. I do not know how we should proceed on this matter in light of the court order. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to draw the attention of the Attorney-General and the House to the Rules of Procedure under the Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act, Cap 258. I would to read section 4: “No process issued by any court in Uganda in the exercise of its civil jurisdiction shall be served or executed within the precincts of Parliament while Parliament is sitting or through the Speaker, the Clerk or any officer of Parliament.” 

Therefore, if we were served while we were sitting as we have been doing, then it is not effective. That is section 4 of The Parliament (Powers and Privileges) Act.

MR RUKUTANA: As I said, I am comforted by your interpretation –(Interjections)- I said that I was seeking your guidance on the matter – (Interjections) - I was not trying to serve Parliament. 

As I said, we are also respondents that were served. However, the fact that there was this order, my intention was to make sure that we move in a manner that does not harm our Constitution or our rules. Now therefore, I am in your hands and I oblige to your interpretation. 

5.03
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Winfred Kiiza): Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you so much for educating the one who is supposed to advise us. By law, the Attorney-General is the one supposed to legally defend Parliament and also to advise us. I am surprised that the one who is supposed to advise Parliament does not actually know the rules under which Parliament operates. 

It is no wonder that in some cases, the Office of the Attorney-General has been failing Parliament. I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker, because under your wise leadership, the Attorney-General has been given a free lecture and free education on the operations of Parliament, especially on the Rules of Procedure, which he should be using in the exercise of his duty.

Leaving that aside, the Attorney-General should have been the last person to come here and say that he is bringing a court order stopping the discussion of the motion before the motion is even presented. I would, therefore, like to ask that the statement of the Attorney-General be expunged from the record of Parliament and that a motion for the censure of the Attorney-General be moved without notice. (Interruption)- Maybe you can second the motion to censure without notice.

MR OKUPA: I thank you, hon. Winfred Kiiza – 

THE SPEAKER: Order, honourable members.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, the information that I would like to give the Leader of the Opposition is that following the futile attempt by the Attorney-General to suffocate Parliament – 

Madam Speaker, I think that there are things that really need moral authority. When you look at that court order, it is Eric Sabiiti v. the Attorney-General. The Attorney-General is a beneficiary in this case because from what we are reading, the Attorney-General got money, the Deputy Attorney-General, Solicitor-General, Deputy Solicitor-General and the directors in their departments – (Interjections) - I am wondering whether it is not connivance with Government because here is the Attorney-General coming to stop this debate when he is a beneficiary in this matter.  

Madam Speaker, Parliament derives its powers from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda and not any other. The powers to appropriate, monitor and the powers of accountability are derived from the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. That is the information that I wanted to share with the Leader of the Opposition regarding this matter. I wonder whether it is necessary for us to entertain the Attorney-General who is a net beneficiary and a suspect in this case.

Madam Speaker, I support the motion that we expunge the statement by the Deputy Attorney-General from the record of this House. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Can I have a look at that document that you are reading? 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I would like to put the record correct. I did not rise to stifle the efforts of Parliament. Hon. Okupa, who said that we are trying to gag Parliament, should have listened carefully to what I said. I said that we were served with a court order and when I came here, I came to seek procedural guidance. 

I did not say that we are bringing a court order to stop Parliament. I was also seeking the guidance of the Speaker on how we can proceed in light of the fact that there was a court order. I did not say that I was presenting the court order to stop Parliament from proceeding.

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Speaker, I am bamboozled and perturbed. There are three arms of Government: the Judiciary, the Executive and the Legislature. It is clear in the Constitution that as much as the three arms of Government operate independently, one arm of Government cannot tell the other to do this and that.

Following separation of powers, Parliament makes laws and plays the oversight function. It is illogical, even by common sense, for someone to stand in one arm of Government and tell Parliament not to do oversight. Otherwise, we could leave other arms of Government to do the work of Parliament. 

Even in our rules, it is clear; there is no way you can debate that situation. How can the Judiciary decide for us in anticipation about what we have not done and say, “Do not do a, b, c, and d”? It is a bad precedent. Honestly speaking, we are looking at these matters as a joke but please, we are Members of Parliament and we are responsible. We are the summary of Ugandans; we have to leave a legacy. 

I do not believe that even if the Attorney-General is served, he cannot say “no” to what is clear. He is the custodian of the law. If the Judiciary wants, they can object to the motion, which can be tabled here, and it can be interpreted that we passed it in a wrong way. However, it cannot prevent Parliament from carrying out its mandate.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, do you believe this is a genuine court order?

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, I want to repeat what I said. We were served with that court order. (Interjections) The court order, on the face of it, appears genuine. It was my responsibility to bring to your attention, Madam Speaker and Parliament, the existence of the court order. 

The issue of whether Parliament was served or not is a matter of fact; I did not know. As the Attorney-General’s office, we were served. Given that there seems to exist a court order, I came here to seek procedural guidance on how we should proceed. The order is not extracted by the Attorney-General’s Chambers; the order was only served on the same chambers.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of the few questions that you have asked the Deputy Attorney-General, I have listened carefully and he has avoided answering all of them. The said court order had a representative of the respondent and the respondent is in doubt. He said, “on the face of it”. When a lawyer uses such words, and I enjoy the benefit of being one of them, he is either dishonest or is economical with the truth. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, this is a matter that should not have reached this level. We would be very far. This is Parliament of Uganda. You have ruled that you have not been served. Probably, it would be the best thing to twist this court order. My fear, Madam Speaker, is that another court order might come out tomorrow restricting Members of Parliament from coming to Parliament. (Applause) 

My genuine belief, and I want to invite honourable members - I had indicated that I would not be saying anything about this but I have been compelled when I saw the Attorney-General going the direction he was pointing to. Service of court processes is regulated by law and it is known. 

We want to set a precedent rightly. Of the three arms of Government, we have legislative roles, courts have a role and court orders must be obeyed. If we are to obey court orders, beginning with this one, be prepared to obey one that will stop you from sitting in that chair, Madam Speaker. We either liberate our Parliament today or not. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Musumba comes up, can I ask the Attorney-General to read that so-called order so that we know what we are discussing? 

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, as I stated earlier, this court order was served on the Attorney-General and it is also indicated that it is addressed to the Speaker of Parliament by one Candia & D.W. Oundo Advocates. There is a letter that encloses the court order. Let me begin with the letter.

THE SPEAKER: Deal with the order. 

MR RUKUTANA: Okay. The order reads as follows:
“The Republic of Uganda
In the Constitutional Court of Uganda at Kampala
Constitutional Application No. 07 of 2017 
Arising from Constitutional Application No. 06 of 2017. (Arising out of Constitutional Petition No. 04 of 2017.) 

Sabiiti Eric, Applicant versus Attorney-General, Respondent.

Court Order

This application coming up for final disposal on the 9th day of January 2017 before Hon. Mr Justice S.B.K. Kavuma, DCJ in the presence of Mr Alex Candia, counsel for the applicant and Mr Mandette Geoffrey for the respondent. 

It is hereby ordered that: 
1. 	An interim order is hereby issued restraining Parliament, any person or authority from investigating, questioning or inquiring into the impugned bonus payments and/or staying all proceedings of whatever nature, if any, which may be pending before any forum whatsoever arising from the impugned payments, until the main application No. 06 of 2017 has been heard and determined.

2. 	The registrar of this court is directed to ensure that all pre-trial steps are taken in good time and fix the hearing of the main application and the constitutional petition without delay in the next convenient court session.

3. 	The costs of this application shall abide the outcome of constitutional Application No. 06 of 2017. 

Given under my hand and the seal of this honourable court this 9th day of January 2017. 
Registrar Court of Appeal.” 

This is the order. (Interjections) The order does not indicate time; it only indicates the day.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LANDS, HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT (URBAN DEVELOPMENT) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of procedure. My understanding is that you have read the law and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament as to what constitutes service of process of court to the Parliament. The question, therefore, is: has this Parliament been served with a court order or not? Once we determine that, we have no further discussion on that matter. 

If we determine that you have not been properly served, we should proceed because that document does not exist in your hands in law. You cannot serve a document when Parliament is sitting because it contravenes the privilege of Parliament.

Secondly, I heard the Leader of the Opposition say that the Attorney-General should be held accountable for this and so on. I beg to implore you, Madam Leader of the Opposition, that to take that route would be diversionary. The principal matter here is the substance. The Attorney-General came, put his papers before us, and it was within his mandate to do so, and the Speaker has ruled. Let us concentrate on the substantive matter before us. (Applause)

MR JACKSON KAFUUZI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, I wish to draw your attention to Article 8A of our Constitution, clause (1), which states, “Uganda shall be governed based on principles of national interest and common good enshrined in the national objectives and directive principles of state policy.”	

Colleagues, do you feel that closing our mouths to the motion that was about to be tabled would be in the national interest? [Hon. Members: “No.”] Most obliged.

MR RUKUTANA: Madam Speaker, my role, as everybody else has said, is to advise Parliament and Government on all matters of legal nature. As I said, I am one hundred per cent in your hands, Madam Speaker. 

On the issue of whether the court order has been properly served to Parliament, all I can say is that just now I have seen a copy endorsed with the stamp of the Office of the Clerk to Parliament on 10 January 2017, received by Joshua at 11.35 a.m. Why I am doing this is to allow Madam Speaker to take a conscientious decision well knowing what we are deciding on. That is all.

5.26
PROF. MORRIS OGENGA LATIGO (FDC, Agago North County, Agago): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I joined this Parliament like everybody else and since this Parliament was inaugurated, you have not seen me speak on the Floor of the House. This is probably the first time that I am seriously saying something. Thank you very much to the colleagues who suggested that I descend here; I used to enjoy this in the Eighth Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, I appreciate the fact that the Attorney-General is the Attorney-General. I also appreciate the fact that court orders are legal matters. However, the matter before this Parliament is not about legal matters. It is about the status of this Parliament in the eyes of the country; it is about the functioning of this Parliament; and it is about the relationship between Parliament and the other arms of the state.

We respect the Judiciary. There is no way we can sit in this Parliament and tell the Judiciary what to do; we have never done it. I do not know whether this is audacity or a sign of national decay that we have a very senior member of our courts totally disregarding the existence of Parliament. I do not know what they call them because I am an insect scientist. If those who went before him had gone there and made this appeal, the first thing I would expect him to do is to advise them that this is such a grave matter that would call for Parliament to be present and hear you people out. 

The fact that an individual in the Judiciary – it is not the Judiciary because I know that the Judiciary are deeply aggrieved by what is happening. The fact that an individual has the audacity to issue a court order to Parliament like Parliament is a bunch of cattle thieves is absolutely beyond my comprehension, Madam Speaker. 

We should not waste time examining the law behind this court order. We should proceed with our business. I have been in this Parliament long enough to know that if a matter is sub judice, that ruling comes from the Speaker in his or her wisdom, not from outside. It should have been you to say, “Look, this matter is sub judice and we cannot proceed with it.”

If a street person can go and get a court order stopping Parliament from deliberation, what will we do in this country? What kind of door are we opening? Where will our democracy end up? 

Madam Speaker, we should end this discussion and the Executive should apologise to Parliament for trying to encourage this mischief. We should proceed with our business because we were elected to exercise oversight over the Executive, to uphold the Constitution and to ensure that our people are protected from those who abuse the authority vested in them. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

5.31
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think there is a problem and when I stand here to say there is a problem, indeed it is true. 

Madam Speaker, you are a tested Speaker of this august House and you have steered this Parliament over the years. There has never been a single day or time when you have been known on record for doing anything contrary or in contempt of any court or court order. 

In the last Parliament, there was an attempt concerning a court order and you guided, ruled and said that where the matter is sub judice, you shall guide the House. I do not know anybody who doubts that under this motion, you are able to guide us. I am perturbed by the Attorney-General coming on the Floor of this House - As hon. Oboth said, either the Attorney-General is hiding something or he does not believe in that court order. 

I would like the Attorney-General to challenge me because this afternoon I was standing in the corridors of Parliament and the Attorney-General was confiding in a senior Member. I would like to quote him verbatim. He was holding the court order in his hands and explaining to one of the Members, whose name I will withhold. He said, “You know, the Office of the Attorney-General was surprised about how a member of their office went to court and they went further as the Office of the Attorney-General” - I did not want to disclose this but because you are confusing this House, I must say it. (Applause)

MR RUKUTANA: I do not know where hon. Anifa Kawooya was but I did not utter the words attributed to me. Is it in order for the honourable member to put words in my mouth when I never uttered them? All I said is that we were served with a court order. 

I will repeat, for the record, that we were just served with the court order. We are respondents; we are not petitioners. That is what I said when I talked to the person I was talking to.

MS KAWOOYA: Madam Speaker, unless the Attorney-General now thinks that I, Anifa Kawooya of Ssembabule District, have just changed now - I have not even changed my dress code. I was with you. (Laughter)

Finally, the court order is addressed to the Attorney-General and the Attorney-General is not this august House; we were anticipating a court order written to the Speaker of Parliament. However, now that you gave the Attorney-General a chance to read whatever is in the court order to the House - You know that I have been in court for a long time, so when it is a court order the specifics are clear. It has stated, “to investigate, look into” etcetera; all those are speculations until we hear the motion.

Therefore, when we hear the motion, Madam Speaker, you will guide us on what the motion contains and whether what we are debating touches on that court order. I, therefore, move that we hear the motion, debate it under your guidance and move on. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, we are facing an unprecedented situation where the doctrine of separation of powers is being tested. This is the first time that a court is operating in anticipation of an issue, which has not even come to the House. This is an attempt to gag this House and prevent it from doing its work. (Applause)

Therefore, honourable members, I cannot accept a situation where a court dictates how we shall speak in this House and how we shall write the Order Paper. The court is interfering with the oversight powers of this House and it is going to the core of democracy in this country.

Honourable members, this court order says we should not debate, inquire or investigate and this is unacceptable. There is no way we shall deal with the Budget without talking about this matter. There is no way the Government will secure the money for the Petroleum Fund without talking about this matter. There is no way you will recapitalise UDB without considering this matter. I, therefore, would like to direct the Attorney-General to move to court immediately and get this stupid order vacated. (Applause) 

Honourable members, I want to have the rights of the Members of Parliament fully reinstated. In the circumstances, I will adjourn the committees of this House sine die from today - no more work will be done – and I adjourn the plenary sine die until you have vacated this order. House stands adjourned. 

(The House rose at 5.39 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)












