Thursday, 7 January 2016

Parliament met at 2.56 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this sitting. I want to thank you very much for coming back to perform your constitutional duty. I intend to release you at the close of business today so that you can go and do the needful with the people of Uganda.

I just have two matters to communicate. I would like to amend the Order Paper to permit the Minister of Finance to present two Bills. One Bill is on anti-money laundering, which is up for the first reading, and then we have the long awaited tier IV Bill; it is finally here, so allow it to be presented for first reading and I hope it will help our people to avoid being cheated. Those are the two adjustments to the Order Paper. 

Hon. Paul Mwiru had a matter to raise. Let us use one minute.

3.04
MR PAUL MWIRU (FDC, Jinja Municipality East, Jinja): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I rise on a matter of national importance. 

Last night in my constituency, fire gutted over 30 houses and my people lost property although there was no loss of life. In the circumstances, I call upon the Minister of State for Disaster Preparedness to come to the rescue of my people. I want to put Government on notice that actually this is one area where if you help my people, it can even help – (Laughter) – to show that you are concerned about them. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.05
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North Constituency, Kasese): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There is a gravity flow scheme in my constituency, which was donated with the perspective of corporate social responsibility by Tronder Power Ltd. The subcounties of Bugoye and Maliba are benefiting from this scheme and the local people were also asked to make their contribution, which they did.  

Unfortunately, after the completion of the project, Kasese local government, together with the subcounty authorities, decided to initiate a process to sell the water supply system to National Water and Sewerage Corporation so that people can begin paying. This project was compensation to the people after their water was used to generate that power. The company reasoned that since they had denied the people from getting water from the river, they could supply water in the pipes, and that is what happened. The people have petitioned the Minister of Water and Environment and they have also petitioned National Water and Sewerage Corporation not to undertake that kind of move. 

The reason I am raising this matter is to ask Government to explain why the people have been denied water in the river. Secondly, to compensate them they were given piped water but then after that you turn around and begin billing people when these people had their water in the river; what is the intention of the Government in this?

My prayer is that the local government and all its accomplices are restrained from continuing with that move. Also, National Water and Sewerage Corporation should immediately stop undertaking that move because it is very disastrous and the community is not comfortable with it. The Minister of Water and Environment should explain to this House and the people of Kasese why they have hijacked that project of the community and yet they contributed to have it there with the help of Tronder Power in form of compensation. The situation is not good. I was with them last week and they said that this will not happen as easily as some people may think.

3.08
MR LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe South Division, Kawempe): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Two weeks ago, we raised the issue of poster charges in Kampala but KCCA has still ordered all those contesting for various positions in Kampala to pay Shs 500 per poster. If you want to pin up your poster in the city, you have to pay Shs 500 per poster, regardless of whether you are contesting for LCIII, LCV, councillorship or any other position. 

Madam Speaker, it is a constitutional requirement for us to contest. In Kampala alone, over 70 aspiring Members of Parliament have paid over Shs 200 million to Government as nomination fees. We thought that the nomination fees would be used to cater for such charges. As we talk, all those who are contesting in Kampala have provided over 1500 temporary jobs to the people of Kampala and we are supporting businesses at Nasser and Nkrumah roads. If you visited those two streets, you will find them very busy with people printing posters. I believe that as Kampala residents, we are taking the lion’s share. 

Madam Speaker, is it really right –(Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Madam Speaker, just this morning about 3,000 of my campaign posters were defaced by KCCA allegedly for non-payment of a levy we are not aware of. We do not know of any resolution of KCCA that put in place that kind of levy. I have got complaints from people who are contesting for councillorship whose posters have also been defaced under the same allegations.

Madam Speaker, it was you who personally tasked the Minister of Kampala to make a statement within two days. It is now about two weeks and the statement has not been made yet we are getting affected. I had to instruct my cadres to take down my own campaign posters so that KCCA does not take them away. Thank you.

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, hon. Latif Ssebagala, for giving way. Madam Speaker, when we talk about Shs 500, it is not for the whole period; it is just for a month. That means that every month, you must pay Shs 500 for a poster to appear on the streets of Kampala. This morning, as the hon. Moses Kasibante has said, KCCA hired people and trucks, and even as talk now they are on the streets, to remove these posters.

If we are to campaign for two months and pay all this money – For every 10,000 posters you pin, you must pay Shs 5 million per month, then that is Shs 10 million that we have to pay to KCCA. The situation has also affected the presidential candidates. According to the list from KCCA, the Rt Hon. Amama Mbabazi paid, His Excellency the President paid but the lower cadres, including councillors and MPs, are contesting this fee. 

During the time of KCC, before Madam Musisi came in, as contestants we used to pay a flat figure - we paid Shs 200,000 in 2011 - and the authorities would get this money after the campaigns to clean the city. Now this has become commercial and we cannot afford to campaign in Kampala. I do not know what means we can use now to campaign because every poster is being removed. Thank you.

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am speaking in the capacity of the former deputy mayor of Kampala City. The information I want give is that even when the people were not able to pay the Shs 200,000 as expected, we never used to harass them. We would sit with them and negotiate and we handled them in a manner that was dignified as members who were contesting. That is the information I want to give.

MR SSEBAGALA: Madam Speaker, I talked to one of the KCCA officials and he quoted a clause in the KCCA Act under advertisement. He told me that since I was contesting, I was advertising, and indeed if you are advertising you must pay for outdoor advertising. However, this is a constitutional requirement; otherwise, we would not have contested. It is because we are fulfilling that constitutional obligation that we are out campaigning.

Madam Speaker, I humbly request that you prevail in this. Many of the contestants in Kampala have paid a lot of money to the printery here and in other areas and some have been providing temporary employment opportunities. Right now, I employ over 20 people a day to move around, and so do other colleagues of mine. We request you and this august House to intervene, otherwise KCCA has become a monster in this city, and this is because they do not respect all those who were elected in Kampala. 

We know that even their existence in KCCA was as a result of appointment by H.E. the President, who is also a candidate in these campaigns. We appeal that if we are to be protected as aspirants in Kampala, maybe we come up with an order to KCCA to stop removing our posters. Otherwise, if this continues successfully in Kampala, next time it is going to be implemented in all the other districts. We must fight it in Kampala so that it does not go to other districts. Thank you very much.

3.15
MS LUCY AKELLO (FDC, Woman Representative, Amuru): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I rise on an issue of national importance. 

For some time now, elephants have been disturbing the people of Amuru. The reason I have brought up this issue in this House is because lives have been lost. We have so far lost three people who have left orphans. Secondly, crops have also been destroyed and people have said they are not going to plant crops anymore. That means that our people are going to starve. There is already a problem of food shortage in the parishes of Bibia in Atiak Sub County. 

What is perturbing is the fact that these elephants are actually crossing from South Sudan. They are not our elephants. (Laughter) Recently, the elephants that crossed gave birth, and this means they are not about to cross back. That is really worrying the people Pachilo Parish. One of the elephants has a mark of Ethiopia –(Interjections)– Yes; that is what the people have said. So, it is a bigger problem. The good thing is that the people know the routes of these elephants. My prayer is that Uganda Wildlife Authority cooperates with the community to find ways of blocking this once and for all because it has really been a menace to the people. I thank you.

MAJ. GEN. OKETTA: I would like to inform hon. Lucy Akello that the issue has been reported to the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife. That area is an elephant corridor. The ministry and the Uganda Wildlife Authority are going to the area next week to make identifications and educate the people in the area and also to assess the damage so far done. I thought she should be informed about the action being taken.

3.17
MR SAMUEL SSEMUGABA (NRM, Kiboga County West, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance. 

In my district, Kyankwanzi, El Nino rains burst all the bridges along River Kitumbi and washed them away. However, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) has failed to repair those bridges, forcing people to set up wooden bridges, which are causing many people to fall into the river and some end up drowning. That river also destroyed some roads in the district and yet the district has no money to manage those bridges. 

I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Works and Transport and the Ministry of Finance to provide money. We have reported to UNRA, to the Ministry of Works but they are saying there is no money. I appeal to Government to rescue people in Kyankwanzi who live along River Kitumbi crossing points; they are around four. About 10 lives have already been lost in my area. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.20
MR JULIUS MAGANDA (Independent, Samia-Bugwe County South, Busia): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise on the issue concerning the state of the roads in Busia District particularly Musita-Lumino-Busia-Majanji Road. The Musita-Lumino-Busia-Majanji Road was awarded to a contractor in February 2015, and the funding for this road, which was under UNRA by then was reverted to other programmes since the contractor had taken over. However, since then, nobody has gone to this road - even the contractor - to do what we call periodical maintenance. As I speak, the bridges on that road have broken down. 

On 29th December, we attempted to locally repair a bridge between Lumino and Masafu on Majanji-Busia Road but because there is a lot of water, the whole thing has collapsed and there is no passage as I speak. I was able to reach the Minister of Works and Transport but he could not make any effort to help. Right now, I am forced to bring this up on the Floor so that we can compel the minister to probably inform the contractor to go to that spot and do repairs or else the people in the community intend to close the road and maybe do a post-mortem that would compel other departments of Government to come and rescue the road. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as you know on Thursdays private Members’ business takes precedence. Therefore, I want to ask the Government to quickly answer so that we can use ten minutes. These are representational issues and it is important that they are addressed. 

Attorney-General, I do not know where to start from and who else to ask but there is the issue of Kampala and the cost of posters. These are representational issues and they involve access to the public. Members have raised this issue again and they say that it affects all the leaders up to the lowest level, who must pay Shs 500 per poster pinned up. This is a matter of representation; I do not know how it can be resolved.

3.21
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, it is good that most Members of Parliament stay in the enlightened constituency of Nakawa so they know what has been going on. In the initial period of the primary elections, my posters were also removed but I had made an application. When they said that we make applications, I did make one. It takes time for these applications to be assessed but during that time they were removing the posters. 

When my application was assessed, I was given an invoice of 12.5 million, which I dully paid. This is why my posters are up – (Interjections)– I paid Shs 12.5 million - (Mr Kasibante rose_) - Madam Speaker, I do not think any clarification should be sought from me because I am one of the payees. Any clarification, which has to be made, must be addressed to the appropriate authority or minister. You cannot seek clarification from me as a person who has also been a victim of the payment. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the Prime Minister’s office and then we go to works. The person we had tasked to come here and explain is the Minister for the Presidency, but I have been looking for him and I have not yet found him. That is his sector.

3.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere):  Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have three points to make. The first one is about the case of fire raised by hon. Paul Mwiru. In addition to what he has tabled before the House, I request that he contacts the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) for details so that it can be handled by the relevant ministry. This would apply to any of us; when you have an emergency, apart from addressing it in the House you should make sure you reach where action can take place. This is a general observation.

The second remark is in response to the issue raised by my brother, hon. William Nzoghu. I think we need to also check. When you get water from a river, it is not treated; the moment you have the processing of water, there is a cost. We should also bear in mind that public works end up costing money. Therefore, I would not want you to insist, honourable member, that people do not make a contribution. In fact, even in many cases the members themselves – those who share a public supply – do sit down and agree on the cost of doing repairs. In many cases there is a local committee, which keeps checking on the wholesomeness of the project. So, I would like to propose that – (interruption)

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable minister. For the scheme that I am talking about, the local community has a maintenance plan; they make their monthly contribution. The water, for your information, is clean, so there is nothing that National Water and Sewerage Corporation is going to add apart from charging the local people who have been denied their water, which they were actually utilising before. As you know, when projects are initiated in a particular area - (Interruption)

MR MBAHIMBA: Thank you for giving way. The information I would like to pass on is that this water project has a committee and they contribute money monthly to treat the water. 

I would also like to inform you that I stay in an urban area, but we are failing to pay for national water. Here, you are taking costs to a village community, which is more impoverished than a town community. Even if National Water and Sewerage Corporation takes up this water project, the local people will not manage to pay the bills and the project may close. Why don’t National Water and Sewerage Corporation go to urban areas where there is no water other than going to areas where local people have managed with their own sources? That is the information I want to give.

MR NZOGHU: Thank you, honourable member. As I had said earlier, National Water and Sewerage Corporation are not going to add any value to that water project – that is very clear.  I am the representative of the people; I come from there and I know that water project. 

The reason I raised this matter was to ask you, Government, to stop National Water and Sewerage Corporation from disturbing our people. This is their water and they gave their water to Tronder Power to generate power, which the Government is utilising. You cannot punish people twice for – (Interruption) 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, honourable member, for giving way. Whereas I would like to sympathise with the residents who are being disturbed by National Water and Sewerage Corporation, I would like all of us to appreciate the fact that all people in Uganda are entitled to clean water, whether they are in urban areas or villages.

The information I would like to give to the honourable member, with due respect, is that when you look at the things right now being sold in Uganda, the cheapest item is water. For a jerrycan, we pay around Shs 38. Many of the villagers he is talking about have mobile phones. A unit for making a call using a mobile phone costs more than water. If we require National Water and Sewerage Corporation to invest - unless in every budget Parliament is going to approve money for National Water and Sewerage Corporation - they have the responsibility to raise money for their functions. That is the information I want to give the honourable member. This is not a submission – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, is it in order -

THE SPEAKER: He has left the Floor.

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Even so, is it in order for a senior legislator like hon. Emmanuel Dombo, who knows very well that water is life, to come before this august House and begin to imagine that the cost of water can be equated to the cost of telecommunications?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you for all your contributions. I think it is very clear that a public facility must involve all of us. There is the Government’s contribution as well as the people’s contribution. I would not like to be like some people who are trying to say that you can avoid taxes.

Lastly, Madam Speaker – (Mr Nzoghu rose_) - is the issue -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Nzoghu, I am going to instruct the minister responsible to handle your issue.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: My last remark is on this issue of posters. I am talking as Prof. Kabwegyere. I am happy that KCCA is making money out of us. This is such a waste of money. Given the amount of money we put in these posters, we should even pay taxes on the posters we print. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Order! Order! Let me ask the Minister of Works to respond first and then the Minister for Water and Environment will follow.

3.30
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Dr Steven Chebrot): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Yesterday, a Member of Parliament came to my office and complained about elephants having broken a bridge. She said that the elephants were from South Sudan. I would like to remind the Member that elephants do not carry passports or visas to cross borders. Those could easily be Ugandan elephants. They are not necessarily from Sudan. I would like to assure you that we need elephants in this country.

Madam Speaker, we have experienced heavy and long rains. My ministry has noted the concerns of the Member and the details given about the bridges, which have been washed away. We will be sending a team - (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable minister for allowing me to seek clarification from him. I thought the import of the issues raised by my sister, hon. Lucy Akello, were to the fact that regardless of the source of these elephants, they are causing destruction to mankind and crops. For your information, last month I even visited the graveyard where one of the women who was killed by these elephants was buried. 

Is it in order for the minister now to begin talking out of turn, saying that these elephants are not foreign, that the elephants are ours or from the neighbouring country? The issue is, whether they are ours or from a neighbouring country, they are causing destruction to lives and property. Can you clarify whether you only take action if the elephants are ours? 

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I will ask the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife to clarify on that issue.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank the minister for allowing me to seek further clarification. 

What is happening in Gulu is also happening in Kasese. Elephants are destroying crops and property of people; crocodiles are killing human beings and fish, and these are in our own territory.

The clarification I would like to get from the minister is whether it is okay for elephants that are within Ugandan national parks to kill Ugandans and destroy their property. You said that the ones that are attacking people in Gulu are not our elephants and, therefore, we cannot have any jurisdiction over them. However, the ones over which you have jurisdiction are also causing mayhem in the country. What is your plan for these animals which we must co-exist with and yet they are also destroying property and human lives?

THE SPEAKER: I will ask the Minister of Works and Transport to respond on the issue of the bridges in Kiboga and other bridges that have been destroyed. The Minister of Tourism and Wildlife will tell us about the elephants. Please, concentrate on the bridges. 

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On the issue of bridges, I would like to clarify that we are making an effort to send a team to go and examine the bridges which the Members have raised concern about, especially the bridges in Kyankwanzi and in Lumino. As you know, that road is under construction; so, we will be sending a team from UNRA and from my ministry to do that. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Ms Maria Mutagamba): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank colleagues for the concerns. 

My brother told us we need the elephants and we must appreciate their existence, but we have got to co-exist with them. I would like to request Members - When an elephant strays, it is an elephant, it is an animal, and I expect the communities around to help in getting it where it should be.  However, if there is none - (Interjection) - Excuse me! If that happens, at least alert us. Otherwise - (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Madam Speaker, is it in order for the Minister of Tourism and Wildlife, who is supposed to take care of all wild animals and make sure that they stay within their designated areas, to insinuate that members of the communities in this country should instead take care of those animals? The people are supposed to take care of themselves and guard their property from getting destroyed by the wild animals; is it in order for her to come here and begin to order us to start looking after the animals? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not know if it was a slip of the tongue or you really asked these people to escort the elephants back to Sudan’s border. 

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to correct the impression created. I do not expect the communities to hold the elephants and take them back. We have introduced what we call “collaborative management”; we have recruited rangers from the same communities and we are paying them. Just two weeks ago, I dispatched Shs 2.3 billion to the communities neighbouring these parks. 

Therefore, if there is a problem, do not take it as a problem; let us find a solution together. I think we can do it. We have got machinery to build the trenches, except that we do not have the money to do electrification. Thank you.

MS KIIZA: Thank you, Minster, for accepting this information. The issue that is before us is an issue which some of us are concerned about. I love the way you have put it, that there is some money that you have put aside to train people who are close to the national parks so that they can take care of those animals.

The information I would like to give you is that during this harvest season, especially when people were about to harvest their cotton, some homes were deserted; people decided to be guards and watchmen at night and yet they were not paid. They have been asking the Government to give them at least some little money to enable them do this work and I am now happy that you have the money. 

Can I now go and tell these farmers to ask for the money for guarding the animals, because they are not killing them? They make campfires so that these animals do not come, but they are not being paid. They were even asking whether the Government could buy for them torches, which they can use to supplement the fire that they make. They are not getting any single coin; they are doing it voluntarily. Therefore, when you tell me there is some money you are giving these people, that would be good news and I can give them the message.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Please, conclude honourable minister. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: I would like to seek clarification on the money, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, would you like to know where the money is? Okay, ask. 

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The minister has given us good information, especially me who comes from Agago District, which borders Kidepo. I have always been reporting cases of elephants attacking and displacing my people. The minister has now given us good information, that there is over Shs 2 billion for communities living around these national parks, especially those who are affected. 

Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the minister is: How much of that money did the people of Agago District specifically get? Amuru has reported here, Agago has also been reporting every now and then on the Floor of Parliament, and when the President visited the district this issue came up and a team of people was sent to have a meeting with the community. However, to date, we have not received a single coin of this money. Therefore, can the minister tell us how much of that we have got?

MS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you very much, colleagues. Definitely, each year we collect money and two weeks ago, we were at Murchison Falls and we dispatched Shs 2.3 billion to aid seven districts including Agago. The cheques are passed on to the district administrations to co-ordinate the communities that are badly affected. This money goes to help the people who have been affected - those who have lost their food or are attacked while fetching water. It is the district administration that handles this money. We do not handle it from the centre. Thank you very much.

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WATER AND ENVIRONMENT (ENVIRONMENT) (Ms Flavia Nabugere): Madam Speaker, I rise to give clarification on the issue of National Water and Sewerage Corporation in regard to the people of Kasese. 

National Water and Sewerage Corporation is a Government parastatal that is charged with the responsibility of managing piped water supplies in the country. Therefore, the assets in Bugoye, which have been constructed by a power company, will remain there. The charges levied on water consumption are intended to maintain the water supply sustainably in addition to extending services beyond the current supply area. These costs are intended to cover replacement of broken parts, operator labour and reserve funds for such future activities. 

Government has, therefore, not sold the assets to National Water and Sewerage Corporation but only appointed this public company to assist in operations. However, the ministry will address this subject at length with the people of Bugoye in Kasese. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister’s Office, how do you resolve the issue of the posters because Members are concerned about the costs? Did you tell them to pay? 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Madam Speaker, you are in Kampala and you have seen the many posters that are all over the place. I think KCCA calculated that it would cost them a lot of money to clean up. Therefore, by charging this figure – (Interjections) – You can raise a point of order, but I think they are right. (Interruption)

MR KASIBANTE: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When this matter was raised, we talked about its legality. All the candidates whose posters are pinned up in the streets of Kampala are those that went to the Electoral Commission, where they were nominated and cleared after some nomination fees was paid. 

The minister is almost accusing us in Kampala who are participating in the general elections of being many. Is he in order to accuse the candidates of Kampala of being many instead of explaining the legal issues? He may not be among the candidates standing anywhere in Uganda, but it is not a crime for the people of Kampala to turn up in big numbers and be nominated as candidates. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I look at this as a barrier. Probably, the Attorney-General can afford but if it is an LCI or LCIII councillor, I look at this as a barrier to access to the voters because if you cannot market yourself, then what happens. That is the problem I have with this issue. I do not know how it can be resolved. 

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, this is a matter that I thought the Government should not take casually. To say that somebody who prints a poster at Shs 500 has to pay Shs 500 to put it up, then you go to the KCCA Act to try to defeat the purpose of the Constitution - the right to representation and the democratic process – and you say that this is advertisement, I think the Prime Minister standing in here should be able to come up with something that reconciles the two. 

I saw some small posters of a councillor for a ward or division and you are asking them to pay! That is another cost. The framers of the Constitution would have said that for Kampala, in order for someone to put up their poster they should pay. This is a constitutional matter. It is not a matter that you can casually talk about and wish away. Representation is a constitutional matter. Even taxation without representation is no taxation. It is not a way of revenue collection. You can talk about how they can harmonise and clean up Kampala. 

Madam Speaker, I think the Government needs to be whipped. They have to be brought to order to handle this matter. It should not be handled casually. The Attorney-General is also a victim, but he needed to help us know the legal basis of this fee. Since he has already paid, I do not know how he can -

THE SPEAKER: We must find a solution for these candidates. It is not right. 

3.59
THE GOVERNMENT CHIEF WHIP (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Colleagues, I think the principle of paying something is being agreed on by almost everybody, according to the debate which was on the Floor –(Interjection)– I said paying something so that we can clean up the city. The divergence was the amount. I am sorry if I got it wrong.

My proposal is that the Prime Minister calls a meeting, because this is a matter which can be decided on by the Government, to make sure that what the Members of Parliament are raising is taken seriously and we come up with a way forward. Many people were pointing at the Prime Minister to sort it out, so I am suggesting a meeting – (Interjections) - How else are we going to sort it out - on the Floor of Parliament like this? We need a committee to sit and then you resolve and implement.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, our Constitution is very clear; Article 1 of our Constitution states that power belongs to the people and the people will exercise the power through electing their leaders. So, it is a constitutional right. It is only through posters that we can - (Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: A constitutional right that a candidate must have posters to be recognised; a constitutional right that a body, which is established by law like a city council, cannot collect taxes when they find a source of money from people who are claiming to be rich and who want to defend themselves! Is he in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think it is anticipated that when you are campaigning, you market yourself by different means. Here in the urban areas, how many people attend rallies or meetings? Maybe they simply look at the posters and say, “Oh, this is Otto, he looks nice, I should support him.” Therefore, posters are an integral part of the democratic process.

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, thank you very much for your wise ruling. What I was stating is that it is the people to elect their leaders and it is through advertising and disseminating information through channels like posters to the voters that the voters will know the people to elect.

It is clear in our Constitution that people elect their leaders after every five years.  Also, after every five years, it is the Government, through the Electoral Commission, that organises the elections. Members are nominated and allowed to campaign through various media like radio, organised rallies, among others, and they are virtually free to campaign everywhere; this is not illegal. I, therefore, wonder why the Government in their own sense, if they have a sense –(Interjection)– I am talking about the Government not you as –(Interruption)

MS RUTH NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, I was listening attentively to my brother, hon. Felix Okot Ogong, and I think he was making some sense. However, when he mentioned in his speech that he is not sure whether the Government has sense and yet he is part of the Government, I was provoked. I would like to know whether he is really in order to exhibit his ignorance here in Parliament about his own government. Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the leaders in the Government qualified and satisfied the constitutional requirements for being in those offices, therefore they have sense. You are out of order. (Applause) 

MR OKOT OGONG: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I agree but what I am stating now, and this is a serious matter, is that for KCCA to charge members who are duly nominated, who are campaigning to represent the people and work for them is not right. Politics is sacrifice; it is an obligation to serve the people. We are servants of the people and if you tax and charge the servants of the people when they want the same people to elect them, I think that is not right at all; it is not proper.

Secondly, all these Members of Parliament pay tax in all forms. When you buy sugar, salt or put fuel in the car among other things, you are paying taxes. It is this Parliament that allocates money to KCCA. I know that in this financial year, over Shs 200 billion was allocated to KCCA through this Parliament. Is it, therefore, in order for KCCA to charge members who are contesting to represent their people?

Madam Speaker, I would like to suggest now that we move a motion in Parliament urging KCCA to drop those charges on the posters. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker and dear colleagues, for raising this pertinent issue.  On the face of it, it is an issue of posters but after having a deeper look at the issue being discussed at the moment, we are looking at the impunity and illegality going on at KCCA. One, what does the law say? Obviously, I do not envy my learned friend and colleague, the learned Attorney-General, in this matter because he has what we would call a conflict of interest. Having said that, according to the law, KCCA is composed of the Lord Mayor, the Deputy Lord Mayor and then councillors. As we talk, there is no authority today because without the Lord Mayor, KCCA cannot sit as an authority or even as a council. 

The law about taxation stems from the Constitution. Article 152 of the Constitution says, “No tax shall be imposed except under the authority of an Act of Parliament.” Even where that authority has been given under an Act of Parliament, there should be periodical reports on how that authority or institution has exercised those powers under Article 152(2).

The law gave the local governments the authority and those local governments then included Kampala City Council and eventually Kampala Capital City Authority. As of now, I can tell you authoritatively that no civil servant - I repeat for emphasis - no civil servant, however mighty she or he may be, has a right to impose a tax except under the authority of Parliament stemming from Article 152 or the authority of the local government. Therefore, the issue we are talking about is an illegality ab initio - right from the beginning. You created these civil servants because we were fighting political wars and they are now a law unto themselves. That is why even a minister can come up here and start defending something baseless.

Let me tell you what happens here; taxation is the power of the people, not the power of civil servants. The executive director, director of finance, whoever he or she is, does not have power to impose a tax; she does not.

THE SPEAKER: Please, wind up because we have other business. We need to find a solution to this matter.

MR DOMBO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and thank you, honourable member, for giving way. The submission by the Shadow Attorney-General is so vivid and fundamental and is going into our Hansard as a record. He is the Shadow Attorney-General but we have an Attorney-General on the Government side. 

Can this House be informed by the Government’s Attorney-General whether it is true that the authority brought an illegality and he is just quiet about it? Can the Attorney-General please come out and educate this House? This is something fundamental as raised by a colleague on the other side - the Opposition side. What does the Attorney-General say about these issues, Madam Speaker?

MR KATUNTU: Well, I thought you were seeking clarification from me, which I would gladly give. Maybe you should address me differently, hon. Dombo. You should be able to address me as the other Attorney-General and not a shadow. (Laughter) 

Light moments aside, Madam Speaker, I think this is a matter which the Attorney-General, much as he has a conflict of interest, should be able to address with KCCA and advise them accordingly. I am a little bit anchored in my knowledge of the law, so you do not have to get worried, hon. Dombo. If the learned Attorney-General has problems, I think then the office of the Solicitor-General can advise Kampala Capital City Authority about where their powers begin and end as far as taxation is concerned. I propose, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General, as I said, to me this is a barrier to access to the population. The Constitution states that you must be of a certain age and qualified to contest for an office, but now these are additional requirements being imposed by an authority. Please, help us to sort it out.

MR RUHINDI: Madam Speaker, the concerns raised by colleagues are very important and need to be addressed. I am the MP for Nakawa Constituency and also the Attorney-General of Uganda. When the matter for payment came up, I was not approached in my capacity as Attorney-General; I was approached in my capacity as a Member of Parliament and asked to pay. 

Let me tell you one thing, those of us who are in the field are out there to win an election; it is not a joke. It was not a question – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable Attorney-General for accepting me to ask him for clarification. 

You have rightly said you are the MP for Nakawa and also the Attorney-General and chief legal advisor to the Government and a candidate at that. However, you have gone ahead, having known very well that you are the legal advisor to the Government, to pay in an area which you know as chief Government legal advisor is an illegality. Don’t you think you have let us down as a country in exercising your role as chief legal advisor to the Government? This is one of the organs of the Government that you should have advised and let them know that this was an illegality. 

MR RUHINDI: I think, Madam Speaker, hon. Kassiano Wadri is making his own submission, not mine. At no one point - I think hon. Katuntu was proceeding very well; he cited the law the best way he could understand it and at the end he said that given the fact that hon. Ruhindi, the Attorney-General, may have a conflict of interest, another officer in his office should give the necessary advice by studying all the necessary laws on the matter. 

I intend, therefore, in pursuance of hon. Katuntu’s submission, to delegate my office to the Deputy Attorney-General, who may not have the same magnitude of conflict of interest that I have. The Deputy Attorney-General and the entire office will look at the law and advise the Office of the President or KCCA –(Interruption)

MR SSIMBWA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter under consideration is an emergency because as we talk now, aspiring candidates must continue campaigning and by the time the consultations take place, the period for campaigns would have elapsed. 

Therefore, I beg to move a motion without notice under rule 50 of our Rules of Procedure. Bearing in mind the emergency of the matter, the illegality of what is being done and the timeframe that we have between now and when the Attorney-General will consult and advise the Minister for Kampala, I beg to move that the collection of these fees be suspended until all these consultations are done. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Is it seconded? Honourable members, I put the question that the fees be suspended as proposed in the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING (AMENDMENT) BILL 2016,

4.09
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Money Laundering (Amendment) Bill, 2016” be read for the first time. 

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I would also like to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications thereto.

THE SPEAKER: The Bill is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE TIER IV MICROFINANCE INSTITUTIONS BILL, 2015

4.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Tier IV Microfinance Institutions Bill, 2015” be read for the first time.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded across both sides of the House.

MR OMACH: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the certificate of financial implications thereto.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to appeal to the committee to handle it expeditiously. The people of Uganda have been fleeced for several years because of the absence of this law, so it is really important. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

4.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I beg to lay on the Table the following papers:
1. 	The East African Community Appropriation Act, 2003
2. 	The East African Community Appropriation Act, 2004
3. 	The East African Community Appropriation Act, 2005
4. 	The East African Community Appropriation Act, 2006
5. 	The East African Community Appropriation Act, 2007
6. 	The East African Trade Negotiations Act, 2008
7. 	The Summit (Delegation of Powers and Functions) Act, 2008
8. 	The Lake Victoria Transport Act, 2008
9. 	The East African Customs Management (Amendment) Act, 2009
10. 	The East African Community Appropriation Act, 2009
11. 	The Inter-University Council for East Africa Act, 2009
12. 	The Community Emblems (Amendment) Act, 2009
13. 	The East African Community Budget Act, 2009
14. 	The Administration of the East African Legislative Assembly Act, 2012
15. 	The East African Parliamentary Institute Act, 2012
16. 	The East African Customs Management (Amendment) Act, 2012

I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. These are already Acts of the Parliament of the East African Community; so we may not do much to amend them. However, I would like the Committee on East African Community Affairs to examine areas that need domestication and advise the House so that we can do a follow-up later. 

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW US $200 MILLION FROM THE EASTERN AND SOUTHERN AFRICAN TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT BANK (PTA) FOR A REVOLVING FOREIGN EXCHANGE FACILITY TO STABILISE THE EXCHANGE RATE

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I want to propose that item No.4 be handled alone but items No.5, No.7, No.8 and No.9, which are related, be presented in sequence and debated together. Items No.10 and No.11, which are also from the same sector, could also be presented in sequence and debated together. That would mean that only items No.4 and No.6 would stand alone. I do not know if that is okay with you, Members. You can summarise the reports.

4.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker, I beg to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by the Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rate.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this revolving foreign exchange facility is required to stabilise the exchange rate. It will be a standby facility to meet immediate priority foreign exchange rate requirements of the Government. It is required to deal with the current exchange rate volatility because the economy has experienced sharp depreciation of the shilling against major currencies. As a matter of fact, the exchange rate has depreciated by about 27.6 per cent against the US dollar on account of many issues but mainly because of the imbalance in our external balance of payments, and particularly the large current account deficit.

Madam Speaker, this has also been caused by the sluggish exports that we have been experiencing, the decline in tourism, the high import requirement and the weakening of the foreign direct investments. This has caused pressure on the shilling, therefore requiring that we have a facility to help the Government to intervene in foreign exchange related disbursements.

Madam Speaker, this loan has been presented to the Committee on National Economy. We need a temporary foreign exchange facility to finance this foreign currency denominated requirements – (Interjections)– such as when we have to pay – 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, he is moving a motion; you will be able to comment on it later. 

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the facility we are requiring will ease the pressure on the shilling, thereby preventing increased costs to the private sector. We also need to maintain adequate levels of our international reserves –(Interjections)- The Bank of Uganda has been committing quite an amount of money – 

THE SPEAKER: There is a motion being moved; please, let him complete the motion and then you can comment on it.

MR KAJARA: The Bank of Uganda has been making interventions in order to ease those pressures but these interventions have not borne a lot of fruits. As a matter of fact, the bank has intervened to the extent of $206.8 million to stem the exchange rate volatility. This loan, therefore, is required so that we do not deplete our foreign currency reserves but we also allow liquidity conditions to improve.

Madam Speaker, this loan is for $200 million. The facility will be a revolving facility with an interest rate of 4.6 per cent per annum, which is fixed. We think that it is fair that this loan is acquired. It has been considered by the Committee on National Economy and the committee has compiled a report, which they will present to the whole House. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you will be able to comment. I do not know what the committee chairperson is going to say. Let him present the report and then you can comment on the motion. We should not anticipate what the chairperson is going to present; let him present and then we can comment on the same. 

4.23
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Xavier Kyooma): Rt Hon. Speaker, this is the committee report on the proposal by the Government to borrow up to $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank (PTA) for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rate.

I have the original report of the committee, the brief to Parliament and the trade finance facility agreement draft. I beg to lay them on the Table. I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the committee on the same loan request.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this proposal was presented to this august House by the Minister for Finance, Planning and Economic Development on 25 November 2015 and accordingly referred to the Committee on National Economy for consideration in line with rule 166(2)(b) of our Rules of Procedure. The committee considered and scrutinised the proposal and we now beg to report. 

As part of our methodology, we met officials from the finance ministry, Bank of Uganda, National Planning Authority and Uganda Bureau of Statistics. The documents reviewed included the minister’s brief –

THE SPEAKER: I think the Members can read that; you go to the substance.

MR KYOOMA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. With your permission and since the minister had already elaborated on the amount, I beg to go to the observations and recommendations.

Observations and recommendations

Loan Terms

The committee noted that the loan facility is based on market rates, making it more expensive than some other commercial loans that Parliament has approved for projects whose interest rates have been two per cent on average.

The Public Debt Management Framework 2013 has no provision for financing Balance of Payments (BOPs) shortfalls using commercial loans. The amount to be borrowed will be available immediately but will be utilised as and when required depending on the need by the Government to boost reserves and/or support the exchange rate from volatile movements.

The committee recommends that the Government adheres to the Public Debt Management Framework 2013. In addition, the Government should make realistic economic forecasts to guide policy action at lower costs as provided for in the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

Purpose of Borrowing

Madam Speaker, the committee also observed that the Government is requesting to borrow $200 million to finance the balance of payment deficit, which was $353 million as at June 2015, to temporarily stabilise the exchange rate and to tame the increased domestic borrowing, which in turn could affect private sector borrowing. In addition, current reserves are valued at $2.75 billion, worth 3.9 months of imports, as at 11 December 2015. This implies that should external shocks persist, the reserves will fall further, deviating from the East African Community convergence criteria of 4.5 months of imports.

The committee recommends that the Government urgently expedites Uganda’s export strategy to boost exports in the short to medium-term so as to improve the BOP position. This improvement will require less financing from reserves that were drawn to finance the BOP deficit. 

In order to improve productivity in the economy, the Government should target the food industry to boost export revenues because its contribution to GDP is significant, at 12 per cent.

Performance of the Economy and Economic Outlook

The committee observed that the economy grew at 5.1 per cent, below the programmed level of 5.3 per cent, during the financial year 2014/2015. Despite maintaining a fiscal position within programmed levels, the economy experienced a deterioration of the external account, where the current account worsened from 8.6 per cent in the financial year 2013/2014 to 10 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2014/2015. This led to a BOP deficit of 1.5 per cent of GDP and necessitated a drawdown of the reserves amounting to $353 million. 

The current account deficit is projected to deteriorate in the medium-term due to higher imports associated with the Government’s public investment programme. This was caused by a decline in export receipts, Foreign Direct Investments (FDIs) and portfolio investments resulting from limited support to the export sector, and delay in unlocking the oil industry that supressed the FDI inflows.

In addition, the shilling lost 40 per cent of its value between September 2014 and September 2015. This has created debt service challenges.

Madam Speaker, to improve the external position of the country, the Government should embark on increasing productivity in productive sectors, especially the agricultural sector, in the short to medium term; and unlock the constraints surrounding the oil production phase to boost export receipts and attract foreign direct investments.

Debt Sustainability

The committee further observed that Uganda’s public debt position is sustainable in the medium and long term. The present value of public debt is to increase from 24.1 per cent in the financial year 2014/2015 to 33.9 per cent in 2019/2020 as a percentage to GDP, below the Public Debt Management Framework (PDMF) threshold of 50 per cent of GDP. This increase is due to the rise in the present value of external debt to GDP, which doubles in the same period.

The present value of domestic debt to GDP reached its highest in the financial year 2014/2015 and is projected to decline over the medium term due to Government’s decision to scale back on domestic borrowing. However, given that the shilling lost 40 per cent of its value between September 2014 and September 2015, it has created debt service challenges. Despite being sustainable, standardised stress tests find Uganda’s debt to be vulnerable to the depreciation of the shilling, which could have implications for the country’s ability to meet its debt service obligations. 

Debt service is affected by the slow growth of exports. Stagnation in growth of exports has posed a huge challenge for external debt sustainability. Between September 2014 and September 2015, exports grew at a monthly average of only 0.3 per cent. The IMF projects the price of coffee, Uganda’s most important export, to decline by 20 per cent in 2016.

The committee recommends that the Government opts for sustainable options to increase foreign inflows through aggressive export promotion, attracts FDIs especially in the oil industry by concluding oil production procedures, among others. This will cushion the shilling against further depreciation amidst external environment challenges.

Financial Sector Liberalisation

Government liberalised the capital account in an attempt to attract FDIs and avoid market price distortions in the financial sector. However, this has come with challenges of creating volatility in the foreign exchange market. This policy stance notwithstanding, FDI inflows are declining as evidenced in the financial year 2014/2015. 

The Government should use an appropriate policy mix to attract FDIs. In the medium term, the Government should review its policy stance in view of controlling capital outflows.

Expenditure Contracts in Foreign Currency

The committee observed that the national budget is approved in Uganda shillings yet spending agencies contract service providers in foreign currency, exposing them to exchange rate risks. 

Government agencies should contract service providers in the currency approved in the national budget, irrespective of the level of imports that will be undertaken, to hedge against exchange rate risks.

Other Borrowing Options 

The committee observed that Uganda is a member of the IMF and qualifies to borrow to boost Government reserves to finance shortfalls on the BOP if there is an urgent balance of payments need. However, this is not urgent since as at December 2015, the reserves were worth 3.9 months of imports. This, therefore, does not demonstrate any urgency to Uganda as its import cover is above three months of the import cover benchmark of IMF.

The committee recommends that the Government should always try to avoid commercial loans to finance BOP support due to the high costs involved, yet IMF has a rapid credit facility that is concessional, which carries a zero interest rate, a grace period of five and a half years and a final maturity period of 10 years. 

Conclusion 

In the short run, in the event that the economy is unable to register a significant rise in foreign exchange inflows, the Government should adjust its fiscal policy stance and opt to cut spending in less critical areas without undermining growth objectives.

Subject to the above recommendations, the committee recommends approval for the Government to borrow $200 million from the Eastern and Southern African Trade and Development Bank for a revolving foreign exchange facility to stabilise the exchange rates. Madam Speaker, I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, there is a minority report. Can I invite hon. Nzoghu.

4.35
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora North Constituency, Kasese): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I want us to begin this year faithfully so that we can end it faithfully. I am presenting this minority report in accordance with rule 194(1) and rule 194(2) and here are the dissenting opinions:

1. 	We say that there will be an increase in the country’s debt. Despite the fact that Uganda’s public debt is sustainable, the continuous borrowing of loans to finance projects will continue to weaken the value of Uganda’s currency.  The present projection of Uganda’s public debt to GDP shows an increase from 24.1 per cent in financial year 2014/2015 to 33.9 per cent in 2019/2020 as a percentage to GDP. Since the Uganda shilling is continuing to depreciate in value, there is likely to be increased cost and difficulty in servicing the debt.

2. 	The loan has no grace period. This is dangerous because interest on the loan will have to be paid as soon as funds for the facility are released. This can in effect destabilise the economy.

3. 	This is a commercial loan. It has an interest rate of 4.6 per cent, and therefore, it is more expensive to service this loan than a concessional loan. Also, the loan facility is based on the market rates, making it expensive. Therefore, Government should renegotiate the terms of the loan or find other sources of funding for this exchange rate facility.

4. 	There are other alternatives to improve Uganda’s exchange rate; those who have done economics know this. As a serious government, the Government of Uganda should find other viable alternatives for stabilising the country’s exchange rate, and examples are: through increased production and providing incentives to improve the country’s exports; and marketing and branding Uganda’s exports internationally. This will lead to improvement in the export sector and provide a good competitive advantage for the country’s exports on the world market.

5. 	Unrealistic loan terms. One of the terms of this loan is that the amount of money to be borrowed for this facility will be available immediately but is to be utilised as and when required depending on the need by the Government to boost reserves and support the exchange rate from volatile movements. This means that this money will be available as and when they want but the interest will be accumulating. This is unrealistic because as a country, we cannot simply borrow loans based on whether an event will or will not occur. Uganda already has a contingency fund to handle emergencies, Madam Speaker. 

6. 	Volatility of the exchange rate. Exchange rates of a country change depending on the economic conditions of that country. Uganda’s local currency may appreciate or depreciate depending on the economic activities and market conditions of a particular period. The current currency depreciation pressures are therefore temporary, so the exchange rate should be determined by market forces as well as the monetary policies employed by the Central Bank to stabilise Uganda’s foreign exchange as the Governor of BoU is doing. 

7. 	There is the aspect of dollarization of Uganda’s economy. This loan request, as well as most of the other loan requests, is made in terms of the foreign currency of the lenders and yet Uganda’s local currency is the Uganda shilling. Also, the figures of Uganda’s national budget as well as other budget related documents like the ministerial policy statement are always quoted in the local currency. Therefore, getting loans for projects in foreign currency creates a problem for the Ugandan economy. These challenges include exchange rate risks, imported inflation, among others. Furthermore, there is also a risk of having the interest repayment figures inflated.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, if there is a situation in which the economy is incapable of obtaining an increase in foreign exchange inflows, the Government through the Central Bank should adjust its monetary and fiscal policy to reduce expenditures in less vital areas without affecting activities that could lead to economic growth, a stabilised exchange rate and appreciation of Uganda’s currency. 

Lastly, since Uganda is a member of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), it is allowed to borrow from the IMF at a lower cost to boost Government reserves and to fund the balance of payments shortfalls. Therefore, there is no merit in borrowing this money expensively under terms which are actually very dangerous for the citizens of this country for the generations today and the generations to come. I beg to move.

MR KYOOMA: I rise on a point of procedure. I have been ambushed by my member. I was not aware that there was a minority report, because actually I should have presented it. I think he moved it in line with rule 194(1), which actually states, “A Member dissenting from the opinion of a majority of a committee may state in writing the reasons for his or her or their dissent, and the statement of reasons shall be appended to the report of the committee.”

It was actually not brought to my attention. When he started reading, I tried to check on my iPad; it was just uploaded two hours ago and yet my report was uploaded two weeks ago. I did not want to interrupt my colleague. I am just seeking for your guidance on how to proceed. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, since yesterday, I had the main and minority reports. They are both here and I have had these documents since yesterday. Honourable members, as far as I am concerned, there is a main and a minority report; you can therefore debate.

4.43
MR AMOS LOGOLOOBI (NRM, Ntenjeru County North, Kayunga): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. Looking at the two reports, I think they are almost the same except in the conclusion. I think what we only need to look for is the harmonisation of the conclusions.

Secondly, I am almost at a loss with how we are proceeding with our policy on liberalisation of our current accounts. I am getting confused because intervention in the currency is becoming the order of the day. I am wondering whether the policy we are pursuing is sustainable.

My understanding is that the root cause of depreciation of the shilling is largely because of the weaknesses on the supply side of the economy. This is what we need to fix in order to stabilise our foreign exchange rate. We know that we are importing more than we export. What do we need to do? Let us produce more products for export; let us add more value to what we are exporting and diversify our exports -that is the secret - other than artificially trying to fix the exchange rate.

What we are doing is not sustainable; going to the level of borrowing commercial loans to fix our exchange rate is untenable. I do not think it is the right way to proceed. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

4.45
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the minority and the majority reports. I support both because the majority report only fell short of giving the right recommendations; they gave us the ills and the dangers of this borrowing, but they were shy to tell Parliament to throw out this loan.

Madam Speaker, I am glad that I belong to this Parliament and I do not want to be associated with this loan. This is the first time that I am seeing Parliament borrowing for consumption. Let us forget it. It is not even for stabilising the balance of payment deficit. In other words, we are saying that we spent more than we earned, therefore, let us borrow to continue spending. This is borrowing for consumption, which is very unsustainable. 

Madam Speaker and honourable members, this Parliament has been on record saying that the problem is elsewhere; it is poor exports. We have also been crying about multinational companies carrying away our foreign exchange and this Government has been listening in, year in, year out. We have been telling the Government that our foreign exchange is being repatriated without anybody raising a finger. Now they are telling us our coffers are empty and that we should borrow for others to take back to their countries.

This is being cosmetic. I would have loved the chairman to be honest with this House and tell us that this borrowing is merely for consumption and that we are borrowing and allowing multinational companies to repatriate our foreign exchange. It is like a bottomless pit; even if we borrow, there is no way –(Member timed out.)

4.47
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, the first two speakers on this matter are representatives of my sentiments and they spoke my mind. I rise to support both reports. I do not want to differ except that the majority one falls short of the adequate recommendations. 

I know hon. Kyooma, the chairman. We even saw this when the minister and chairperson of the committee were giving their statements; they were speaking without passion. (Laughter) Your words would say something else but your body was saying, “I do not know” and “I do not want what I am saying”. 

Madam Speaker, the cure to stabilising foreign exchange cannot be by borrowing. The minority report captured that, and this is one of the few instances that I have to congratulate the two colleagues, hon. Nzoghu and hon. Atiku. The deficit is purely because we are exporting less than what we are importing; there is no mechanical way to change that. Is this really constitutional? Is the Minister of Finance aware that you are here busy borrowing, or you are doing this because he is campaigning elsewhere? (Member timed out.)

4.49
MS BETTY AMONGI (UPC, Oyam County South, Oyam): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues to thank the committee for the work well done. 

It was stated that this loan interest is 4.6 per cent and yet the standard percentage we have been borrowing at is 2 per cent -(Interjection)– He stated that on average, it has been 2 per cent but this particular one is 4.6 per cent. The committee goes on and on and states that the right intervention would be policy options, increase in exports, reduction in imports to balance and stabilise the shilling.

This really goes to the core of credibility in some of our work. You give us the justification, that is drawing a very clear conclusion, and then at the end of it we are all shocked by the conclusion. From the way you had gone through the entire report, it was towards one clear message, that this loan is not sustainable and that we should not approve of it, then you sheepishly say, “We recommend approval” and we were all shocked.

The reason why you are given work is to give it merit. What is the merit in what you are recommending? Recommendations should come from the content of your report. If the content of your report is something different from your conclusion, then we begin asking questions. (Member timed out.)

4.51
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  

I would like to speak on “is” and “was”. What is happening is that both reports actually diagnosed the problem, but the prescription is different. The prescription of the main report is a contradiction of the diagnosis and that is the biggest problem we have. It is like a doctor saying that this patient suffers from malaria and one of the symptoms is high temperature and the doctor says to cure this disease, go and take a cold shower. (Laughter) I have got a problem with this sort of thinking.

Madam Speaker, let me tell you one thing; the problem as diagnosed, and many colleagues have talked about it, is about export and import. We import more than we export. A loan in itself is an indirect import. Therefore, you are actually worsening the situation. I do not know which schools of economics some of these people proposing this solution went to. I think there is a very fundamental problem. There is no way you will treat this by artificially borrowing more money – (Interjection) - We do not have to go to universities.

Madam Speaker, when we have a problem of production, what do we do? We have got to be innovative as a country and see what sectors we need to improve on and increase our production as well as our foreign exchange earnings. Where do we get our money and where do we put it? We can put it in tourism to attract more tourists, for example, and they bring in more dollars. This is basic economics -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Katuntu. Honourable colleagues, we are talking about the sectors that bring foreign exchange earning to this country. Over the Christmas season, I was privileged to be hosted by hon. Badda in Kalangala. However, the day I was leaving by ferry from Entebbe, 38 German tourists got off the ferry just because of one thing which the Ministry of Works has failed to do – where the ferry docks is just murrum and people were placing wood for the ferry to dock. They said, “We cannot risk our lives; if this place which is near the airport looks like this, what will Kalangala look like?” 

All the 38 tourists flew back. The hotels lost the money and this country lost money. Therefore, we must improve all the sectors that bring in foreign exchange earnings to this country and I hope the Ministry of Works will work on that. The committees on national economy and infrastructure should visit that place and see how pathetic it is.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have to conclude. This is what we call artificial control. Even if we are to touch our own reserves, that is also artificial control. It is just a painkiller to get our own reserves and throw them to the market for purposes of stabilising the exchange rate. There is only one solution, which is to increase production. (Member timed out.)

4.58
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. 

Until I heard the conclusion from the main report, I thought I had attended a good school of economics. I thought I would confidently debate with my colleague the issues he raised in the earlier report. This is because the honourable colleague properly analysed the problem and one of the statements he made was that debt sustainability in this country in the mid-term and long-term was viable, only to conclude that the Government can go ahead and borrow from a money lender. This is not even commercial borrowing; it is borrowing from a money lender on the street. When you do not have a problem in the mid-term and the long-term, why the panic to go and borrow from a money lender on the street? This is akin to borrowing from a money lender; there is no school of economics that can accept this.

When you choose to manage your current account, particularly the foreign exchange account, the kind of measures you take must bear in mind the ramifications of each measure. When you choose to intervene in the market by borrowing commercially, you are actually aware that you are returning us almost to window one and window two. The challenge here is that we are not a net importer of productive machinery to augment production and bridge the gap that Members are talking about, but we are net importers of consumption goods – shisha and campaign materials, etc. Yesterday, I challenged the nature of the report we passed relating to the National Budget Framework Paper because it was devoid of projection statistics and here we are; there was no information and now they are panicking to borrow. 

I would like to invite Parliament to be firm on this matter. There is no risk in stopping this loan request because we were comforted yesterday that all was well; unless somebody is telling lies to this country.

5.00
MS OLIVIA KWAGALA (NRM, Woman Representative, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to be in line with the former discussants of this report, given the fact that the two reports had similarities apart from the conclusions. Honourable chairperson of the committee, we had high expectations in you until you concluded. (Laughter) As people who did economics at high levels, we are surprised. Maybe when you are responding, you will improve our hopes.

Madam Speaker, when I sat here listening, the purpose of the loan is very good but the problem is that when we are borrowing, we need to know how long the financing or the repayment will take. The chairperson told us what the interest rate would be but he ignored the other aspect. As Ugandans, if we decide to continue borrowing and we are not investing or checking capital flight, we will still continue borrowing, which will be a very sad story. We need to check capital flight because in most cases, we are getting a problem of foreign exchange fluctuations because of capital flight. 

We do not check the way some of our investors handle their investments and returns. I think the Ministry of Finance should not only check Ugandans but they should also check the foreign investors. In fact, it is even one of the major reasons why the dollar is always hiking. You check the indigenous people, but the foreign investors are ignored

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I would like to talk about the balance of payment problem. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should try to always check what is causing that high burden of the balance of payment. It is because you are not linking up with exports and the sectors that will improve exports so that we earn dollars. Those are my observations. However, Mr Chairman, I would like you to liaise with hon. Nzoghu so that we get comforted before we pass this loan request. I thank you.

5.04
MS ANNE NANKABIRWA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyankwanzi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank the chairperson of the committee and the members. 

I have been following the chairperson’s submission and I was only disappointed by the conclusion. Maybe I will propose an amendment of the recommendations in the conclusion. With my little economics, I do not think borrowing to stabilise the dollar is the solution. You do not borrow to do that. In the financial year 2014/2015, treasury operations were at Shs 2.5 trillion. In the financial year 2015/2016, treasury operations alone are at Shs 6.7 trillion. When we checked on the functionality of many of these loans, there are some loans we found at zero operation - they are not functional - but we are already paying interest on them. That is the reason that was given for increasing treasury operations. I would, therefore, request the Bank of Uganda to come up with other tangible measures other than borrowing. 

The deficit between the imports and exports is also another problem. Can they have policies that would reduce the pressure on the dollar? Increasing taxation on some of the commodities that can be procured locally can reduce the pressure on the dollar.  

I would like to conclude my remarks by requesting Parliament not to approve this loan request and defer this loan.

5.06
MR SULAIMAN BALYEJJUSA (NRM, Budiope County East, Buyende): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. My contribution will be in form of seeking clarification from the presenter of the report. 

Madam Speaker, a few weeks ago, I had the benefit of listening to a talk show and one of the ministers in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was making a presentation on the state of the economy. The gist of his submission was that the depreciation of the shilling has been largely caused by the Government’s massive spending on imports for the large infrastructural projects that we have in the country currently. He went on to promise the country that Government was going to do a phased spending on imports for those large infrastructural projects.

I was, therefore, waiting to hear from the presenter, or from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for that matter, what Government has gone ahead to do in terms of realising that promise which he made on public radio. I thank you.

5.07
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am really disturbed by the position taken by the committee to ask us to borrow. Is this an admission that the Bank of Uganda has completely failed in dealing with the fiscal policy options that help stabilise the economy, to the extent that we have resorted to war-time emergency disaster methods, where you borrow at commercial rates? That is what we are resorting to; as if the country is at war or a massive disaster has befallen this country. Is it that the Bank of Uganda has completely failed with the fiscal policy options? Is there a gross failure in the bank and we therefore need to rethink the competence of the managers of that bank?

Secondly, Madam Speaker, yesterday I said if we are not going to invest money in agriculture, and other colleagues have talked about tourism, but for as long as we run a boda boda economy, we will not realise the stability in our foreign exchange reserves whether we want it or not. That is going to be the reality. The reality is, even if we borrowed money today, tomorrow morning that money will leave with the international conglomerates that operate here – MTN, Airtel - and then the next morning, we will borrow again.

I would like to plead with my colleagues, for the sake of the children of this country, not to pass this loan request.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I have not heard support for this motion; so how do we proceed?  

5.09
MR FELIX OKOT OGONG (NRM, Dokolo County, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, I hope you can guess what I am going to say –(Laughter)– because we have always heard that our economy is very buoyant and it can withstand any shocks, whether internal or external.

Madam Speaker, ever since we got independence in 1962, we have never borrowed to stabilise our foreign exchange. As a nationalist, I can state here without any hesitation that I do not understand the economics that is being exposed here –(Laughter)– on how to manage foreign exchange because I have studied economics up to the highest level. Our problem has always been from the supply side. Even in the 1970s when Amin was in power, he was struggling with foreign exchange and what he introduced was never to borrow to stabilise foreign exchange, but he introduced windows 1 and 2. Even when Obote came to power, it was windows 1 and 2 so that you controlled how money “x” went outside and how it came in. That is exactly what we can do right now to control outflow and inflow of foreign exchange.

Madam Speaker, I therefore would like to appeal to my brothers who are running our economy and I believe the President is not aware about this. (Laughter) I am very sure he is not aware of this borrowing because the President knows our economy is stable and buoyant and we can manage it through policies in the bank and also generally. The economics I studied is about money supply and how it is handled. Right now, we have a problem. 

Madam Speaker, I would like to state that recently, I was somewhere and I realised that the reason our currency is losing is because of the policy in America. The Americans over strengthened the dollar but recently, the dollar came down because they increased the interest rate by some percentage and they are expected to increase it up to 2.5 per cent. When they continue increasing their interest rates, they are going to devalue the dollar and therefore, our currency will strengthen. That is economics. We know this very clearly. 

When I hear people talking about this thing, I think this is a cosmetic policy that we should not accept. I, therefore, move a motion that as we wait to consult the President because we have to consult him. As supporters of the Movement, we are not aware of this. The President has not directed us. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, in good faith, I would like to move and urge my members, especially the minister, to withdraw this motion as we wait for further directions from His Excellency. 

THE SPEAKER: Does the minister wish to say something? 

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to appreciate the concerns of the Members. 

First of all, it is true that the cause of the problem is poor exports as a result of increased imports. That is the root cause of the problem. In addition, there are issues of declining tourism, which the honourable members have alluded to. We have weakening FDIs. We do not have direct foreign investments coming in as they should. We also have speculation in the domestic market about the future of fiscal policy. 

I have heard honourable members talk of increased production. It is true that the solution is increased production but increased production cannot be achieved in the shortest possible time that we require this loan to intervene. We need a short-term intervention and short-term measures. For the information of the Members –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, the honourable minister is the custodian of the NDP and he has been in this House since time immemorial. We have always been talking about injecting money into agriculture, tourism and increasing productivity so that we stop importing more than what we export, in order for us to generate goods and have something to earn as foreign exchange. The honourable minister has been in Government for all these years and he knows this. 

Is it in order for the honourable minister to come and join us in lamentation as though Government has completely been ignorant all this time? Is it the first time he is hearing about this, instead of fixing those things? Moreover, they have the budget initiative. Only yesterday, Madam Speaker, we were dealing with the National Budget Framework Paper, he should have proposed an injection of money into those productive sectors. Is he in order to come here and lament as if he has no power or as if Government has gone to sleep? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, you presented your views to the committee. From the body of their report, they were unconvinced. I was also shocked to see the conclusion. I really do not know whether you are not flogging a dead horse.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, in light of your advice and the views of the hon. Okot Ogong, we will withdraw this loan request and make further consultations with the view of improving it and bringing it back to the House. 

THE SPEAKER: Minister, I think you should formalise the motion for withdrawal. Formally move that you are withdrawing your motion in half a minute.

MR KASULE: Madam Speaker, from the way the minister concluded, we thought that you would suspend the debate and consult. This is because he is saying that withdrawing would mean - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. You have just advised this House and guided on the way forward. The minister has conceded that in view of the submission of the Members and with your guidance, he withdraws the motion. Is the chairperson, hon. Robert Kasule, in order to challenge your authority as a sitting Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. Minister, please withdraw. We need to move on this matter.

MR KAJARA: Madam Speaker, the view expressed by hon. Okot Ogong is that we are not in a position to conclude this loan request today. Therefore, I wish to agree with him that we withdraw this loan request for further consultations. This is so that we bring it back at an appropriate time with further improvement. I beg to move. 

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Honourable members, the question is that the motion be withdrawn.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: Before we go the next item, this debate has reminded me about the time I used to practise law. We were told that you can look at the demeanour of the witness and it will show you -(Laughter)- I have seen that. 

Honourable members, I now invite the chairperson to present item No.5 on Bukasa Inland Port, item No.7 on water supply, item No.8 on forest conservation and item No.9 on fisheries and water resources. Present them in sequence and we shall debate them together. Let him present those four items and you can debate any of them, but voting will be one by one. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, there is fairly good faith today on both sides of the House. Out of the four items, it seemingly appeared to me as Members were interacting that there seems to be some reasonable degree of convergence. Therefore, other than going the omnibus way, Madam Speaker, I would seek your indulgence that we dispose of those ones which are important so that as business closes today, at least we would have dispensed one or two of them. I see the risk of taking all the four at ago. Some bad ones may delay the good ones. I would like to seek your indulgence.

THE SPEAKER: Which ones are the good ones? (Laughter) The voting will be on each; I just want the presentations to be made together. We shall debate but the voting will be on one by one.  

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Loan request No.5 is extremely controversial.

THE SPEAKER: How do you know? We have not got the report.

MR SSEMUJJU: The report is already available. The Government actually seeks to displace hundreds of people in my constituency -

THE SPEAKER: You are now anticipating the report. That is not allowed, hon. Ssemujju. You will debate after the report has been presented. Let the report be presented. Now that I have identified that you have a problem, I will ask you to speak about it after the presentation, but do not object to this presentation.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW EUROS 42.5 MILLION FROM GERMANY BANK CONSORTIUM (A.K AUSFUHRKREDIT-GUSELLSCHAFT MBH AND COMMERZBANK AG) FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INLAND PORT AT BUKASA ON THE SHORES OF LAKE VICTORIA


5.24
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Madam Speaker and honourable members, I would like to move a motion for a resolution of Parliament on the proposal by the Government to borrow up to €42.5 million from German Bank Consortium (A.K Ausfuhrkredit-Gusellschaft MBH and Commerzbank AG) for the development of an inland port at Bukasa on the shores of Lake Victoria. 

Madam Speaker, Uganda being a landlocked country, we need a port for us to be able connect. So far, we have the northern corridor seaport of Mombasa in Kenya and we rely mainly on this corridor. There is need, therefore, to open the central corridor and for us to do that, we need this port very urgently.

This loan request has also been presented to the committee and the Committee on National Economy has considered it and has come up with a report. I beg to move that this loan request, therefore, be approved by this House. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please present the report.

5.25
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by Government to borrow €42.5 million from a German bank consortium for the development of an inland port at Bukasa on the shores of Lake Victoria.

Before I read the report, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the report of the committee, a brief to Parliament, the loan agreement, minutes of the negotiations, the Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) report, the concept report, the National Transport Policy and Strategy and the National Transport Master Plan. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, the Committee on National Economy considered the request by Government to borrow €42.5 million from a German bank consortium for the development of an inland port at Bukasa on the shores of Lake Victoria. In accordance with rule 166(2)(b) of the Parliamentary Rules of Procedure, we beg to report to this House. The proposal was laid before Parliament on the 16 December 2015 and accordingly referred to us for consideration. I will skip the methodology and go to the background. 

Background

Infrastructure development is critical for enabling timely as well as efficient movement of merchandise and labour resources from production zones to the market. For the country’s economic competitiveness to improve, increase in the stock and quality of strategic infrastructure has to result in the reduction of the time required to get merchandise to the market.

The key strategic infrastructure priorities for the country are focused on transport, energy, ICTs, oil and gas as well as water for production. The efficiency of a transport system plays a significant role in the economic and social transformation of a country.

Madam Speaker, water transport in Uganda has the potential of playing a cardinal role in the promotion of the country’s tourism and regional integration. On the other hand, the East African Community integration provides Uganda an opportunity to pool resources with other partner states, to develop regional transport infrastructure projects which are capable of increasing the country’s connectivity within the region. These include regional road networks, regional rail networks and regional waterways, ports and other facilities. You are all aware of the existing situation of our lake ports and inland waterways in Uganda. Therefore, this project is intended to develop a new port at Bukasa near Kampala to meet the demand of the increased cargo capacity.

I will not read out the costs but I will go to the observations and recommendations the committee came up with after analysing all the documents I have laid on the Table. The economic rate of return of this project is 12 per cent and this is without consideration of the benefits resulting from the cost savings on the would-be axle loads without the project, time savings related to efficiency gains, from efficient transport connections through the central corridor.

Observations and Recommendations

1. 	The committee observed that water transport and the legal institutional framework is characterised by disjointed and obsolete laws, regulations and standards which require immediate review and harmonisation. In addition, the Ministry of Works and Transport is without a fully-fledged department for water transport, demonstrating lack of prioritisation of water transport in the ministry. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should strengthen the policy, the legal and regulatory framework and coordination among stakeholders in the water transport subsector in order to increase efficiency and improve effectiveness in service delivery of water transport infrastructure and provision of water transport services. The promotion of safety within the water transport subsector should as well be emphasised. 

2. 	There is over reliance on road transport. The committee observed the country’s over reliance on the road transport system as opposed to marine, rail and air transport. This has limited the transportation of bulk goods. 

Although the country is endowed with strategic water bodies that have a high potential of improving the country’s connectivity in the region, its economic competitiveness ranking has remained low over the last three decades, compared to its regional neighbours. This requires a strategic marine transport route in the country, which has remained under developed due to the large capital requirements that have limited investments in this subsector. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should strategically scale up its investments in the development of the water transport subsector in Uganda by increasing the number of water access routes and linkages to its neighbours. This is due to the country’s high exposure to the social, economic and political developments in the neighbouring countries.

3. 	State of the Existing Inland Ways

The committee observed that there are a number of non-engineered landing sites on existing water bodies in the country. There is inadequate marine transport infrastructure present at these landing sites; for example, the landing sites at Wanseko and Ntoroko on Lake Albert are currently used to export goods such as cars, rice, beer, cement and general goods to the DRC even though no proper port facilities exist. Wanseko is also used to some extent for cargo transfers for the oil industry.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should embark on a countrywide rehabilitation of facilities at all the existing inland waterways in order to increase the volume of passenger traffic and cargo freight by marine transport in the country.

4. 	Limited Funding to the Water Transport Sector

The committee observed that the water transport sector is grossly underfunded. During the financial year 2014/2015, no provision was made for the development of ports in the sector. This has resulted in delays of opening the southern route transport initiative to Tanzania to boost international trade activities. Government has opted for sourcing external financing to undertake preliminary works including development of the port’s master plan, training and engineering preliminary works like dredging and swamp surcharging, which ordinarily would have been financed by the Government budgetary resources.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should, as much as possible, desist from financing preliminary works or designs for any project using debts, but opt to use local budgetary sources or grants, especially for priority projects.

5. 	Land Availability for the Project

The committee observed that the land available for the project, which is approximately 400 acres, belongs to Government of Uganda. However, the committee established that there are encroachers on this said land. The committee, therefore, recommends that Government expedites the process of availing land, and that is land without encumbrances, to the contractor to enable the timely implementation of this project.

6. 	Proven Performance and Capability of the Consultant

The committee was not able ascertain the technical capabilities of the procured consultant for this project. The committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport should perform due diligence on the proposed consultant to ensure that deliverables of this projects are within the programmed timeframe.

The Ministry of Works and Transport should also ensure effective supervision of the consultant during project implementation. 

7. 	Building a Strong Hubbing Marine National Carrier

There is need to build a strong hubbing marine national carrier. The committee noted that in order for the country to realise the long-term social and economic benefits of the development of this project, Government should as well consider the future establishment of a strong hubbing marine national carrier. This would avoid turning the port to mainly an origin/destination port without a strong based hubbing national marine carrier.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should consider the establishment of a strong hubbing national carrier in order to maximise port revenues that will accrue from the envisaged increase in domestic marine traffic for both passenger and cargo dominated revenue.

8. 	Provision of an Integrated Transport Network for the Port

The committee noted the need for the inter-connectedness of the port to other efficient and effective transport systems for the convenient movement of cargo and passengers. This is also the practice in all modern water ports worldwide.

The committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should ensure the efficient inter-connection of the port to the railway and other appropriate transport modes in the design of the port’s master plan. 

Madam Speaker and colleagues, in conclusion, the committee recommends that Parliament approves the request by Government to borrow €42.5 million from a German bank consortium for the development of an inland port at Bukasa on the shores of Lake Victoria subject to the recommendations mentioned above. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee, for the work done. I have checked that the necessary minimum signatures are available; let us have just a limited debate.

MR MWIRU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have no problem with the project but I have a problem with some technical issue. The first one is the feasibility study for this project. When you read the document submitted by the ministry, they tell us on page 5 that they did a pre-feasibility study –

THE SPEAKER: Is that a Cabinet memo?

MR MWIRU: This is the brief to Parliament on the loan. They tell us that they carried out a pre-feasibility study and that is where they end; they did not proceed with it. 

Secondly, there are no designs for this project. When it comes to the cost of the entire project, what the minister did not disclose to this House is that three years ago, this House approved a loan which they utilised and apparently, there is no progress in as far as this project is concerned. 

Therefore, I am wondering whether procedurally, it would be right for us to approve this loan request without a feasibility study, without knowing what the total cost of this project is going to be, because even the minister does not brief us on the previous loan on the same project- how far they have gone. For the benefit of the Members, I had the benefit to discuss even with the ministers and we got this information to report to them. How do we proceed, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: Let me consult over it while we debate because this is a new situation.

5.39
THE MINISTER FOR DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Mr Hillary Onek): Thank you, Madam Speaker and colleagues. I would like to make two statements; the first is to emphasise the importance of this project. I was Minister for Energy when Kenya had a crisis and we were suffocated. We almost did not have fuel in the country to run our economy and many of our traders’ goods were held up in Mombasa and many lost their property because we did not have any exit alternative routes.  This route is coming in timely and without any politics attached to it. This affects the entire economy of our country and our people. Therefore, I strongly support that we have this alternative route in place.

Secondly –(Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank the honourable minister and I would like to agree with him that when there was a political crisis in Kenya, we suffered to some extent. However, having said that, at that time we also had our two ships - Kabalega and Mwanga - on Lake Victoria which were supposed to dock at Port Bell and in Jinja. What happened to that arrangement? If you failed at that time to make these two routes workable, will it now be a miracle that you will make it possible in Bukasa? What explanation can you give as to why those two routes have failed to operate?

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, when the Kenyans had a problem, we suffered. However, during the independence period and the period of the late Idi Amin, fuel reserves were built; as I travel to Tororo, I see one of them in Jinja. A contract was given to some company to repair it and we even approved a grant here, but to date, it is dry. Even if you built a port at Bukasa, it will not put fuel in our reserve in Busoga so that at least trucks can come there. Can you explain?

MR ONEK: The two questions raised are definitely good. Port Bell has enormous limitations; it is a very small landing port. The Bukasa option is a mega project whereby there will be huge haulage of luggage of various goods including transportation of oil and the rest of it. They cannot be compared.

Secondly –(Interruption) 

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, hon. Wadri had just stated that we had two ships and now the minister is telling us that Port Bell is too small for one ship, that that is why they could not use it. Is he in order to say that Port Bell is too small to handle one ship?

THE SPEAKER: Can we have clarification on the capacity of Port Bell before we rule? Answer the issue raised by hon. Okupa. 

DR CHEBROT: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Could I just answer the first question to do with the feasibility study then I go to the justification for the port?

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

5.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (TRANSPORT) (Dr Steven Chebrot): Madam Speaker, on the issue of the pre-feasibility study, I would like to inform Members that we have approved very many projects in this House and they do not necessarily have to have a feasibility study for them to commence -(Interjections)- Okay, let me put it this way: Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I hesitantly rise on a point of order against a senior gynaecologist –(Laughter)– who is submitting to this House on engineering matters. He has said that for such a huge project - the way engineer Hilary Onek has been explaining – on 400 hectares of land, having major interventions, this Parliament does not deserve a feasibility study! Is the senior gynaecologist, the honourable Dr Chebrot, in order? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, considering that if we do approve this loan request and it is granted, we begin to pay interest while the Government is still thinking about what to do – a feasibility study! I do not know whether we would be doing a service to this country by getting a loan that attracts interest when we are not ready to use it. 

MS KAABULE: Madam Speaker, let me give some information. If you listened carefully to the project scope, this project is going to be implemented in a phased manner. There are three phases; phase I will mainly involve preparatory port development work that will include consultancy and engineering services for preparation of the master plan; consultancy and engineering services for the project management; procurement of goods and services, including dredging and surcharging; and then consultancy and engineering services, technical assistance for operation, management and training. There are phases and we have outputs for these.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Onek was on the Floor; let him conclude.

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, in the report here, it has been mentioned that there was a feasibility study except that the statement did not go further. In this report, it is mentioned that there was a feasibility study and I remember, as a minister in charge of energy at that time - (Interjection) - Why don’t you wait for the explanation? What are you raising points of order for?

THE SPEAKER: Let him tell us.

MR ONEK: I want to inform you because I was involved in this project of looking for alternatives when I was Minister for Energy. This feasibility study was done, on the basis of which that estimate was made. Therefore, the feasibility study is there, Madam Speaker. If they want, I think the Minister for Works will produce it. Thank you. 

5.47
MS BEATRICE ATIM (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We had looked at this project and its merits were good and we thought it was a good project. However, when you look into the details of this and the minister’s response, he has even spoiled my appetite, which I had earlier. 

I feel that even if you had a still birth, you will go on to have more babies thereafter. This project is good because we thought it will improve transport. Uganda being a landlocked country, we thought it would promote tourism which would bring us more foreign earnings. We also thought it would help us network with our neighbouring countries. However, with all these advantages of the project, it is still sad to note that the Government very often comes to this House without completing their part. 

We cannot keep on borrowing; as you rightly noted, interest starts accruing while the Government is not ready and you would wonder whether it is a priority when Government brings such a project to the House for approval. We have lost a lot of funds. We have actually enslaved Ugandans by paying for loans for projects that – (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think that the principle of developing marine transport is okay. We have suppressed the marine industry in this country. Therefore, the principle is okay but how it is being done could be an issue.

5.50
MR IBRAHIM SSEMUJJU (FDC, Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We earlier spoke about the demeanour of witnesses; you can actually see that within three minutes – Even now as we speak, the ministers are still consulting on what they can tell this Parliament about this loan; you can see them in disarray. (Laughter)

My disappointment, Madam Speaker, is that even the committee that is supposed to represent the interests of this Parliament, seems to have acted in a hurry. Not only do I represent that part of Uganda but I stay there. There are about 10 MPs who stay on that land that you are talking about, including hon. Jack Wamanga-Wamai and hon. Omollo. Without visiting the place, you come to Parliament and say that the area is empty, that it is a forest, and you recommend passing the loan request.

THE SPEAKER: No, no; the chairperson said there are encroachers. She said it is Government land but there are encroachers. That is what is in the report. 

MR SSEMUJJU: I am now reporting to Parliament that the biggest part of the land is privately owned and I am mentioning honourable Members of Parliament. I do not know whether these MPs that I am mentioning are encroachers, and that should have been solved if the committee visited. However, it appears the committee got involved in armchair arrangements and that is why they cannot report adequately on it. 

Madam Speaker, the matters that I would like to raise are -(Interruption) 

MR KYOOMA: Madam Speaker, I am one of those who does not always rise on the Floor to raise points of order against colleagues. The committee took time and visited this place. I do not know why hon. Ssemujju says that we did not go and yet he is not a member of the committee. I would like to confirm that the committee visited this place and what he is saying is actually among the questions that we put to the Government; we wanted them to explain how they would develop the land and yet there are occupants. It is even clearly stated in our report.

Is it, therefore, in order for hon. Ssemujju to undermine the committee and say that the committee just sat in a room and concocted the report and yet the committee visited this land? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: The Member is out of order because in reporting, the chairperson informed this House that the land belongs to the Government but there are some encroachers and that they are asking Government to deal with that issue quickly. Honourable members, being a Member of Parliament does not mean that you cannot be an encroacher. (Laughter) Yes! People have built in wetlands and other places.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am sorry if the committee secretly visited the place. My residence is in Bukasa and these MPs that I am talking about live there. Therefore, if you came unnoticed, I am very sorry. 

However, the first point I wish to raise is that if you look at the brief to Parliament on page 4, Government says the reason that they cannot expand Port Bell is because of the residential developments around that place. We have some residential developments around Bukasa. Do you mean there are angels and princes who live in Port Bell that you cannot displace but it is easy to displace those of us who live across Lake Victoria? Are we not humans? This is a brief from the Government. You cannot displace people around Port Bell but the ones of Bukasa, you can displace.

The second point is that this is not an emergency. If you need the same brief from Government –

THE SPEAKER: What page are you reading?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, in the brief to this Parliament, Government actually says that it is not that they have not developed marine transport –

THE SPEAKER: What page are you on?

MR SSEMUJJU: Page 3, paragraph 4; they actually say that transit traffic across Lake Victoria simply fell and that is why hon. Wadri and others are asking what happened at Port Bell and probably in Jinja that you are not telling Parliament. It is cheaper to expand than to construct and displace people. Where were you for these industrial and residential projects to begin developing around the port?  (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: As we speak now, we have major industrial hubs in that place like Roofings Ltd –(Interjections)- Madam Speaker, this information is very important. We have industries that have been built on this land like Roofings Ltd, which was commissioned by the President. I do not know whether we are going to compensate Roofings Ltd so that they move away and where we are going to get that budget. I even do not know whether those are encroachers. Therefore, this project has so many questions that beg answers that we cannot get today.

MR SSEMUJJU: As I conclude, Madam Speaker, some of the issues that I am raising are issues that can be answered by a feasibility study. A minister has stood in this Parliament and said that it is not necessary and so this Parliament can be used as a dustbin - simply pass laws as if this is mob justice. 

If the committee had announced its visit, - since I am a Member of this Parliament, I will be interested in the minutes of the visit and a report – this information that we are giving to Parliament would have probably given to – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my MP, hon. Ssemujju. I would like to inform you that not long ago, we had a very contentious issue on the Katosi Road where a contract was awarded before due diligence was done. That landed one of our colleagues, the honourable minister and engineer, Byandala, in trouble and he is still appearing before the courts of law. I would not wish to have the honourable Dr Chebrot and the honourable engineer, Hillary Onek, follow the same.

The issue is that if you had carried out feasibility studies, all these issues would have been addressed and we would not be heckling over some of these issues the way we are doing. I would really want to advise my two colleagues here to beware of what befell hon. Byandala. (Laughter)  Yes, because it was all as a result of lack of due diligence. Go back and conduct a feasibility study so that when you come here for such a request, you have all the information and answers to questions in that report.

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, even in the report of the committee, the chairperson now tells Parliament to pass this loan request subject to the issues that I am raising. If you are raising issues as a committee for God’s sake why are you in a hurry to tell us to pass a loan request? Why don’t you first have those issues addressed? 

Not only am I at pains because you want to massively displace my people, but it is the work of the committee and I do not want to continue blaming the committee. You have issues unanswered and yet you are telling Parliament to pass the loan request very quickly so that these issues can be addressed. Supposing they are not addressed?

6.01
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga, Ssembabule): I thank you, Madam Speaker. In my hand is a paper entitled, “The Republic of Uganda: A brief to Parliament”. This brief to Parliament contradicts the spirit and the report of the committee. The committee is saying that they are ready and we should proceed to borrow. Two, the committee chairperson has informed this Parliament that we should not worry as this project shall be implemented in phases, and she has not laboured to tell us for what phase we are borrowing. The reason I am raising this is because the brief concedes that there is no feasibility study and yet the committee wants this august House to commit Ugandans to such a huge loan.

Reading the bottom of page 5, the committee says, “The Ministry of Works and Transport in consultation with the Ministry of Finance and in line with the provisions of PPDA, has procured the services of the German firm Gauff to offer the services needed to undertake this preliminary work which is detailed below subject to the approval of Cabinet and Parliament” and then they say that they will provide a loan for this project. How do you want this House to sit here and commit itself without a clear way, because the feasibility study would tell you the engineering designs and feasibility designs, amongst others? Now you want us to commit Ugandans to borrow without properly telling us where we are moving and at what point - (Interruption)

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, colleague, for yielding the Floor. Madam Speaker, when you look at page – Oh, they are not numbered. 

THE SPEAKER: The numbers are obscured by the signatures but maybe you can refer to the paragraphs.

MR KATUNTU: There is a page that begins with point No. vi at the back of the page and the conclusion says, “The committee recommends that the Ministry of Works and Transport should perform due diligence on the proposed consultant to ensure that deliverables of this project are within the programmed timeframe.” You can see, even the deliverables are not stated and they are telling us they are going to borrow. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, the committee is concluding in a rather difficult way to understand; the committee recommends that Parliament approves the request to borrow this money subject to their recommendations. We cannot give our consent and approval subject to conditions. It is like passing a budget subject to conditions. We cannot do it. There are no deliverables at all.

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, we are borrowing on the basis of pre-feasibility studies. When we actually do the feasibility studies, supposing they turn out negative and yet we have already approved, what happens?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I want to draw your attention to paragraph 5.2 of the report, which lists some of the major expected outputs for phase 1 as follows:  “i) A detailed masterplan for the development of New Kampala Port at Bukasa area developed (including proposals for lake transportation, a shipyard and engineering and procurement services) and engineering design, tender documents…” 

It goes on to say that it will involve preliminary engineering works on the inland port including all dredging works and swamp surcharging, construction of access roads to the port area, etc. and also geotechnical, topographical and other investigations. I think that is the objective of the loan. 

MS KAABULE: Let me give some clarification so that we get this clearly. 

Just like I said before, this work is going to be done in three phases. This loan will finance Phase 1 of the development of the port and this will mainly involve preparatory port development work that will include consultancy and engineering services for preparation of the master plan, consultancy and engineering services for project management and others. 

Therefore, the pre-feasibility study was done, which led to the understanding that we are going to borrow in phases. The outputs and the deliverables that hon. Katuntu was talking about – (Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, then on what basis is this Parliament undertaking to borrow €42,000,500? For that matter, I would say let us be patient. When all this is concluded, this Parliament or even the 10th Parliament shall be there. We all want to expedite marine transport and we beg not to be misunderstood on this. We all need marine transport and we need to develop the port at Bukasa, but let us be ready; when we are there, a proposal to borrow can come. After all, this – (Interruption)

MR MWIRU: Thank you, honourable colleague. The question I want to ask this House -

THE SPEAKER: How did you come up? It was supposed to be hon. Odoi-Oywelowo, hon. Oboth, hon. Ssemugaba and then hon. Biraaro.

6.11
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. There are a number of issues that I did not want to address myself to but given the interest this has generated, I think I should. 

One, pre-feasibility studies can be equated to conception. When a woman conceives, in project planning that is the equivalent of a pre-feasibility study. However, you know that before a woman gives birth she must, for nine months –(Interruption)

MR ONEK: Madam Speaker, it is difficult to discuss an engineering detail when a lot of it is turned into legal and political – I managed projects for all the towns when I was in National Water and Sewerage Corporation. A pre-feasibility study and report is always done to determine the approximate loan requirements to enable engineering works to be done in that project. The engineering works here are consultancy services and developing -(Interjection)- You have not been a managing director, do not shout. The point is -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. We are discussing a matter, which touches on the lives of Ugandans, and as a Parliament we have our Rules of Procedure. Is the honourable minister in order to use un-parliamentary language in reference to colleagues, saying that they are shouting and not discussing? Is he in order?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that emotions are charged on this matter but let us handle it under the Rules of Procedure.

MR ONEK: Sorry; I apologise for that. What I am trying to guide Members about is that pre-feasibility studies are done to estimate the quantity of work required and the amount of money associated with it and this has been done - the estimates –(Interjections)- We have a committee report here; read paragraph 11. It is reported that it was done and the report is ready. 

Secondly, Bukasa and that industrial area was forest land de-gazetted for industrialisation. It has nothing to do with squatters there - 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, may I know from the committee chair whether that study is part of your minutes? Do you have the pre-feasibility study? Can it be laid on the Table?

MS KAABULE: The pre-feasibility study is part of what I laid on the Table.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think I need to move to more useful issues. 

Madam Speaker, you stated that as a country we need to invest in marine transport. There are several advantages of investing in marine transport; the first and most obvious one is that probably, it is one of the cheapest modes of transport. We cannot, in future, run this country in a viable manner without investing in alternative modes of transport. We borrow every year to invest in the construction of roads that are destroyed and then we again borrow to maintain them. Therefore, it is important that as a Parliament, we support Government when they come to ask us to borrow to invest in marine transport.

Madam Speaker, I learnt from living with my neighbours, the Iteso. They are good hunters and eat mole rats. (Laughter) Let me tell you how they capture mole rats. A mole rat has only one entry and exit route to its hole. They only have to lay a trap at the entry and exit route. Uganda is like a mole rat; without passing and conveying our goods through Malaba and Busia, we have no viable alternative routes. This project proposes to develop an alternative route to the ports of Dar es Salaam and - (Interruption)

MR MPUUGA: Thank you, honourable member, for giving way. I agree with you that we need to support particular projects but we should not be oblivious of the history of borrowing in this Parliament and the history of projects involving massive chunks of land, one of which was in Nakawa. Long-term planning is very important but we must be careful with the level of borrowing that we undertake just because there is a need. Argentina’s economy went under similar justifications; there was a need but they have never recovered. Therefore, when we ask questions, we are trying to be sure that we are not making mistakes in what we want to do. When matters of feasibility are raised, when matters relating to whether people were consulted are raised, we need unequivocal answers. 

I am looking at the catalogue of consultations on page 8 of this report - the Government brief to Parliament is mentioned but the community is not one of the most important entities they consulted and yet this is a project for the people. Somehow, we believe that we can do it very fast and borrow in haste.

I believe we can support the Government on borrowing but can we get all the information prior to approving these borrowings? Thank you.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, hon. Mpuuga. Madam Speaker, this Parliament works through its committees. Our committee interfaced with the Government and it came up with answers to all these questions -(Interruption)

MS OSEGGE: Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I think the House is in agreement that the principle is acceptable across the board. What we are disputing is the fact that we are borrowing for things that we think we should not borrow for; for instance, undertaking a feasibility study. 

The committee has clearly stated in their report that one of the expected outputs includes preliminary engineering works and a detailed master plan. These are things that you should have done before you subjected Uganda to a loan because while you are doing all this, the loan is being paid for.

Madam Speaker, is hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo in order to derail and confuse this House and insinuate that we are rejecting the principle and not understanding the issues that this House is raising? Is he in order to pretend that we do not understand? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I know that in principle, Parliament supports the development of the marine industry. I think what we are not agreed upon is how to get there.

MR ODOI-OYWELOWO: Thank you, Madam Speaker, for your wise ruling. The committee raises the question of encroachment and I heard the very sentimental submissions of hon. Ibrahim Ssemujju Nganda. I think this country has a legislative framework that deals with these issues. You cannot evict a person from land that he has a claim over without adequate compensation.

It is also good practice that when you are investing in a project, it must have a human face. My understanding is that Government will not, in any way, evict the 50,000 families that hon. Ssemujju is talking about without compensation if they have a legal claim -(Member timed out.)

6.20
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Fox Odoi-Oywelowo is my neighbour and a maternal uncle. As has rightly been observed, many of the loan requests being submitted here are really of substance but probably the way they are packaged is making Members a little bit uncomfortable. There is nobody in this House who does not want water transport to be improved. If you are here and you do not support the cause to diversify and have alternative routes, you are not a Ugandan; you should be Congolese.

Madam Speaker, this is a call upon the Government not to be seen to do certain things haphazardly and this is my problem. As we are trying to submit, they are caucusing. You wonder what they do in Cabinet. A very good thing can easily fail because of - Another loan has already been withdrawn; it would be painful to see this one going the same way. 

The committee observed that there was no water department in the Ministry of Works and Transport but we have a fully-fledged minister. Now, listening to the minister in charge of planning, what kind of planning are you doing on the Floor of the House? (Laughter) What planning do you do on your feet? This is a very thing, a good baby; let us carry this baby and not throw it out with the bathwater - (Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you very much, my age mate. Madam Speaker, we have so many legal questions. The land upon which this proposed port is supposed to be is land that belongs to National Forestry Authority and is partly a wetland. The requirement for de-gazetting any forest land is that you must acquire land of similar environmental condition and be able to plant trees in that place before the resolution comes to Parliament for de-gazetting. Also, for Parliament to de-gazette, you need two-thirds. That is the law. 

Therefore, if we approve this and tomorrow we find that we have failed to adhere to the forestry Act – (Interjection)- I am giving information. I have been in this Parliament for a long time and I thank the people of Tororo for it. I only know that the land, which we de-gazetted, is Namanve and the only part that we de-gazetted now has industries. That is why I stood here and told you that the Roofings factory is on part of the forest land, which has not even been de-gazetted.

MR OBOTH: I thank hon. Ekanya for the information he has given me. In the brief to Parliament, the Government identified land in Kyankwanzi to replace that –(Interjections)- There is Government land there. I have read the brief and I got that. 

I am only faulting the haphazard way we are trying to do things. Let us have this country at heart and do the right things the right way, and make sure that this loan request goes through. It is not your loan; it is our loan. It is not your water transport; it is ours. Why must we be seen to do the right things the wrong way? There is no harm, honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

The whole loan now appears to be for a feasibility study. I saw that the pre-feasibility study was conducted for the last six years. Probably, the concerns of hon. Ssemujju could be reconciled, that there will be a cost-benefit analysis. When you look at Luzira –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Thank you, hon. Oboth. Madam Speaker, I sat in the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and I was waiting for my chairman to say this, but he has given me a nod to say it. For the last seven or so years, even before I joined Parliament, the committee has, year in, year out, been given information by the Ministry of Works. 

I thought the minister would come out here and say that they have done feasibility studies for Bukasa. As committee members, that is the information we have heard. The dead silence of the minister here today points to a different thing from what he has been feeding the committee with. Before he joined the ministry, that is the information that we were given; we were told that it is only money that was needed. Were they lying to us?

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the chairperson of the Committee on Infrastructure first - I would like to confirm what has been coming up in your reports - before the minister comes up.

6.26
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (Mr Ephraim Biraaro): Madam Speaker, first and foremost, we must thank the committee for what they have done so far. We have been on recess and carrying out campaigns but I think that there are certain things they did not lay their hands on.

With respect to due diligence on the contractor, I have seen many signposts, we have seen many works, we have witnessed a lot of projects implemented by Gauff in Uganda here; there are more than 15 or 17 projects.

Secondly, when we are discussing this topic, I think we should restrict ourselves to the statement on page 10 of the ministerial brief. Phase I, which is the main subject of this Cabinet paper, is about consultancy and the procurement of goods and services. This is the purpose for which €60 million is required of which €8,000,000 is to be provided by Government of Uganda and €52 million by the German banks.

Madam Speaker, our question as Ugandans would be: Are we able to raise eight million euros so that we undertake phase I? While it is agreed in principle that we need to open the waterways from Bukasa to Mwanza, we need to question ourselves if as Ugandans we – (Interruption)

MS FLORENCE NAMAYANJA: Madam Speaker, is hon. Biraaro, the chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, in order to come here and tell us things that he is not certain about? Sometime back, during the Kasokoso matter, he came here and lied to Parliament. He was requested to go and bring facts about the feasibility study on Kasokoso and he has never come back; he just brought a draft. Is he in order to come here without facts, the same way he came previously, and tell us lies?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I cannot read his mind. He is speaking about what he knows. Therefore, he is in order.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, I think I have to ignore that and go ahead. 

The second issue is that everywhere we come from in our constituencies, we have people on land. It is established as a very clear and strong fact that that land belongs to National Forestry Authority (NFA). Maybe what we need to think about is whether it has been de-gazetted for land use purposes and that NFA has agreed with the Ministry of Works over that land and they have swapped. I even have information that the Ministry of Works has secured land in Kyankwanzi to compensate NFA so that that land can be used for this project.

Madam Speaker, my last point is about the ships that were damaged - MV Kalangala. These were Government or public ships and the information I have is that when this project starts, it will be big enough for private operators to bring in their ships. Therefore, this issue of MV Kalangala being sunk and later repaired - It will be bigger business. I think this project needs all our support. We need to move away from dividing the House about this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, I had wanted you to explain to this House whether you have or have not received the feasibility studies in respect of this.

MR BIRAARO: Madam Speaker, as hon. Hilary Onek said, there is a pre-feasibility study on phase I. It will be the information from phase one that will form the other master plan in phases II and III. It was attached and laid on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the chairperson to lay it on the Table?

MS KABUULE: Madam Speaker, among the things I had laid on the Table is the Central Corridor Development Programme. This is the development of Bukasa Inland Port updated concept report which – (Interjections)- Can you listen? It includes, among others, regional connections -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this loan is very important for the development of the marine industry but I do not know whether we should jeopardise it by taking a decision now. Do you mind if we defer it until after the elections so that we can get all this information?

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, now that the issue of the feasibility study has come here, instead of the chairperson presenting a copy of the feasibility study she was trying to lay a concept paper on the Table. Can they go back and bring that feasibility study report and we compare it with what is here? If they did that, we would not need money for the feasibility study in phase I. As we who have been in that committee have said, that was what we have always been told and the chairperson here is saying she has the copies -(Interruption)

MR SSEMUGABA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for the work well done. From my knowledge as the former chairperson of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and a current member of the committee, I know that there is a feasibility study for phase I and that is what formed the requirement and -(Interruption)

MR SSEKIKUBO: Madam Speaker, I have been listening attentively and a while ago, you raised the question as to whether there is a feasibility study report and none was presented. Now, the honourable member is categorically stating here that there is a feasibility study report. Being a former chairperson, he is aware of one.

Madam Speaker, can the former chairperson of the committee be tasked to lay on the Table a copy of that report that he is talking about? If not, can action be taken against a Member who is persisting to misinform this House?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I asked you a question: Do you mind if we defer this until after the elections so that we can get copies of the feasibility study and any other information? I do not want to jeopardise this project. This is the first time a marine project has come here. Therefore, can we defer it, honourable minister?

DR CHEBROT: Madam Speaker, I have considered your request and we will go ahead and look for some of these documents.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the interest of the people who use the marine industry, which is underdeveloped - Masese, Lake Kyoga, Lake Victoria; they are so many - the question is that this request be deferred until further notice and that the minister undertakes to present the document for the feasibility study and any other relevant information arising from this debate.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL BY GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNIT OF ACCOUNTS 65.8 MILLION (APPROXIMATELY $92.37 MILLION) FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK FOR FINANCING THE WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION PROGRAMME PHASE II (WSSPII)

6.37
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PRIVATISATION) (Mr Aston Kajara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish to move a motion on the proposal from the Government to borrow up to 65.8 million units of accounts from the African Development Fund for financing the Water Supply and Sanitation Programme (WSSP) Phase II.

Madam Speaker, this project will contribute to improved health and productivity of the population through provision of safe water and sanitation services.

This loan will go a long way in addressing the small towns’ water supply and sanitation. This will be in the details. The project has three components: rural water supply and sanitation; small towns’ water supply and sanitation; and sector programmes support.

The loan has been discussed by the Committee on National Economy and a report has been produced. I would like to move that this motion be supported after the presentation of the report. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: The motion is seconded by the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. Can we hear the report of the committee?

6.39
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Ms Evelyn Kaabule): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. This is a report of the Committee on National Economy on the proposal by the Government to borrow up to 65.8 million units of accounts from the African Development Bank to finance the Water Supply and Sanitation Programme Phase II (WSSP II).

Before I report, I beg to lay on the Table minutes of the committee meeting, a brief to Parliament, the project appraisal report, the loan agreement, minutes of the loan negotiation, progress report of phase I and mid-term evaluation report. I beg to lay.

Madam Speaker, this is a report of the Committee on National Economy to borrow unit of accounts 65.8 million, which is approximately $92.37 million, from the African Development Bank to finance WSSP II. You already have the background and performance of WSSP I. Phase I was to improve the socio-economic situation of the communities. Just to remind you, phase I included:

    a) Bududa-Nabweya Gravity Flow Scheme;
    b) Lirima Gravity Flow Scheme;
    c) Bukwo Gravity Flow Scheme; and
    d) Twenty solar powered mini-piped water supply schemes.

We also have small towns’ water supply sanitation components under the water and sanitation development facility- central. By the end of September 2015, we had the following towns supplied with water under phase I: Kyamulibwa, Kakumiro, Kiganda, Najjembe, Nkoni, Kasanje, Zirobwe, Ntwetwe, Bweyale, Kinogozi, Kako and Nakaseke. That is 100 per cent implementation. The rehabilitation included Buliisa, Kabango-Budongo, Bukomansimbi, Kakiri and Wakiso, which was also at 100 per cent implementation. Kayunga, by that period, was at 30 per cent implementation.

Therefore, the areas to be covered under this particular project are spread across the country with rural gravity flow schemes and solar powered mini-schemes targeting beneficiaries in the east, northeast, north central and western regions of the country. The programme will cover 25 town water supply and sanitation systems, 10 large gravity flow schemes in rural areas and 70 solar powered water mini-schemes located across the country. They are covered under table 4, which you have in your report. For purposes of emphasis, they include:

    a) Lirima Gravity Flow Scheme, which is within Manafwa and Tororo districts.
    b) Bududa Gravity Flow Scheme, which is in Bududa District.
    c) Bukedea Gravity Flow Scheme in Bukedea, Bulambuli and Kapchorwa.
    d) Nyarwodho Gravity Flow Scheme, which is in Nebbi.
    e) Orom Gravity Flow Scheme in Agago and Lamwo.
    f) Lukalu-Kabasanda Gravity Flow Scheme in Gomba.
    g) Nyabuhikye-Kikyenkye Gravity Flow Scheme in Ibanda and Kiruhura.
    h) Ntoroko Gravity Flow Scheme in Ntoroko District.
    i) Masyoro-Shuuku Gravity Flow Scheme in Sheema. 
    j) Bukwo Gravity Flow Scheme in Bukwo District. 

This component will also include the construction of 70 solar powered water supply schemes. 

We also have the following under the small towns’ water supply and sanitation component: 

    a) Kagadi and Nyamarunda in Kibaale District.
    b) Bugoigo and Walukuba in Buliisa District. 
    c) Gombe and Kyabadaza in Butambala District. 
    d) Zigoti and Sekanyonyi in Mityana District. 
    e) Busiika and Bamunanika in Luweero District. 
    f) Kakunyu and Kiyindi in Buikwe District. 
    g) Kiwoko and Butalangi in Nakaseke District. 
    h) Namulonge and Kiwenda in Wakiso District. 
    i) Kabwoya in Hoima District. 
    j) Kabembe, Kalagi and Naggalama in Mukono District. 
    k) Butemba/Bukwiri and Nalukonge/Lusozi in Kyankwanzi District. 
    l) Butenga in Bukomansimbi District.  
    m) Kikandwa and Kasambya in Mubende District. 

The components under this project include: 

    a) Rural water supply and sanitation;
    b) Small towns water supply and sanitation; and 
    c) Sector programme support. 

Observations and Recommendations

Madam Speaker, the committee noted among the lessons learnt from the implementation of projects, especially those financed by externally borrowed funds, the untimely release of Government counterpart funding and the low absorption capacities of project executing agencies. 

Therefore, the committee recommends that Government should ensure that adequate counterpart funds for this programme are integrated within the national budget of 2016/2017 to ensure timely implementation of the project. 

Fulfilment of Loan Conditions

The committee observed that Government has been slow in the fulfilment of the conditions upon signing the loan agreement in order to trigger the disbursement of committed funds for the implementation of debt financed projects. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that Government ensures speedy fulfilment of the agreements’ conditions in order to provide for the timely release of funds and implementation of these projects. 

Management of Sewerage

The committee observed that poor sanitation and hygiene are public health concerns, which cause diseases such as diarrhoea and cholera, which are prevalent in Kampala and other urban areas. Management of sewerage is a key aspect in ensuring that the broader sanitation challenges are addressed. In addition, the committee noted that there continues to be more emphasis on water supply infrastructure expansion compared to sewerage infrastructure development. This has caused a mismatch between water and sewerage infrastructure development in numerous urban and rural growth centres in the country.  

The committee, therefore, recommends that given the fact that access to sewerage services is a key aspect of water and sanitation management, there is need for Government to fast-track and implement the proposed strategies in the management of sewerage to ensure increased access to the services in the country. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that the request by Government to borrow 65.8 million units of accounts, approximately $92.37 million, from the African Development Bank for financing the Water Supply and Sanitation Programme Phase II be approved subject to the recommendations above. I beg to report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think water is very important; can we have someone to move a motion? 

6.46
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Given the fact that the matter is very clear in this request for a loan - there are no controversies, the presentation was clear and audible and water is life - I, therefore, move a motion that this should be one of the few requests that should be passed without debate. I move a motion that the question be put for the adoption of this.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the question be put. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that this House approves the request as proposed.   
     
(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I only have one request. I want a commitment from the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that the Siyabyona Gravity Water Scheme in Namayingo, directed over 15 years ago by the President, will be funded. I am shocked that it is not here. I did not want to cause a problem but I want a commitment that this scheme will be funded urgently. 

6.48
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you for having passed this loan request. I am sorry for the others and we want to assure you that when the House sits again, we shall come fully prepared to give you all the information you need so that you can pass them. We need them as well. 

Madam Speaker, if the sector comes up with a request and says, “This is a priority for us” then we do not have a problem. Therefore, I request that - (Interruption) 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, I rise on a point of order. I have been the chairperson of the Committee on Government Assurances and I know the implication of a statement made by a minister here; it will have a trickle-down effect on the technical staff in each ministry because it is already an assurance made before this House. 

Is hon. Matia Kasaija in order to evade making an assurance, which this honourable House needs to hear? They can use their own mechanisms to follow it up with the relevant ministry. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I am not requesting; I am directing that you deal with the Siyabyona Gravity Scheme urgently. It was directed 15 years ago. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I did not want to spoil the party and raise objections to the loan request that we have just passed. However, I would like the sector minister to note the following: We have so many new districts coming up with headquarters and they do not have proper running water. I urge the ministry responsible to make sure that these new districts that have come up or that are coming up in a phased manner in the next two or three years are supplied with proper running water. 

Automatically, once a district is created, the headquarters become the town council, if they are not already, or a municipality. I say this in order for them to be provided for under the next phase in a sort of organised manner, in order to avoid district headquarters with pit latrines and without running water. That also includes Bugweri District.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, I sympathise with hon. Matia Kasaija because of his allusion that the water sector did not put the Siyabyona Gravity Scheme on board. 

I have been following the issue of gravity schemes since I was a youth MP. The Siyabyona you have talked about is part of those schemes. In fact, I got information three months ago that the Permanent Secretary/Secretary to the Treasury was dragging his feet to clear its presentation here. Therefore, hon. Matia Kasaija, you might have good intentions but your technical people are frustrating the water sector. 

THE SPEAKER: Do you want to say something about Siyabyona? Honourable minister, go ahead.

MS NABUGERE: Madam Speaker, this system of water supply is going to spread all over the country. Therefore, Members should not worry about whether the new districts will get water –

THE SPEAKER: I have directed the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to present a loan request here in respect to Siyabyona because it is a presidential directive, running for 15 years. I called the Minister of Water to my office about that. Minister, you do not have a choice.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, we shall work very closely with the sector responsible for water and do the needful according to our financial capability. This House appropriates money. We bring budgets here and if – (Interjections) – No, I am not being clever. May I be protected, Madam Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow the minister to speak.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, let me repeat that we shall work very closely with the sector to fulfil the desire of this House. Let me leave it at that.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to make a slight amendment to the Order Paper in order to bring in the Anti-Terrorism Bill, which has only three clauses. Thereafter, we can come back to the loans. I just want to make space for it. There are impending sanctions against Uganda, so I would like us to handle it. We will then come back to the loans.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I would like to chip in and help my colleague to explain this. It is affecting the economy of the country. We belong to an organisation called Financial Action Task Force (FATF). They recently held a conference in Paris, just about two months ago. We had been assessed on how far we are compliant with anti-money laundering and financing of terrorism. Unfortunately, Uganda was found to be noncompliant with the recommendations that were made. 

One of the recommendations that was made is that our legal framework must comply with international standards. We were categorically – I have a letter from the Bank of Uganda here - warned that if we would have not passed these laws by the next meeting which is scheduled for February, Uganda will be blacklisted. If we are blacklisted, the consequence is that no international financial institution will have any dealings with us and all the banks here will find it difficult to transact business with any international organisations. Therefore, I pray that we consider this law and pass it so that we become compliant and Uganda is not blacklisted. Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

6.59
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015” be read for the second time. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: It is seconded by various Members.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, the object of this Bill is to further amend the definitions of “terrorism” and “acts of terrorism” to include the revised international aspects envisaged by the United Nations Convention against terrorism and for related matters. 

7.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON DEFENCE AND INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Benny Namugwanya): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Before I read the committee report, I beg to lay on the Table a copy of the same. 

On the 24 December 2015, the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015 was read for the first time and referred to the Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. The committee invited the Minister of Internal Affairs to present the Bill and thereafter, the committee examined it and I hereby present our recommendations. 

Background to the Bill

From 19th to 23rd October 2015, the Financial Action Task Force held a meeting in Paris, France with regard to Uganda’s anti-money laundering and combating the financing of the terrorism regime. It was expressed that Uganda had only addressed one action item on the scope of terrorism financing and was considerably outside the agreed timeline (February 2016) for completion. Uganda was, therefore, urged to -

        a. Develop a legal framework and implement its obligations under the United Nations Security Council Resolutions (UNSCRs) 1267 and 1373; 

        b. Issue regulations to implement the Anti-Money Laundering Act;

        c. Finalise inspection manuals for the Anti-Money Laundering and Countering Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) supervision; and 

        d. Establish the Financial Intelligence Agency (FIA) as the central authority for receiving Suspicious Transaction Reports (STRs).

It was further expressed that Uganda had not yet criminalised the collection or provision of funds for an individual terrorist not linked to terrorist acts. It was, therefore, advised that Uganda should address the following deficiencies:

1) 	Adequately criminalise terrorism financing. 

2) 	Establish and implement an adequate legal framework and set procedures for identifying and freezing terrorists’ assets.

3) 	Ensure that all financial institutions are subject to adequate record keeping requirements.   

4) 	Establish a fully operational and effectively functioning financial intelligence unit.

5) 	Ensure adequate suspicious transaction reporting requirements.

6) 	Ensure an adequate and effective AML/CFT supervisory and oversight programme for all financial sectors.

7) 	Ensure that appropriate laws and procedures are in place with regard to international cooperation for financial intelligence unit and supervisory authorities. A copy of the letter from the President of FATF is attached herewith. 

It is in that regard that the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015 was tabled before Parliament.

Committee Findings and Observations

The committee made the following observations:

In the Anti-Terrorism Act 2002, the word “person” was not defined yet it has been used repeatedly in this Bill. The committee found it necessary to define this word.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the word “person” should be defined to avoid abuse of the law. I beg to report.

MR EKANYA: I am raising a procedural issue. The report which the chairperson has presented states that the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015 was read for the first time in Parliament on the 30 April 2015 by the Minister of Internal Affairs.

With me here, I have two copies of the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Bill. One was gazetted on 11 December 2015 and signed by hon. Rose Akol, MP and another one was gazetted on 24 April 2015, which the committee dealt with, signed by the late Aronda Nyakairima - May his soul rest in eternal peace. 

Therefore, I am raising a serious procedural issue. When was this Bill of the late minister officially withdrawn?  The one of 11th December is the one which should be valid but it should only be valid after the one of 24th April has been withdrawn and officially tabled here. The committee is presenting a report on a Bill printed in April 2015. So, I am raising a very serious procedural issue that if a colleague dies, is it normal that you rub his name from the work he has done? What are we doing?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, are the two Bills substantially the same? If they are, we proceed with the first Bill.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Hon. Ssekikubo, I know what I am talking about. I never stand here without knowing what I am talking. If I am not sure, I go back and check.  Madam Speaker, can I be protected from hon. Ssekikubo; he is nagging me this afternoon and I do not know why.

THE SPEAKER: Please, allow the minister to make a clarification.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, what my brother, hon. Ekanya, is saying is that we passed in April, but this business of anti-money laundering and financing of terrorism is very dynamic. When we went for review, they said there was something missing and, therefore, we had to come back and change it. Now we are coming to amend -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, has the Bill signed by hon. Akol been given a first reading? That is what I would like to know.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: It has been given the first reading and this is the report?

MR MATIA KASAIJA: I thought I should clarify the two amendments. This year, this law is being subjected to two amendments: One, which was submitted by the late Aronda, which we passed and the President assented to, and then new issues arose and we are now coming back to Parliament for yet another amendment. That is the point I would like to clarify.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, when did the Bill that you are reporting on come for first reading? Just state it for the Hansard and then we proceed.

MS NAMUGWANYA: Madam Speaker, the Bill was brought for first reading on 24 December 2015. (Interjections) I corrected it when I was reading. The report reads “24th November” but I corrected it and said “24th December”. The one the honourable colleague is referring to, which was signed by the late Gen. Aronda, was duly processed by this House and the amendment passed. When you look at the title of this Bill it is, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015.”

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I want this matter to be well understood. I have a copy of the Act here and it is entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) Act, 2015” and the President I think assented to it. If you want, I can lay this before Parliament. This is the second amendment. 

MR OBOTH: I am rising on procedural issue. I see the honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is preaching to the choir. Now that he has stopped preaching, we could do the needful. This is a law that we do not need to over emphasise; it is noncontroversial, a matter that can go even without debate. “Define…”– what are you going to debate here? (Mr Ekanya rose_) Hon. Ekanya is saying no, let him debate the definition and we go on. 

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. When you look at this Bill, indeed it is a short Bill with only three clauses but it is not as simplistic as hon. Oboth thinks.

I would like to draw his attention to clause 3 of the Bill, which seeks to amend section 32A of the principal Act by providing thus: “Without prejudice to subsection (1), the minister may make regulations…” When you look at the regulations he is supposed to make, (c) says, “to prescribe a penalty in respect of any contravention of the regulations including-
(i) 	a fine not exceeding 250 currency points or imprisonment not exceeding five years or both;
(ii) 	a higher penalty for subsequent or repeated offences.”

He is not addressing himself, the lawyer that he is - We are now giving the minister power to start creating offences and prescribing penalties including sentences. If he thinks it is as easy as –(Interjection)- I would like to debate the motion.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, we can have a few comments; he was moving a motion. 

MR KATUNTU: Madam Speaker, I arose because he was taking us to the point of simplicity – “Let us pass the Bill.” I object to that. We need to debate this.

THE SPEAKER: We shall allow some debate on the issue.

MR OBOTH: Madam Speaker, I was debating that way thinking that my colleague here would have addressed his mind to the committee report. What does the committee report say - “Delete…”? Legal knowledge is not a monopoly of –(Laughter) 

MS CECILIA OGWAL: Madam Speaker, I would like to exercise my whip power here in my backyard. The chairperson of the committee said that this Bill was made available to her on 24th December; remember we were here up to 3.00 p.m. on 24th December. The reason I am rising on a procedural matter is because on the 24th of December, you adjourned so that we could go for Christmas and we all went. My question is: When did the committee meet to consider the report? It is a very serious procedural question.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I am aware that the committee did sit and consider the report. Do not insinuate; just debate the motion but do not make unsubstantiated allegations against the committee, which is doing work on our behalf.

7.13
MR FOX ODOI-OYWELOWO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion and amendments proposed by the committee. 

We all have a duty to contribute to the security of our country and that of the whole world – of every homosapien. When the Government comes to Parliament and requests that we arm them with legal tools to fight terrorism, it is the duty of every right-thinking Member of Parliament to support them. That is what they have come to do. They brought a Bill with three clauses. Clause 1 is an amendment of section 7 of the Anti-Terrorism Act; clause 2 is an amendment of section 9A, and of course there is the controversial clause 3, which our committee has very ably recommended that we delete substantial portions thereof.

Therefore, I would like to request my colleagues that we make our small contribution. Terrorists will not make appointments; they will not ask for invitations to bring trouble to our borders. They will not make appointments to raise funds or to travel outside Uganda and train and come back to cause mayhem. We must, as a Parliament, speak with one voice and support the Government by passing this very small Bill. I beg to submit, Madam Speaker.

7.15
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Hon. Mulongo would have been the best person to talk about these matters. (Laughter) I have ever seen him submitting on NTV with very good amount of knowledge.

Having said that, I just want to ask one question – I have seen the committee recommendation. It would be very exciting for anyone to jump on board and say, “We support it” because you are recommending that we should not give the ministers those powers, but this is dangerous. 

I agree the minister should not direct court. I should not have a problem with hon. Akol and if she goes and makes a law and inserts my name on the list of terrorists and then she runs to Parliament and Parliament’s role is only post mortem, – that we can annul it within 14 days by resolution of Parliament so that your role is to implicate me and the role of Parliament is to free me - I do not think that would be a problem.

However, what I wanted to find out from the committee chairperson is this: If we delete that recommendation, does it meet the requirement Paris is pushing for? Would it still serve the purpose that these international actors have compelled us today to consider this particular aspect? I only wanted to be helped in that specific aspect. Thank you.

7.16
MR THEODORE SSEKIKUBO (Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand to support the motion. 

Apparently, the gist of the Bill is to tighten on the financing of terrorists, whether individuals or organisations, through money laundering and other processes. Recently, I read in the press that about $46 million was lying unclaimed in Swiss banks, and this follows some other reports which emerged one year ago. It is suspected that much of this money is from Uganda. 

Apart from this Bill, therefore, I would like to draw to the attention of Government that not only must we legislate against international terrorism but we have our own terrorists, who terrorise Uganda by stealing and hiding this money in other capitals; can we equally, as we pass this law, have another law that will track down rich people in this country who most times have gotten this money through dubious means and this money is stashed away in Swiss banks, in Belgium and other countries?

As a country, is there a way we can be availed these foreign accounts and the names of people who steal this money. This is because this money is what this law is targeting. People who have excessive money launder this money and when the Swiss banks say, “Come and claim your money”, they run away. The country eventually ends up losing because this money is now going to be deposited in the Central Bank of Switzerland. We, the poor Ugandans from whom much of this money is coming from, will remain here poor and we keep borrowing left and right, without money. Can this law be followed with another law that will track down our own local terrorists? Not terrorists in the sense that they are armed and causing death to people through bombs, but they are robbing Ugandans of their money and they end up keeping it in world capitals. Therefore, I will say that yes, we support the Bill but let the Government also work hard to deal with our own who steal and rob this country.

7.19
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I stand here to support the motion with the amendments proposed in the Bill. The day the Bill was presented here, we raised an objection and asked the honourable minister to give the committee a chance to look at it. I am happy that that was done; she conceded and that is why we are here today. We gave you assurance that day that we shall be here and today we are here.

The little I want to say is to the Government. In May, when we were debating the amendments to this Anti-Terrorism Act, I remember our shadow minister, hon. Kivumbi, raised the issue of definitions. When you look at the object of this Bill and also what you are requiring us to do, it is to align the definition of terrorism to the international standard. 

Can we learn to listen to each other and to reason? I remember hon. Oboth was one of those who said, “Please, can we align this” but the frontbench refused. It is the main reason we are bringing this amendment here. Please, let us learn to listen to one another.

The next issue regards what hon. Ssekikubo has stated; at an appropriate time, I will lay a document before this House about the local “terrorists” or money-launderers. We have had cases where lots of money is deposited on people’s accounts locally here and internationally. I have a document in my possession where Shs 1.5 billion was deposited on an RDC’s account in August last year and it was cashed in Stanbic Bank. (Interjections) I have told you that at an appropriate time, I will bring it here. (Interjections) I do not lie; people trust me and they give me documents. Can you people deal with the local terrorists? 

We also hear that there are some people who collect money from our missions abroad and it goes into personal accounts. Please, I hope this will help us to deal with what hon. Ssekikubo has talked about - the Swiss accounts. Part of that money is Ugandan, so help us. I have given you leads, I hope our body that we formed here is not intimidated. I understand that some of them are being intimidated in those offices when such information is given; even bank officials were threatened – (Member timed out.)

7.22
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. For the purposes of the record, I have read the report and I agree with its aspects. I do wish to improve one or two things in the report, especially on the proposed amendment. 

Before I do that, I want to make this point: Terrorism, as we know it in the contemporary world today, is the biggest menace and threat to humanity. There is a big tendency in this country today to vulgarise terrorism. When people have got political differences, they use the word “terrorism” to stigmatise their opponents and even take actions that would otherwise have been actions against terrorists.

As we do make these laws, I would like us to wake up to this reality – that the biggest threat to humanity today is terrorism. Therefore, let us not take it simply and fight our political wars using the word “terrorism”.

Having said that, I will go to the law. In the Bill, under clause 3, the proposal is to introduce powers for the minister to make regulations, create offences and prescribe punishment. As the committee report rightly notes, that would be usurping the powers of this House. However, they propose a deletion of sub clauses (2) and (3). Without these subclauses, then you cannot have subclause (3) (a) and (b). You will have to delete them both because subclauses (2) and (3) are a consequence to the amendment that was anticipated under clause 3 (a) and (b), and then you revert back to the original position of the Bill, I think 32A, which just gives the minister powers by statutory instrument to make regulations that should be in conformity with the law. I will propose at the right time that you delete the entire clause 3 from the Bill.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see general support for the Bill. The motion is now that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I now put the question that the Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2015

Clause 1

MS NAMUGWANYA: Before we go to clause 1, the committee recommends a new insertion. We would like to define the word “person” as it is in our Interpretation Act, Cap 3, to mean- “a person includes any company or association or body of persons corporate or unicorporate”.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Is section 7 an interpretation section?

MR KATUNTU: If a word is not defined in any other law, then you go to the Interpretation Act. That is all. You do not have to transplant the interpretation of the Interpretation Act here. It is not necessary.

THE CHAIRPERSON: It is not necessary. It is defined in the Interpretation Act.

MR KATUNTU: It is already defined.

MS NAMUGWANYA: It is already defined but we thought that we would make it part of this. However, if that is how laws are drafted, I concede.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2, agreed to.

Clause 3

MS NAMUGWANYA: The committee recommends that clause 3 is deleted. 

The justification:

1)	It usurps the powers of Parliament to make laws in line with the United Nations resolutions.
2) 	It gives the minister powers to declare a suspect a terrorist, an act that the committee considered unacceptable.

3) 	It further gives the minister powers to direct court on the course of action yet the two arms of Government have clearly separated powers.  

4) 	The parent Act clearly stipulates the powers given to a minister to make regulations and hence there is no need to repeat them.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the motion is that clause 3 be deleted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.29
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.30
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015” and passed it with amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.30
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) BILL, 2015

7.31
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No.2) Bill, 2015” be read the third time and do pass. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, 
“THE ANTI-TERRORISM (AMENDMENT) (NO.2) ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passed. (Applause) I would like to appeal to the finance minister because you are the real owner of this problem. You should bring these Bills in good time; do not stampede all the time. 

7.33
MR JACOB OBOTH (Independent, West Budama County South, Tororo): Madam Speaker, we have just handled the Anti-Terrorism (Amendment) (No. 2) Bill. Terrorism can come in many ways including, but not limited to, overstaying in the House. (Laughter) Madam Speaker, you have mothers and fathers in this House; we are still available under your supervision tomorrow morning and we can come back here. 

If it will please you, Madam Speaker, I would move a motion for adjournment of this House to tomorrow or to any other date that we may deem necessary and expedient within your mandate. I wanted us to go back, as we internalise this Bill we have just passed. (Laughter)  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, it is seconded by the shadow attorney-general and the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

First, I really want to thank you for taking your national duties seriously; you have been here for two days but I am happy that you are willing to complete this exercise. Therefore, the House will be adjourned to 10 O’clock tomorrow so that when you go, you really go.

(The House rose at 7.35 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 8 January 2016 at 10.00 a.m.)
