Wednesday, 6 January 2016

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Your Excellency, the Vice-President, and honourable members of Parliament, I welcome you to this sitting and also thank you very much for coming back to do your national duties. 

I would like to appeal to Members to put in one extra day as there are some urgent activities that need to be completed as they have timelines. Since you are in Kampala, let us put in tomorrow as well so that we can leave you – I am just appealing, honourable members. 

Honourable members, I would also like to wish you all a Happy New Year and to thank you for the work you have been doing in your constituencies and for the country. (Applause) 

I have three areas for communication. The first one is that, I want to adjust the Order Paper to permit the laying of the reports of the Auditor-General; to permit a report on the Inter-Parliamentary Games; and to permit the Ministry of Internal Affairs to make a statement, which will come at the end of the sitting.

For my own communication, I would like to appeal to the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General over the issue of the national identity cards. There is an outcry in the countryside – many people in the population do not have these cards –(Applause)– and they are really worried that they will not be able to vote. This is a very emotive matter apparently. The citizens want their identity cards.

Secondly, we received communication from the Ministry of Internal Affairs that there may be some Members of Parliament whose firearms are licenced but not registered. The National Policy on Firearms Ammunition and Incidental Matters stipulates that no civilian firearms licence shall be renewed without such a firearm being marked. So, if there are Members who have unmarked firearms, they should take them to the Central Firearms Registry at the Kibuli Police Training School for marking and registration with all your relevant documents. So, those in that position, please, do the needful.

The other matter is about our failure to construct dams in the cattle corridor. Kamuli-Buyende-Kaliro is the cattle corridor for north Busoga but there are no dams. The old ones have silted and I think that is the same thing in other places. We need to do something about the cattle farmers in our areas.

That is what I had to communicate. Commissioner Rosemary Sseninde has something to say, and then hon. Nzoghu. Let us have Commissioner Rosemary Sseninde first.

2.54
MS ROSEMARY SSENINDE (NRM, Woman Representative, Wakiso): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

First of all, I would like to wish my colleagues a Happy New Year and success in the 2016 elections. I believe that we shall all be here to swear in together.  (Interjections) It is our prayer. 

I would like to add my voice on the issue of the national identity cards. In my district, we have a problem; people are not accessing their identity cards and to make matters worse, for those who manage to go to the district or sub county headquarters where the identity cards are, they are charged money. We want this to be clarified.

Are we supposed to pay for these identity cards? I think we need to consider the people with disability and the elderly who cannot move all the time to the district headquarters to only be told that the person supposed to give them the cards is not around and so they keep moving day by day.  

We need clarification on this matter; it is very sad because we all know that national identity cards are going to be used as voters’ cards. Many of our people have sworn not to vote if they do not have the national identity cards and so, we are going to miss our votes. 

Madam Speaker, we need clarification on this.

2.56
MR WILLIAM NZOGHU (FDC, Busongora County North, Kasese): I thank you, Madam Speaker.

For the last three weeks, my constituency has had a number of challenges but prominent among them is the issue of Hepatitis B where over 30 people died and many more are still bed ridden. There is no effort of trying to address this matter locally at the district health offices.

Secondly, in the 2015/2016 budget, we passed some Shs 10 billion to cater for such kind of emergencies. The reason I am raising this is to the effect that the district health office has not helped the people in that regard and in the circumstances, I wish to seek the indulgence of the Ministry of Health and specifically the Minister for Health to send a team – (Interruption)

MR WADRI: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I wish to thank my colleague, hon. Nzoghu, for accepting this information. 

Two and a half months ago, the issue of Hepatitis B was raised on the Floor of this House. I also remember that hon. Okot Ogong was very particular and I equally associated myself with him by saying that 14 per cent of the people of northern Uganda were currently suffering from Hepatitis B. 

The Speaker ruled then that the Minister for Health should come and give a comprehensive report to this House. I do not think that report has been given. That is the information that I wanted to give you so that what you are saying is an addendum to whatever position has already been taken in this House. I thank you.

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, I just want to seek your indulgence that you allow me allow my colleague, hon. Okupa, to give information. (Laughter)

MR OKUPA: It is very short. I thank you hon. Nzoghu. (Laughter). The information that I want to give is because Teso is one of those areas hit by Hepatitis B. The President even launched the vaccination in Ngora and we are now wondering what the launch was for if this has not expanded to other regions. 

MR NZOGHU: Madam Speaker, the affected sub counties are basically Bugwere, Maliba, Kyabarungira and Buyihira. But the issue is; where is the money that we passed in the budget that should be working on these emergencies? That is the issue in contention.

THE SPEAKER: Let the Members raise the issues then we shall want the minister.

3.00
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere): Thank you for this opportunity, Madam Speaker. I would like to wish you and the rest of my colleagues a very Happy New Year and every blessing that comes with it.

I would like to raise a concern that has to do with the non-payment of pension. The whole of last month, I interacted with pensioners who are complaining that they have taken up to seven months without getting pension, and they are really looking and feeling desperate and ignored.

I would like Government not only to give assurance because people do not eat assurance, people want money - the old people are very desperate! What is the position? Is Government going to pay these people, is there money, have they been abandoned, what is the position on the pension payment for these people? Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

3.01
MR JOHN KEN-LUKYAMUZI (CP, Lubaga Division South, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Beyond what has been articulated on the issue of national identity cards, there are greater constitutional issues which need clarification. For example, under Article 59(1) of the Constitution, every citizen of Uganda of 18 years of age or above has a right to vote.

The right to vote is a fundamental right because Ugandans cannot claim to be the source of power if they cannot command voting. Because of this command, the Electoral Commission (EC) recently published the national voters register. Ugandans last voted in 2011. They have not been issued with fresh voters’ cards to date. The EC says that those who hold the national identity cards shall vote even if they are not on the national voters’ register.  

Madam Speaker, can the national identity cards be used as a voter’s card without the backing of the law? As we speak now, this is a mere supposition; there must be a law to back up that right. Otherwise, you cannot speak out of speculation and I believe we have an Attorney-General. He must know why I am concerned about this particular point.

My concern is that the Government of Uganda has a duty to take action after knowing that the Electoral Commission is not doing enough. I have a source of information, Article 59(3) of the Constitution, which reads as follows: “The state shall take all necessary steps to ensure that all citizens qualified to vote register and exercise their right to vote”.

You cannot tell us that those who do not have a voter’s card will seek for a national identity card. Where is the law that gives that mandate?

Right now, in the villages there are many people who are missing national identity cards including my wife, Mary. (Laughter) When they go –(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, at least my wife has a voter’s card but more critical and the information I would like to give to hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi is that, if you look at a district like Wakiso, which stretches from the islands beyond Entebbe and you tell people that you have taken the identity cards to Wakiso, when there is no public transport on Lake Victoria, when there is no public transport between Entebbe and Wakiso, then you are disenfranchising those people!

The second piece of information is that we have a register that was constructed without reference to the law because the mandate of the Electoral Commission is to maintain a register; they have always had a register, which they simply discarded and adopted a document from the National Identity Card Registration Centre and turned it into a register.

In the process, they ended up deleting registered voters from the register - the register that we knew - without references provided for under the law. A case in point is my own party President, the hon. Norbert Mao, who has at all material times been registered as a voter and a presidential candidate in 2011. Without following the process of removing a person from the voters register, he found himself missing and the excuse –(Interjections)- I thought the hon. Byabagambi has the courtesy of listening to me before talking. Without reference to the law, he was removed from the register simply because the Electoral Commission discarded the register and adopted a document without reference to the law. 

I think we need clear answers as: 1) How did the Electoral Commission adopt this document from the National Identity Card Registration Centre? 2) What processes did they follow to delete people’s names from the old register? 3) Where did they get the mandate to discard the entire register made in accordance with the Electoral Commission Act?

MR KEN-LUKYAMUZI: In conclusion, these are the challenges: The first one is that as we speak now, people have not received their national identity cards and they are trying to receive them with pain. There is no responsible authority giving those cards out save for NRM cadres who choose at their will whom to invite to collect those cards -(Interruption)

MR BYABAGAMBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We know very well that these identity cards were taken to sub county headquarters. First was at parishes; now, they are at sub county headquarters and they are being issued either by a Gombolola chief who is a civil servant or chief administrative officers, who are also civil servants. 

Is it in order, therefore, for hon. Lukyamuzi to allege that the public servants are NRM cadres?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, of course, NRM cadres do not have labels. So, I do not know how hon. Lukyamuzi established that they are the ones issuing; but I have established from my place that people have been told to go to the district headquarters from all those villages. That is what I want the Attorney-General to help us with, because people have to spend money, go to the headquarters, bounce, go back home, put in money again. Attorney-General, this is now a very important issue; is it EC or is it the Ministry of Internal Affairs? Who is in charge of the identity cards?

3.09
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I think as far as the identity cards are concerned, the registration of persons is the responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the minister is here. However, I would like to address those issues, which have been raised by my friend hon. Ken-Lukyamuzi. He normally smiles to me but this time he was very serious meaning the matter must be serious.

Let us first start by looking at the bigger picture before we go into the nitty-gritty and legalities. In any case, our Constitution is very clear in Article 126 that technicalities should never defeat the interests of justice.

Having said that, when we had to spend a lot of money on the project of registration of persons we came here with a law and we passed it. One of the objectives of having an identity card, among many others, which are stipulated in that law we passed here is that that process should also help in the electoral process to avoid cheating, multiplicity of voting and many other things.

The key element in an electoral process is the register of voters. You need not even have a voter’s card for as long as you can be identified as the right person on the register in order to vote. Therefore, that identity card is for purposes of identification. Those are legal by the way. It is for purposes of identification but it is not required for purposes of voting. In order to vote, you should be on the register and you should be identified as such. (Interjection) Let me finish please. 

Having said that, therefore, in order to vote, one must be a citizen. Therefore, if a person says, “Please, are you a citizen?” Do not say you are being asked because of anything else but it is for purposes of identification. However, for purposes of voting, you should be identified as the right person to vote and that you are on the register. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have asked for an explanation from the Government; let Government give it to us. Let the Minister of Internal Affairs tell us about the identity cards.

3.12
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to clarify on issues raised by Members regarding the issue of issuance of the national identity cards. This is being coordinated by the National Identification Registration Authority (NIRA).

As of today, 86 per cent of Ugandans who registered, that is about 16 million Ugandans, now have their national identity cards. (Interjections) Yes, we have the records.

The balance of about two million people that have not picked their cards are mainly within Kampala central region. This is the data we have and as to why it is only being done especially upcountry at district level, it is because initially, this exercise started at parish level and was widely publicised, after that we went to sub county level and cards were still being distributed though some remained. The balance of those who have not received cards especially up country have to pick them from the district offices.

I know now Members may request that we go back to the sub county level or parish. Madam Speaker, we have over 1,000 sub counties and over 5,000 parishes. Now, to re-do this exercise at parish level, it requires resources and the budget we have does not provide for another exercise of issuance of identity cards at parish level. We are only trying to do that at district level to cut on costs because we have already spent a lot in the distribution exercise -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Thank you, honourable minister, for accepting this clarification. What I would like to know from the minister is, what happens to the staff that are employed to distribute and do other incidental work at the sub county level if it is about costs? Those same staff that have been distributing these cards are still employed by Government. Therefore, what are they doing?

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable colleague, for seeking that clarification. What I can say is that issuance of these identity cards requires some level of training and the exercise has to be paid for. The people deployed to do this must be paid even if they are there. We have to recall them and pay them before they can again carry out the exercise. That is the challenge we have. We do not have any more resources to perform this exercise at parish level.

Madam Speaker, the issue hon. Sseninde raised that members of the public are being charged for the national identity cards. This is unlawful and any such person should be arrested. I talked to the director NIRA and the technical staff there, I raised this issue when I got the information from hon. Sseninde and another colleague. I requested them that they should continue with spot checks on their staff because what they are doing is not within the law. They are supposed to issue these cards free of charge and they must be issued to anybody who walks in immediately.

However, taking into account the communities we live in, some of these are bound to happen but we are aware and action is being taken about that. Thank you, Madam Speaker, and honourable colleagues.

MR MWIRU: Madam Speaker, I rise on a procedural issue. While the Attorney-General was responding, he was running away from the cardinal responsibility of the issue, which had been raised. The mandate of the Electoral Commission falls under the Attorney-General’s Chamber.

What is in issue is that we raised this matter before but there was no law under which the Electoral Commission was retiring the old register. For instance, in my constituency, I had 41,000 voters who are on the old register. Now, there are 26,000 and some were removed from the register without any due process of the law.

The procedural issue I am raising is whether it was procedurally right for the Attorney-General to run away from explaining the legal issue which concerns the discarding of the old register, which is the cause of the problem now. There was no law under which people were removed from the register given the mandate of the Electoral Commission, then you send it to internal affairs.

The big problem is not with internal affairs. People will pick the cards but under which law did the Chairman Electoral Commission discard the old register?

THE SPEAKER: I wanted to appeal to the Minister of Internal Affairs. This matter of identity cards is not as simple as it looks. The information I got from five of my villages is that when cards were brought, some people had wrong photographs or the data was not coordinated. Therefore, it is not that the people refused to collect their cards in the parishes. There were issues with those cards. 

It is the state which must ensure that the cards are taken back. It is not good to tell someone to pay Shs 20,000 to get a boda boda and go to Kamuli town to be told, “Come back tomorrow.” It is our duty. 

Those people are really angry over those cards. We must find a way. What are the Gombolola chiefs doing? They are paid. Parish chiefs are there. Why don’t they do the issuance? It is a very serious issue, honourable minister.

MS AKOL: Madam Speaker, I share with you those concerns, especially for those Members of the community whose names were either misspelt or whose cards did not have photographs. Personally, I also collected my identity card just about a week ago because there was an error, which had to be corrected before I could get it back at the district.

What I will do now, Madam Speaker, is to go back and consult with the responsible authority. Definitely, the responsible authority must find a way of giving these people an opportunity to pick these cards that were not issued because of errors at the nearest points. 

At the same time, as stated by the Attorney-General, whether you have the national identity card or not does not bar you from participating in the national voting exercise. What matters is that you must be on the register. (Interjections) That was the press release that was given by Engineer Kiggundu. I am only quoting Engineer Kiggundu, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Can we hear from the Minister of Health on Hepatitis? 

MR SSEGGONA: With your permission, Madam Speaker –

THE SPEAKER: You do not have my permission.

MR SSEGGONA: I rise on a point of procedure. Madam Speaker, Parliament is the constitutional organ of this Government, which carries out the oversight function. In raising these questions that we have been raising, we are carrying out our constitutional duty of oversight over Government. 

By not concluding on the way forward – not even a single resolution – and we leave it to the minister to go and do the consultations; recalling that we were recalled from recess for a single day sitting; without assuring ourselves of how we are going to be informed on the steps taken by the minister, is it not procedurally correct that we should actually resolve and urge Government to correct the errors raised by Members in terms of: One, correcting the register? Two, ensuring that the cards are distributed and revisiting the questions before the election date?

What is going to happen to these people? You extract the register from the same data which you are using to print the cards. The cards already have a problem. What assurance do you have that the register has no problem? 

Is it not procedurally correct, therefore, that we make specific resolutions?

THE SPEAKER: Attorney-General- 

3.24
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fredrick Ruhindi): Madam Speaker, I beg the indulgence of the House. Most of the issues, which are being raised of a technical, legal or other nature were addressed here when we debated the Registration of Persons Bill. Thereafter, when a statement was even demanded from the Ministry of Justice, which was presented here, most of these issues were debated. Of course, there may be some of us who are not satisfied. That is granted. We have gone through that long process. 

As I speak, the process of compiling, updating and displaying the national voters’ register was concluded on 11 May 2015 and 11 August 2015. When you talk about changing the register, that would entail another extra step of first displaying because you cannot correct without displaying. (Interjections) Please, listen to me. The voters register is now concluded -(Interruption)

MR SSEGGONA: Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the Attorney-General for giving way. While I agree that there are processes and processes are fundamental, the display of the register or the conclusion of that process is not a statutory matter. These dates are set by the Electoral Commission. The errors we are pointing out are errors of the Electoral Commission. We are not talking about removing people from the register. We are talking about those people that were left out by or at the negligence of the Electoral Commission or human errors of the Electoral Commission.

Secondly, we are talking about the issuance of cards, which is equally not a statutory matter. There is no statutory time set for the distribution of these cards. These matters are as simple as that. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we get an assurance from the minister that you are going to come back to us tomorrow and tell us what to do about these cards? When are they coming as well as the points of distribution?

MS AKOL: Much obliged, Madam Speaker. I will come up with a detailed report on the issuance of these identity cards tomorrow, without fail.

THE SPEAKER: Minister of Health on Hepatitis? 

3.26
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (PRIMARY HEALTH CARE) (Ms Sarah Achieng): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to say Happy New Year to colleagues. 

What hon. Nzoghu has raised is an issue that we have talked about on the Floor of this House. Let us recall that when we were discussing the budget for this financial year, we indicated to you that for us to vaccinate all Ugandans who do not have this virus yet, we needed over Shs 200 billion.

Madam Speaker, because we did not have adequate funds, this Parliament gave us Shs 10 billion. I would like to assure you that vaccines were procured with this Shs 10 billion and vaccines have already been dispatched to the selected districts, which number to about 12. I do not have the list here, but I can bring it tomorrow for the Members.

Madam Speaker, we should also note that when we were given this Shs 10 billion, we had the challenge of our shilling fluctuating yet these vaccines are procured in dollars. In a way, it has also affected the quantities that we had to procure because we thought we would cover many more districts compared to what we have managed to cover. I have just been informed that the last batch of only two districts will be distributed tomorrow. The vaccines have been procured.

The only thing I can say is that we need money for us to be able to procure vaccines to cover the entire country. We do not have all that we require. What we were given is just the Shs 10 billion. 

Otherwise, this is a big -(Interjections)- No, the vaccines are available even in private facilities and people should not die. However, for the children of this country below one year, the vaccines are available free of charge. For the adults, we have managed to procure for only about 12 districts – (Interruption)

MS FRANCA AKELLO: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to get a clarification from the minister over the money that was passed in this House to the tune of Shs 10 billion to buy the vaccines for Hepatitis B. We are told that a launch was done in Ngora District.

Madam Speaker, we kept asking the ministry when the real vaccination is going to commence or when it is going to roll out in all the districts that were supposed to benefit but nobody is giving us an answer. People are dying every day in every district, especially districts in Acholi, West Nile and Teso, which are very seriously hit by Hepatitis B.

Therefore, with the money that was passed in this House, how many districts have you covered? I am told the money is not enough to buy vaccines for everybody but at least, how many of the districts so far that were specified on the Floor of this House that are hard hit have you covered and how many are remaining and when are you rolling out?

THE SPEAKER: Let us just hear from the chairperson of the committee and then the minister.

3.30
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE OF HEALTH (Dr Medard Bitekyerezo): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker, first of all, I would like to thank this Parliament and you for working patriotically to get money from the national budget to buy vaccines, specifically, to prevent Hepatitis B from killing our people.

Issues of health are like issues of generals. (Laughter) It is because, once a disease is there and it is not treated, people will die. When somebody dies - One time, I told you here that once you die, your cells start undergoing a condition known as “apoptosis” and later on “necrosis” and you die and nobody will see you again. (Laughter)

The problem we have had is that when Parliament of Uganda gave out Shs 10 billion to buy vaccines and antiretroviral drugs plus test kits, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development could not release this money at ago. They handled this as if it was something very normal. 

Remember that when you are going to give somebody antiretroviral drugs for Hepatitis, there are some tests that we must do before we subject you to antiretroviral drugs. The drug we are using is Tenofovir. You have to do Liver Functional Test so that we can find out whether your enzymes have become very high (Transaminases). Those are the enzymes that show that your liver is not well functioning.

Madam Speaker, I wanted this Parliament to compel the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to stop releasing money in quarters. This is a matter of life. You cannot keep pretending that this is right when people are dying in Katakwi and Kasese. This is an emergency. Let us get the money and buy drugs in big quantities so that we give our people vaccines and antiretroviral drugs. 

However, releasing money in quarters in amounts of Shs 2.5 billion or Shs 3 billion - We would like this money to go to National Medical Stores and we begin immediately. Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much.

MS ACHIENG: Madam Speaker, the Chairperson of the Committee of Health has said -

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. Minister, tell us when you are going to roll out. That is all we want to hear.

MS ACHIENG: Madam Speaker, as I indicated, we did not have adequate funds to procure drugs for the entire country. The Shs 10 billion that we were given has been used to procure the vaccines for just about 12 districts and as I said before, this money, as it has been said by the chairperson of the committee, has been released to us in batches.

Therefore, we were not able to procure what we needed in the first quarter but we made the order and we had to receive these drugs. You have to know that these vaccines are given in one month, then another dose after a month and then after six months the final dose is given. This is why we have proceeded this way because we believe that by the sixth month, we shall have received the other batch of the two quarters.

Therefore, Madam Speaker, we need more funds to be able to cover the entire country. I would like to appeal to my colleagues that we have got enough test kits in the country. It is important for people to test and know their status because when you test early, then you can be put on drugs early and this will help in protecting one’s life.

THE SPEAKER: Can I ask the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to tell us how swiftly he can release this money. This is not an ordinary situation. Let me hear from the person who has our money.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, at the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, we value life and that is why we are there. We would be the last one to deny a sector’s money when it involves lives.

What happens is that if there is no specific request from a sector, then we release by a quarter. However, if a sector asks for their money, we even do what we call “frontloading”. Haven’t you heard of that? If a sector comes and says they need all their money as per the budget and our cash flow can allow us, we frontload.

Therefore –(Interruption)

MS ALASO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for letting me seek a clarification.

Madam Speaker, this matter has been back and forth and before we went for Christmas, Dr Baryomunsi also talked about the shortages of this money. He actually said that with the Shs 10 billion, we can only buy one million vials of the vaccines in which case, they were going to vaccinate probably only one district.

The issue I am raising is that Hepatitis B epidemic is becoming a national emergency. Today, you recalled us to pass loans in this House: Can we borrow money to buy the vaccines to treat Ugandans? That is what I would like the minister to advise this country on. We cannot watch people dying and we keep thinking one million vials will be enough for over 10 million people. It can never happen! 

Is it procedurally right that you advise Government so that we get a loan and vaccinate the people?

MR TANNA: I thank you, Madam Speaker, for this opportunity. I have helped two cases within my constituency. In my constituency, at a Government institution, the vaccines were available, but they had no test kits. The doctor said he suspects and we had to procure test kits from Mbale.

Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from both ministers is: I have heard honourable colleagues saying that money was secured for vaccines. How do you prescribe a vaccine on a sick person? It is like you are injecting the same germs we are trying to fight into a patient?

I would, therefore, like to find out from the honourable minister how we can vaccinate without testing? The doctor can advise but this is my own experience – (Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you very much colleague for giving way. The information I would like to give to hon. Sanjay Tanna is that the money, which we appropriated to the Ministry of Health, part of it was meant to buy test kits. They are meant to test anybody you suspect to be having Hepatitis B.

If you find the person is negative, you give a vaccine to prevent the person from getting the disease and when somebody is positive and you have done liver functional test, then you give pentavac that is, the anti-retroviral drug. There is, therefore, no way Ugandan doctors can give people vaccines when they have not tested them for Hepatitis B. The Ministry of Health should note that this is very important. It is very simple medicine. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Please, conclude, Minister. We need to find a solution.

MS ACHIENG: Madam Speaker, I thought that I was loud and clear as I indicated that we procured the vaccines together with the test kits. All the districts where we have taken these vaccines have received both vaccines and test kits and in enough quantities. I am actually surprised to hear from my colleague, hon. Sanjay Tanna, that there were no test kits available and yet there were vaccines before. These vaccines have just been delivered two days ago. The last batch is going to be delivered tomorrow, as indicated.

A few of the districts that I can recall that have received this vaccine include Ngora, Kumi, Adjumani, Dokolo among others. Those are some of the few that I can recall. Therefore, we need more funds in order for us to provide vaccines to the entire country.

THE SPEAKER: The honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development said that he only needs your request to frontload the Shs 10 billion. That is what we would like to hear. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Sister Cecilia, you do not smile these days, why? Is it because you dislike me? (Laughter) Madam Speaker, let us put it this way; this is a very sensitive and serious matter.

When I stood up the first time, I thought it was a cash flow problem but now, I see it is a budgetary problem. The minister or a permanent secretary of any ministry or a spending agent cannot request for more money than what is available in the budget.

It now appears –(Interjections)- first give me a chance and I finish my explanation –(Interruption) 

MR ANYWARACH: Before you can explain, Sir – (Interruption)

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Are you calling me out of order or you would like to get information from me?

MR ANYWARACH: I just need clarification from you.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Can you, please, allow me to finish then I will revert to you and clarify? Therefore, if it is a question of cash flow, I would like to stand before this House and request the Ministry of Health to send a requisition. Assuming that there is a balance on that budget and we frontload the funds.

If the budget is insufficient, now that you have ‘untied’ my hands and allowed me to present a supplementary once again, may I ask the sector to write to us, requesting for a supplementary funding and I will make the necessary arrangement. May I, therefore, request my colleague, the Minister in charge of Health, to ask her permanent secretary to request for supplementary funding so that this matter is sorted out once and for all?

Madam Speaker, for the timeline, if I received a request tomorrow, I can assure you –(Interjections)- no, I cannot do it in one day. I can assure you that within one working week, I will have done the needful. (Applause) 

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Madam Speaker, I was glad to hear that in the ministry, you care about life. It was a very good thing for you to say. However, what we have with Hepatitis B is a disaster. You can imagine that we have provided for a disaster fund in the budget, and we have exhausted those funds! Can’t we use that fund instead of having a supplementary, so that we can save the lives of Ugandans? 

There are many things we can cut and people will not die and take the money for treating Ugandans and save them from dying. Why do we have to consider a supplementary when we are able to find money when we cut some of the things and save lives of Ugandans, honourable minister?

However, first clarify, is the disaster money used up? We provided for that fund.

MR ANYWARACH: Thank you, Madam Speaker. My point of procedure is, we have got 112 districts. The vaccines are procured for 12 districts. I believe that those are the districts which are badly off. Annoyingly, the minister does not even know the names of the 12 districts; she remembers only three.

My point of procedure here is, would it not be procedurally right for her to mention the districts so that we get to know which ones are left out – for example, in Nebbi District, Madam Speaker, there are two villages close to each other: Nyayamo and Padauk.

We are burying people dying of Hepatitis B there every week. Would it not be procedurally right if Nebbi is not on the list, at least those specific areas which are highly infected, are given a dose of the vaccines as an emergency? That is my point.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this matter was not on the Order Paper. So, I do not expect the minister to be talking about immunisation, to look at a variety of things; it only came up as a matter of national urgency and she said that tomorrow she will be in position to table the districts. Therefore, give her time to table them and then we find a solution.

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, you will recall that we have decentralised the Wage Bill and as I have stated before on this Floor, that reform has produced wonderful results. We have virtually – not completely - cut out what we used to call “ghost workers”.

Equally so, we have borrowed a leaf and have decentralised the pension. We would like to have every retiree go back to his or her agency from where he or she retired as that was another loophole when the whole thing was put together. The delay has arisen from the fact that some people have taken a bit of time to get their papers verified. That is the only problem.

However, the good news I have is that whatever has been verified, we have sent the money to the mother institution where the officer retired from. 

Madam Speaker, if you do not mind, tomorrow I can come here with a comprehensive statement to show you precisely what we have done. All I know is that for any person who has not been paid, advise him or her to go back to the mother institution from which he or she retired, that is where the problem lies. Thank you.

LAYING OF PAPERS

REPORT OF THE AUDITOR-GENERAL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30TH JUNE 2015

3.50
MR WILLIAM NOKRACH, (NRM, PWD Representative, Northern): Madam Speaker, I wish to lay on the Table the Report of the Auditor-General on the public accounts of the Republic of Uganda for the financial year ended 30 June 2015, as follows:

    i. Annual Performance of the Office of the Auditor-General,
    ii. Annual Report on Central Government and Statutory Corporations,
    iii. Annual Report on Local Governments, and
    iv. Annual Report on the Value-for-Money Audit. 

I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: They are sent to the Committee of Public Accounts for perusal and report back. 

REPORT OF THE NETBALL AND FOOTBALL TEAM PARTICIPATION IN THE EAST AFRICA INTER-PARLIAMENTARY GAMES HELD IN KIGALI-RWANDA FROM 4TH TO 11TH DECEMBER 2015

3.52
MS JALIA BINTU (NRM, Woman Representative, Masindi): Madam Speaker, allow me to add my voice in wishing Members a Happy and Prosperous New Year. I also wish all the Members success in the forth-coming elections.
 
I beg to report on the netball and football teams that participated in the East Africa Inter-Parliamentary Games held in Kigali-Rwanda from 4th to 11th December 2015.

Madam Speaker, the East Africa Inter-Parliamentary Games Tournament took place in Kigali, Rwanda from 4th to 11th December 2015. The Ugandan team participated in a number of activities and games including netball, football, volleyball and athletics. 

I beg to report that the team’s results were as follows: 

    a) The Uganda Netball Team emerged the champion of the tournament. (Applause) Madam Speaker, allow me to recognise the good work that was performed by these ladies: The captain, hon. Winfred Kiiza -(Applause)- who is seated with us here. But I also would like to invite all the honourable ladies who participated in this tournament to stand up for recognition. (Applause) Thank you very much. Hon. Betty Nambooze, you did not participate in this tournament. (Laughter) 
    b) I would like to report that the Parliamentary Football Team emerged the first-runner up with a silver medal and I would like to recognise the presence of the team manager, hon. Denis Obua, who is with us here –(Applause)- and invite all the honourable members who participated in the football tournament to stand up for recognition. (Applause)
    c) Among the other games where the parliamentary team participated was athletics. I would like to report to this House that the women emerged the winners, especially in relays with gold medals. I would like to recognise hon. Winfred Kiiza, hon. Brenda Nabukenya, hon. Elizabeth Karungi, hon. Mariam Nalubega and hon. Harriet Ntabazi who won gold medals in athletics. (Applause) 
    d) Also in athletics the men emerged the second-runner up with silver medals. Allow me to recognise the following honourable members: Alero Tom Aza, Kenneth Kiyingi, Odonga Otto, Nulu Byamukama and Denis Obua. 
    e) Madam Speaker, as it has always been the Uganda Parliamentary Netball Team won the golden hand. Our very own, hon. Sarah Netalisire emerged the best shooter -(Applause)- and this is the golden hand that we won. (Applause)
    f) Also the best volleyball player of the tournament came from our team and that was hon. Winfred Kiiza. (Applause) Further, we also won the golden boot and this was won by hon. Patrick Nsanja; he was the best scorer in that game. 

Madam Speaker, whereas we were supposed also to participate in golf, I would like to report that the Uganda Parliamentary Team did not participate in that game just because of shortages in resources. We did not train partly because we were busy in campaigns. We request the Office of the Speaker and the Parliament Budget Office to adequately allocate resources for these activities. 

We also participated in volleyball and our women volleyball team emerged number three. We appreciate the support from the Office of the Speaker and that of the Clerk, Members and staff of Parliament which enabled us emerge winners in this tournament.

Madam Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table the Golden Trophy won by the Uganda Parliamentary Netball Team. (Applause) I beg to lay. 
 
Madam Speaker, I also beg to lay on the Table, for record purposes, the photograph of the Ugandan Parliamentary Netball Team. I beg to lay. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I thank you and wish everyone a successful year. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Jalia Bintu. I also thank the parliamentary sports teams – both the men and the women but the women are specifically excelling; it has been a struggle to win the netball tournament but we congratulate you. 

We also thank our football team for continuously remaining in the news for doing good work and with resources we shall expand the games and also the capacity. Thank you very much.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE BUDGET COMMITTEE ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR FY 2016/2017 – FY 2020/2021

4.00
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish the Members a Happy New Year and a prosperous one too.

Madam Speaker, I beg to present the Report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial year 2016/2017 to 2020/2021.

Madam Speaker, it is a lengthy report of 74 pages and in two parts. I am not going to present the entire report as I believe that Members have had two weeks of recess, and have probably been able to peruse it.

Madam Speaker, in accordance with the provisions of articles 90 and 155(4) of the Constitution, sections 9(1) to 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 and rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, we are mandated to, among other things, critically examine Government budget estimates and make recommendations for general debate in the House as well as commenting on any policy matters affecting ministries under their jurisdiction.

In compliance with the above provisions, Madam Speaker, I beg to present a report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the fiscal years 2016/2017-2020/2021 for consideration and approval by the august House as required by section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015.

On 16 December, 2015, Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Executive complied with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 (PFMA) by laying on the Table the National Budget Framework Paper for the fiscal years I have just mentioned and the Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance. 

As I mentioned, the report is in two parts: The first part is our comments on the Government Medium Term Macroeconomic Plan, Medium Term Fiscal Framework, Policy Measures and Indicative Revenue Framework. The second part is on the sectoral committees’ observations and recommendations made thereon.

My presentation will be on only part one.

Madam Speaker, the committee would like to note that the National Budget Framework Paper is consistent with the NDP II (National Development Plan II) and reflects its key strategic objectives. Specifically, the commitment to increase the stock and quality of strategic public infrastructure has been given priority as reflected by the increasing share of the development expenditure in the Government budget. 

Government is proposing to start implementing the NDP flagship projects, like the standard gauge railway, oil refinery, oil related infrastructure in the Albertine region, and a number of new roads and electricity transmission projects. All these have been reflected in this framework. These projects are in line with the Vision 2040 and the EAC Monetary Union Convergence Criteria. 

However, the National Budget Framework Paper falls short of meeting all the requirements imposed by section 9(4) of the PFM Act, 2015. The law requires that the National Budget Framework Paper shall indicate the actual, estimated and projections covering the previous two financial years, the current financial year and the next five financial years and indicate in respect of each year, the following economic variables:

    (i) The average and year end gross domestic product,
    (ii) The rate of inflation (average and year-end),
    (iii) The rate of employment and unemployment,
    (iv) The average and year end exchange rate,
    (v) The interest rates, and 
    (vi) Money supply.

However, the current National Budget Framework Paper does not indicate projections for money supply, exchange rates, rate of employment and unemployment and interest rates.  Therefore, the committee’s efforts to scrutinize the macroeconomic variables and to assess realism and reliability of the projections, consistency and validity of the variables, were constrained.

The Certificate of Gender and Equity Compliance of the National Budget Framework Paper was laid at the Table by the minister, as per the requirement of the PFM Act, section 9(6). However, the committee notes that the country lacks baseline gender compliance indicators upon which compliance can be premised. Government should conduct a baseline study, which will guide compliance assessment for future National Budget Framework papers and budgets.

Madam Speaker, you recall that the PFMA talks about the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility. This is still in a draft form pending finalisation and consideration by the Tenth Parliament.  The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility must include a statement of measurable fiscal objectives subject to parliamentary oversight, fiscal policy operation guidelines and fiscal reporting requirements. So, from the financial year 2016/17, fiscal policy will be underpinned by the five-year Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, which will help to strengthen accountability, transparency and stability of Government’s fiscal policy framework.  

However, the committee notes that in its current form, the submitted draft Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is short of the requirements of the PFM Act, 2015.  It is expected that the final Charter of Fiscal Responsibility will be ready by May 2016.

On the Medium Term Macroeconomic Outlook and Indicative Revenue Framework, Madam Speaker, allow me go straight to the real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth as has been projected in the National Budget Framework Paper.

Real GDP Growth

The committee notes that although the economy expanded at five per cent in the financial year 2014/15, this was less than the 5.8 percent that was projected by NDP II in April, 2015 

The current projection, however, revises downwards the overall NDP II growth projection from an average of 6.3 per cent to 5.94 per cent for the medium term.  

The downward forecasted growth rate could be justified by the prevailing tighter-than-expected monetary, credit and fiscal stances in the economy, attributed to the unexpected foreign exchange depreciation pressures and inflation in the first half of the financial year 2015/16.

The growth projection in the financial year 2015/16 will further be affected by factors related to the upcoming elections, which fuel speculations as political campaigns intensify. The uncertainty surrounding the general elections usually affects foreign direct investments, private investment decisions, general production and tax collection efforts. However, consumption spending generally increases. On the annual inflation, consumer prices are affected by both domestic and external factors whose details I may not go into. 

However, I would like to talk about unemployment. The committee notes that despite the stronger economic growth reported each year, unemployment keeps increasing, among both the graduates and drop-out youth.  

Agriculture has remained the main source of household income in the rural areas. Although the youth have tried, without adequate support, to engage in non-agricultural household enterprises to supplement household income, such enterprises are not sustainable without sufficient empowerment and affordable sources of financing.  

In addition, the absence of domestic light manufacturing machinery, retooling and skills transfer for value addition technologies and agri-business besides the access to reliable markets – all these are still constraints. 

The last time a manpower survey was conducted in Uganda was in 1987. Over time, Parliament has been recommending that Government carries out a comprehensive manpower survey to ascertain the gaps to inform public policy. 

In absence of this information, youth in Uganda may not take advantage of employment opportunities in the EAC region. 
 
The committee recommends that Government should come up with a deliberate programme for re-skilling of the unemployed youth to turn them into innovators and job creators, especially in the light industry and service sectors of the economy.

Exchange rate projections

The committee observes that the exchange rate depreciation pressures started around January 2015 and persisted until October 2015. Between June and September 2015, the shilling depreciated by 20 per cent against the US dollar. 

External factors that mainly contributed to currency depreciation pressures include a weaker demand for Ugandan exports, less favourable terms of trade and the tightening of global financial conditions. 

Domestically, the upcoming general election uncertainties have weakened investor confidence as political campaigns intensify.  

The impact of a persistently depreciating currency in Uganda on growth is negative given that – Madam Speaker, I am being rudely interrupted by hon. Barnabas Tinkasiimire – (Interjections) - this is still the Ninth Parliament. 

THE SPEAKER: Order, Members. 

MR LUGOLOOBI: The impact of a persistently depreciating currency in Uganda on growth is negative given that the real exchange rate depreciation gains are eventually eroded due to the large pass-through to domestic prices in form of inflation.  

The committee is concerned that inflation reduces real incomes, increases real interest rates as the monetary authorities tighten money supply to contain inflation. 

Depreciated currency makes imports of intermediated goods more expensive hence affecting domestic production and aggregate demand. No exchange rate projections have been indicated in the National Budget Framework Paper and the reasons have been mentioned.

Balance of payments

The committee notes that in the previous four financial years, the current account deficit (including grants) has been at an average of eight per cent of GDP. 

However, the current account deficit is projected to widen further to an average of 12.8 per cent in the medium term; this is not good.  

The projected widening current account deficit is on account of the lower export demand, weaker tourism receipts and the anticipated public infrastructure investment with high import content. 

Imports are expected to grow from the previous average of 30 to 34.5 per cent of GDP in the medium term. Exports are expected to grow at a slower pace compared to imports from the previous average of 19.7 to 21.5 per cent of GDP in the medium term.

The committee observes that the current account deficit will be financed externally by higher concessional loan inflows while preserving the official reserves at four months of imports cover and public debt at comfortable levels.  

Medium term fiscal framework

On this, please allow me to comment on the revenue related issues. The committee notes that total revenues and grants are expected to increase from 15.8 per cent of GDP in financial year 2015/16 to 16.6 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2020/21. 

Tax revenue is projected to improve from 13.3 per cent of GDP, in the financial year 2015/2016 to 15.8 per cent by the financial year 2020/2021. Non-Tax Revenue is projected at an average of 0.36 per cent of GDP in the medium term.  

Grants are projected to drop from an average of 1.37 per cent of GDP, in the previous three years, to an average of 0.8 per cent of GDP in the medium term. This is in line with the country’s overarching goal of self-reliance. 

In the medium term, therefore, the framework assumes some dismal oil revenues at an average of 0.05 per cent, as the requisite infrastructure to support oil production is not yet in place. The graph there presents the projected Government revenue, expenditure and overall balance as percentage of GDP - see Figure 2.

The committee observes that Uganda’s efforts to raise the tax revenue to GDP ratio has been hampered by the large informal sector, tax evasion, tax holidays or exemptions to investors and lack of proper accountability of the non-tax revenue.  

The committee notes with concern that besides the Republic of Burundi, Uganda’s tax revenue to GDP ratio is the lowest in the EAC. At the end of the financial year 2014/2015, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Burundi reported tax revenue to GDP ratios of 20.9 per cent, 17.7 per cent, 15.9 per cent and 12.9 per cent respectively.

The committee notes that in the medium term, tax administration will be a key driver for domestic revenue enhancement. In particular, Government will institute measures targeting sectors that currently contribute a large amount to GDP but less to tax effort like the agriculture, construction, hotels, real estate and education sectors. 

The committee recalls that the NDP II envisages some improvement in domestic revenue mobilisation (excluding oil revenues), in the medium term. These gains will arise from minimising the use of non-standard VAT tax exemptions, which have compromised the effectiveness of tax collection. 

If neglected, these exemptions are estimated to reduce Government revenue by one per cent of GDP. 

In addition, the exemptions also complicate tax administration and increase the risk of non-compliance thereby costing Government about six per cent of GDP in foregone VAT revenue annually. The committee recommends that Government reviews and resists temptations to grant tax exemptions.

The NDP II also envisages that there will be increased efforts in domestic revenue mobilization, particularly focusing on raising corporation tax revenues, widening the VAT coverage and improving efficiency of tax collection. In this regard, the committee recommends that Government urgently institutes measures to substantially improve revenue collections in the medium term, including those proposals that are outlined in paragraph 33.  

The committee recommends further that efforts to ease tax administration will include measures to eliminate ambiguities within the tax laws so that compliance can be enforced by Uganda Revenue Authority.

Madam Speaker, allow me to go to the risks to the medium term macroeconomic outlooks. I will skip most of these paragraphs and hope Members will find time to read them because they are very important. Let me go to the risks in paragraph 43.

Domestically, the major risks to the framework stem from the excessive expenditures fueled by the political campaigns, which is likely to result into inflationary pressures. Other risks include: The supplementary expenditure pressures arising from unforeseen contingencies during and after the general elections; the El Nino weather conditions, which will affect food prices; risks relating to the lending rates as a result of monetary tightening  hence constraining the private sector credit, and capacity constraints to timely execution of public infrastructure projects and complex commercial and legal aspects surrounding the Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the oil sector, causing delay of the planned investment.

The external risks stem from the regional unrest and insecurity concerns; declining commodity prices; lower demand for exports; and lower gross in key trading partners.

The committee notes that uncertain global financial conditions further spill over from lower global liquidity prompting capital outflows. The pace and tightening of the normalisation of the US monetary policy could also pose major risks to the macroeconomic framework.

Relating to the revenue mobilisation, the committee observed that any divergence from the macroeconomic assumptions underpinning the Government fiscal framework, will pose a risk to revenue mobilisation efforts. In order to mitigate these risks, Government reforms in public finance management and other structural reforms should be fast-tracked and fully implemented to ensure the effective use of available resources, and reduce delays in procurement and implementation of projects. We have also identified a number of tax compliance related risks and all those are contained in paragraphs 47 and 48.

Resource envelope for the financial years 2015/2016 and 2016/2017

The committee observed that the projected total resource, excluding appropriation-in-aid, for the financial year 2016/17 will increase by 6.29 per cent owing to an increase in domestic revenues and improved external budget support.

However, growth in resource inflow will not match growth in the economy. Resource inflow will reduce from 21.8 to 21.1 per cent of GDP in the financial year 2016/2017.

The committee notes that discretionary resources available for Government expenditure will grow by 3.2 per cent from Shs 11.05 trillion in 2015/2016 to 11.411 trillion in 2016/2017, an increase in available resources of about Shs 353.93 billion.

However, as a share of the GDP, discretionary resources will drop from 13 to 12.2 per cent of GDP over the same period.

The committee observes that besides the additional resources that could be mobilised from tax collections, Government should take advantage of anticipated savings arising from one of the activities in the current budget, at the same time institute cost-saving efficiency measures to raise more resources for reallocation to other priorities. For instance, resources will be saved in the financial year 2016/2017 from the general elections related activities; the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) census; presidential swearing-in ceremony; and costs related to the Pope’s visit to the country. Table 2, depicts the summary of the resource envelop for the financial year 2015/16 as compared to 2016/17 in billion shillings.

Sectoral priorities for 2016/2017 at the macro level
 
The committee notes that the budget strategy for financial year 2016/17 will be guided by the NRM Manifesto (since this is the party in power), Vision 2040, the NDP II and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Therefore, the budget allocation will focus on priorities identified in paragraph 52 from I to VII.

The committee notes that the total budget is projected to grow by 9.54 per cent in 2016/2017. However, as a share of GDP, expenditure will remain static at 21.5 per cent of GDP. The highest growth in allocation will be in favour of social development that will be a growth  of  109.91 per cent, followed by agriculture growth of (53.7 per cent), lands, housing and urban development (40.92 per cent), tourism trade and industry (33.74  per cent), accountability (22.63  per cent), and interest payments of 21.6 per cent.  

On the other hand, there will be declines in the following sectors: Information Communication Technology funding, reducing by 66.8 per cent; public administration, reducing by 33.5 per cent; energy and mineral development, reducing by 16.76 per cent and the legislature by 14.1 per cent.

The committee notes that, as a share of GDP, the agriculture sector will receive the highest increase followed by interest payments, accountability and works and transport. The losers include energy and mineral development, public administration and security.  

In nominal terms, the largest share will be allocated to works and transport sector, and the least will go to ICT. All this is summarised in table 3 on page 16. 

The committee strongly recommends that Government should re-establish the co-operative movement and the Co-operative Bank as an integrated institutional framework to support the sector with affordable financing, motivated production and means of access to profitable markets.  

The committee recommends that the agricultural sector should spearhead effective disease control, research and dissemination of research findings, without surrendering such responsibility to the whims of external financiers.  

The committee notes the increased allocation to the works and transport sector, which demonstrates Government’s commitment for investment and maintenance of the strategic infrastructure in the transport and energy sectors. 

The committee recommends that Government should address the absorption challenges and inadequate readiness of project implementers. 
Government should re-examine its pre-project development processes, monitoring and evaluation systems with a view of catalysing and fast-tracking the implementation of core projects.  

In addition, Government should create a sustainable maintenance programme for the stock of completed infrastructure, for instance, by establishing regional construction and maintenance units, with sufficient equipment to keep roads in good condition. Figure 3, presents the sectoral allocations in a simple illustrative manner and you can note that the works and transport sector takes the lead with over Shs 3.7 trillion, and ICT is the least with Shs 22.1 billion.

The committee notes that the share of the health sector budget allocation is projected to increase from 6.9 per cent to 7.1 per cent in order to continue improving on the health sector indicators.  

The committee recommends that Government should rehabilitate and at the same time address the inadequate operational and maintenance costs in the referral and general hospitals.  
In addition, Government should find a solution to the inadequate number of health workers, accommodation facilities and motivational packages at all levels in the health sector. 

The committee observes that the allocation to the education sector will increase but that it is still low, given the numerous challenges in this sector such as the lower-than-predicted primary school completion rates, slow progress in improving the education outcomes such as proficiency, numeracy, literacy and skills development. 

The committee recommends that Government should address issues related to titling of institutions’ and schools’ land, salary enhancement for teachers in schools and the non-teaching staff in public universities.

The committee notes the increased allocation to the social development sector, which is in response to Government’s commitment for the empowerment of the youth, women, people with disability and other interest groups in vulnerable conditions.  

The committee recommends that Government should review its strategy for empowerment, with a view of creating effective community mobilisation systems, efficient management and sustainability of the programme.  Government should manage all the different interest groups under one ministry and in turn create a revolving fund for sustainability.

The committee notes the enhanced allocation to the tourism, trade and industry sector as another commitment to the NDPII for developing the tourism sites and infrastructure in order to attract more tourists and exploit the tourism potential in the country. 

The committee recommends that Government should diversify the tourism products, strengthen tourism research and planning, intensify tourism promotion and marketing, and undertake further tourism development of key sites.  

In addition, the committee recommends that the sector should fast-track establishment of industrial parks in all regions to create jobs and to attract and retain foreign investors. The sector needs to offer adequate support towards small and medium enterprises to generate employment. 
To facilitate trade, Government needs to strengthen domestic commercial trade at local government level, and export promotion services at the international and regional levels.

The committee noted the increased allocation to the accountability sector aimed at fast-tracking the re-establishment of the Uganda Development Corporation as the custodian of Government industrial establishments, and to re-capitalize Bank of Uganda for enhanced management and supervision of the financial sector in the economy.
 
The committee recommends that the sector should improve on tax education awareness, equity, compliance and administration to mobilise sufficient revenue and finance the national budget.

The committee notes that although the energy and mineral development sector allocations will reduce, the sector is challenged with shortage of counterpart funds towards the Rural Electrification Project, which aims at expanding coverage of the national grid to 30 per cent by 2020. 

The committee recommends that Government should fast-track the Rural Electrification Project to facilitate provision of electricity for social-economic transformation in an equitable and sustainable manner. In particular, Government should avail counterpart funds to the tune of Shs 120 billion to facilitate the implementation of donor projects under the Rural Electrification Agency for the financial year 2016/2017.

Adjustment to the Resource Envelope and Re-allocation

On 23 December, 2015, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development submitted a revised resource envelope and some proposals for sectoral re-allocations. The revision was formally presented to the Budget Committee for scrutiny, with the permission of the Speaker of Parliament.  

The minister identified some additional resources, amounting to Shs 818.7 billion, arising from anticipated additional revenue in the financial year 2016/2017 and some savings from the one-off activities in the financial year 2015/2016 budget. (Refer to Annex 1).  

The Ministry made proposals of critical priority areas that required urgent funding in order to boost production and to promote efficiency in the delivery of services.  

After scrutinizing the proposals the committee made the following recommendations:  

One is that Uganda Police should retain Shs 51 billion out of the Shs 60 billion that would be saved from the one-off police activities in the financial year 2015/16 budget. The justification for the retention of the Shs 51 billion by the Uganda Police is that, the funds would cater for the post-election policing activities to ensure security and stability.  

Two, funds for the one-off Internal Security Organisation (ISO) operations and External Security Organisation (ESO) classified expenditure in the financial year 2015/16 budget, should be retained. The justification is that these two votes have in the past had critical funding gaps – as we have noted above -for their effective operations. So, the Shs 7 billion for ISO and Shs 10 billion for ESO should be retained.

The total adjustment in the proposed additional resource amounting to Shs 68 billion, be offset from the salary and pension shortfall of Shs 172.3 billion, hence adjusted to Shs 104.30 billion. The justification for the adjustment is because the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Public Service are still in the process of cleaning up the salary and pension payroll.

Four, Shs 5 billion should be re-allocated from NAADS (seed provision) and to prisons for breeder seed multiplication and cotton production for breeder seeder multiplication in order to supply more seeds to NAADS and increase cotton production. 

The justification for the re-allocation is to increase the stock of seed that are locally generated and save NAADS from importing seeds, some of which has been established to be of poor quality. All the adjustments to the National Budget Framework Paper (NBFP) and the committee recommendations are shown in Annex 1.

Madam Speaker, in the financial year 2015, we had some unfunded priority items, which the House felt should have been funded. However, in absence of resources we could not fund them in 2015/2016. It was decided that they would have a first call on the resources for 2016/ 2017. These are summarised in table 4 on page 20, and we request the ministry to give them due attention. I want to note that some of them have been given due consideration.

In conclusion, efforts were made during the preparation of the National Budget Framework Papers for the financial years 2016/2017 – 2020/2021 to ensure are consistent with Vision 2040, the National Development Plan II and the Sustainable Development Goals.  

Nevertheless, in some areas, the National Budget Framework Paper fell short of the requirements of the PFM Act, 2015, which we believe can be rectified in the subsequent submissions. The Charter of Fiscal Responsibility is still in a draft form, but being developed to meet the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act. We hope this will be ready in time for the Tenth Parliament.

The National Budget Framework Paper emphasises the macroeconomic objectives of achieving and maintaining real economic growth of at least six per cent per annum, maintaining core inflation close to five per cent and headline inflation within single digits, maintaining foreign exchange reserve cover of at least 4.5 months of imports, maintaining a market-determined real exchange rate and attaining monetary and economic convergence and compatibility within the EAC.

The objectives of the proposed budget for the 2016/2017 financial year are to continue supporting the maintenance of macroeconomic stability and at the same time stimulating economic growth and reducing the country’s infrastructure deficit.  The coordination of the monetary and fiscal policies will be paramount to the success of the budget objectives.

Madam Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, I am not presenting part two, which is our observations on the sectoral plans and the proposed expenditure. However, it is an integral part of this report.

I have talked about annex 1 that includes the proposals and our recommended adjustments in the figures, which we request the House to approve.

I beg to move that the report of the Budget Committee be adopted and the National Budget Framework Paper be approved thereto with the said improvements. I beg to move. (Applause)

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson of the Budget Committee.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for the financial years 2016/2017 to 2020/2021. 

I also beg to lay on the Table the minutes of the Budget Committee meetings that were held to produce this report.
 
THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable Chairperson and the Budget Committee. Of course, I need to thank the sectoral committees for their inputs into this process. We thank you for that.

Let us have one or two comments, starting with hon. Kabahenda.

4.42
MS FLAVIA KABAHENDA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyegegwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and the committee for the report.

Arising out of the honourable members’ and the stakeholders’ efforts, Government announced a phased national roll-out of the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), to 40 districts over the next five years under Expanding Social Protection II. It was supposed to begin with 20 districts to commence in the financial year 2015/2016 and consequently five districts for the rest of the financial years up to 2019/2020.

Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development even went ahead to enter into a memorandum of understanding with the development partners that they would provide money every financial year. As they had agreed, in the financial year 2015/2016, Government was supposed to provide Shs 9 billion; Shs 17.59 billion for the financial year 2016/2017; Shs 29.15 billion in the financial year 2017/2018; Shs 40.34 billion for the financial year 2018/2019 and Shs 52.92 billion in the financial year 2019/2020.

Madam Speaker, the National Budget Framework Paper does not seem to honour what the Government agreed with the development partners. They have provided only Shs 9 billion out of the Shs 17.59 billion that they had agreed to provide in the MTEF and the Budget Committee is not making mention of that.

Government has backtracked on their commitment and the inability of Government to provide what they agreed upon is going to jeopardise the planning for the 20 districts and also the 15 districts that are piloting it. The inability to assure elderly persons that the promise that is being made by politicians is never entrenched in the national budget process is a political risk. This is in our manifesto as the NRM and we should be seen to honour what we say as politicians and as Government of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, I would like to call upon Government to make a concrete commitment to roll out the Senior Citizens Grant in line with the undertaking that they made to provide Shs 17.59 billion in the 2016/2017 financial year budget.

I also call upon the Government to provide a roadmap for SAGE roll-out beyond the 65 districts that were mentioned in the National Budget Framework Paper. I would like to call upon the honourable members of Parliament -(Member timed out.)

4.45
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee for a job well done. The committee was very elaborate in scrutinising the National Budget Framework Paper.

However, I am concerned- On page 3 of the report, you can see the committee’s observation of the fact that the National Budget Framework Paper falls short of the requirements of the Public Finance Management Act 2015 – Schedule III – in relation to very important projections in the paper, namely; projections on inflation, unemployment, interest rates and money supply to mention but a few.

These projections lie at the core of the figures that we eventually pass in our budget. This is because subsequently, you are going to see other projections such as revenue growth and tax collection growth. Eventually, we can see Government projecting to enhance funding for key sectors such as agriculture, but not necessarily projecting key variables.

Madam Speaker, it is very difficult in an economy like ours that is facing oscillations in key variables to fail to project and convince us that you are actually budgeting prudently. I am very concerned that for an economy that is private sector-led, you are unable to give an indication of the rate of inflation or you are unable to give an idea on interest rate. These oscillations are the basis for one’s interests in our economy. I do not know why the committee did not insist on having these projections as a basis for subsequently accepting the idea that we shall commit more resources here and there.

I believe this was a very big oversight on the part of Government or the ministry not to make available these critical projections. I believe it will also be a mistake on the part of Parliament to accept the projections and the National Budget Framework Paper without making available these key projections, Madam Speaker.
	
Madam Speaker, you will observe subsequently that we are being advised that the economy grows at a particular rate, but one of the key challenges in our economy currently is unemployment. We are voting funds for ministries and departments without an idea on how they are going to help us create jobs for our people and overcome this critical macroeconomic challenge.

Therefore, this job is incomplete without this key projection being made available by the ministry. We shall be planning in the dark and this is how we will end up planning without proper projections. We end up with white elephants of projects because we made the wrong projections and, therefore, were unable to project how much we need in terms of external funding and local revenue. 

It is very funny we are being advised that local revenue collection will grow, when we are unable to project inflation and exchange rates. When the private sector faces a crisis, and commercial banks arbitrarily change their rates and we are unable to help our people in the private sector - the Government too was saying that it was not in position to project and predict proper planning! 

No serious investors, other than gamblers can invest in an economy without statistics. You will not see any serious external investor coming to invest in an economy devoid of reliable statistical projections in as far as economic growth, inflation and exchange rates are concerned. Therefore, for me the job is incomplete -(Member timed out.)

4.50
MS ALICE ALASO (FDC, Woman Representative, Serere) Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Budget Committee. Madam Speaker, I have four issues that I would like to highlight for the attention of this House:

The question of enhancing teachers’ salaries is something that the Budget Committee should have really paid attention to. The Shs 133 billion needs to have been found because throughout last academic year, this country went through an educational crisis. There was complete instability in the sector and there was no teaching and learning.

The promise was that this financial year, money will be found. I really hope that Government would pays attention to enhancing teachers’ salaries; a commitment that Government made and, therefore, ensuring that our children are able to learn when they go to school.

The second issue, Madam Speaker, which is very shocking, is the question of oxygen for life support in all our regional referral hospitals. It is an unfunded priority. How can it be that oxygen becomes an unfunded priority? This is not fair -(Interruption)

DR BITEKYEREZO: Thank you much, Madam Speaker and honourable colleague for giving way. The information I wanted to give hon. Alaso is that this Parliament, last year, allocated Shs 5 billion for this year specifically to procure oxygen plants for the regional referral hospitals.

Right now, as we talk, the process of procuring the oxygen plants has reached the –(Interjections)- it was advertised, people have submitted their tenders and they have closed bids. Within very few months, we shall be having oxygen in all Government hospitals. I thank you so much.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, we have gone further in this budget to provide an additional Shs 1.5 billion for an oxygen pipe line to Upper Mulago, which is old Mulago. Therefore, additional resources have been made available.

MS ALASO: That is helpful information because I was seeing it as an unfunded priority. Maybe, I am reading the wrong thing. However, that is very helpful information for me.

Madam Speaker, the other thing that I would like to highlight is, while the committee talks about additional resources to Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries, I notice that it is an increase from the 2.6 per cent last year to a 3.7 per cent and that leaves agriculture more or less at rhetoric level. If we are really thinking of the crucial role agriculture plays in this country, we must find real money.

We have always talked about the 10 per cent. What declaration was that? We have talked about that and it has never happened. Therefore, while we are saying there is an increase; an increase from 2.6 to 3.6 is not going to change the situation in the agricultural sector.

Agricultural institutions in this country like the National Semi-Arid Resources Research Institute (NaSARRI) of Serere lie in a dilapidated state, and there is no renovation and research going on and scientists are not funded adequately. Therefore, an increase from 2.6 to 3.7 is more or less rhetoric in this sector and we need a serious commitment.

Lastly, Madam Speaker, I read something about post elections or elections related inflation. All of us should know that in this country, the spending during elections is normally engineered by the ruling party. They are the ones who release money and I do not know from where.

Therefore, instead of the committee coming here to lament, Government should make a commitment that they are not going to release unnecessary money. That will stop this unnecessary inflation after elections. It is something that can be managed. It is not coming from Mars, but from Government. Government should control that and the economy will be a little more stable. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, this is the report of the whole House. Our committees have participated in it. We should not really spend too much time on it. We instructed the sectoral committees to sit and present on their sectors and I believe they sat before submitting.

4.56
MR KENNETH LUBOGO (Independent, Bulamogi County, Kaliro): Madam Speaker, thank you very much.
I am going to comment on three issues: Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), the agricultural tax which is targeted by the Government in the medium term and then the additional resources.

Madam Speaker, I am perturbed and I keep asking myself what method Government follows when rolling out the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment. We know that initially, there were 15 districts, but over 40 or 50 more were captured to make it 65. How did this happen? 

When this idea was being conceived, there were statistics. Poverty indices were available and the first districts were taken based on the poverty indices that were available. At the time they captured those indices, there are districts which had not been born. For example, Buyende and Kaliro, among others, were not there. At the time, Kamuli was captured to be a very poor district at that time, but now when you look at this report, you will find that other districts that have been included in the roll out, Kamuli is there, but the others like Kaliro where I come from have been left out.

When we go to Mayuge, where the minister comes from, it has been captured. Therefore, what criteria are you following to roll out other than influence?

Madam Speaker, we cannot afford to kill this programme. I have been involved in it and we have moved to districts to study the effects and we know it is very important. However, it is bound to fail because Government is not committed to it. We can find money from this budget to support this programme.

Madam Speaker, we have Shs 50 billion which has been allocated for procurement of hoes and yet the elderly cannot dig but they eat.

There is also money for the youth but the elderly have not been catered for. There is an allocation for the women too, but the elderly have been left out. I, therefore, think that we can get some of the money allocated to hoes and re-allocate it to support the elderly so that we realise this programme and cover the whole country. (Applause)

Just about a year ago, in this Government, we had a case in London involving the oil case; capital gains tax case involving Heritage and Tullow, among others. Government of Uganda won this case and I believe that there was a tax remitted to Government which was almost to the tune of a trillion shillings or somewhere close to that -(Member timed out.)

5.00
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. We in the education sector are cursed. First of all, as hon. Alaso has stated, the 15 percent for teachers was a commitment and I would like to assure you that there is no good learning in schools because of that.

Secondly, we constructed 20 technical schools in Uganda and in the Committee on Education, we stated that since they say that there are no funds, these technical institutes must commence in January; they are ready to start and there is no money allocated for the tutors and the lecturers in these institutes.

As for the loan scheme; we gave funds to students to go and study using that money; yet now they say that there is no money. The question is: How will those students continue when there is no money? What kind of budgeting is this?

The committee of education is wondering why they gave you their recommendations and you left them out? You must know that there is nothing we can do in this country without educating children. These students who are already on the loan scheme must continue; we are even supposed to allocate more funds to them.

We, as Members of Parliament, know what we are facing in our constituencies; request for fees and the like. The only solution is the loan scheme. All that is not given consideration - and we gave all these matters as the Committee on Education. We stressed the fact that those three issues need to be given attention.

How do you expect technical schools that are ready to commence to facilitate the tutors and lecturers without money? Madam Speaker, through you, Mr Chairman, hon. Amos, look at me please because I am talking to you as a chairman and you have read the report. You have – 

THE SPEAKER: You are supposed to be addressing the Chair. Do not intimidate the chairperson of the committee.

MR SSEWUNGU: We have to look for these funds, Madam Speaker. We cannot leave technical schools for which we even took loans and then say that, there is no money and they are to spend the whole year until the next budget, yet the structures are already in place. That is my worry and I am not happy with all our requests from the Committee on Education not being given consideration. It is as if we are here for religious affairs.

MR LUGOLOBI: Let me inform you that the money that you are talking about, the Shs 133 billion, is actually in the budget for the increment in salaries for teachers. I, therefore, do not know where your problem comes from. 

In the loan scheme, you are talking about the fact that the money was provided and is already in the base. The Ministry of Education will tell us what they are going to do about it, but the money is there.

MR SSEWUNGU: Let us admit that he has answered me, but go to the report; it is not reflected. My chairperson, is it there? The vice-chairperson can give evidence, she is also there. We did not have any allocations in these areas. I was also adding to what hon. Alaso has already stated - you answered her about oxygen. You did not talk about the Shs 133 billion. Teachers must get their money – (Member timed out.)

5.06
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Madam Speaker, there are some legal gaps which ought to have been highlighted. I am surprised that they have not been highlighted. First of all, the committee was right to point out that the National Budget Framework Paper was not done in accordance with section 9(4), schedule III. We should have recommended that the ministry should rectify this, which was not done.

Secondly, under section 19(1), the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 clearly states that the minister is required to publish a pre-election economic and physical update, not later than four months before the polling day of the general election. 

In this case here, the polling day is 18 February 2016; that is next month. The country has not yet received this publication. This is a very serious gap which touches on the law.

Thirdly, Madam Speaker, the attention of this House should be drawn to the issue of the interest rate payment. If you look at the schedule, you will find that the interest rate payment is actually the fourth highest demand on the budget; the highest is works, followed by energy and education.

On the interest rate,  if the interest rate is going to demand the fourth highest on the budget and we are just taking it for granted and moving on, it means we are not conscious of how much money we are borrowing and not utilising and yet, we are again burdening the population; burdening our own treasury. I, therefore, think that this is a matter which we need to deal with and find a solution. It is a very serious matter. 

Madam Speaker, on the issue of transport and works, I am surprised that we have talked about Standard Gauge Railway and Water Transport, but I do not see it addressed in detail in this National Framework Paper. If it is not done so here, where is it going to be taken care of in the National Budget Framework Paper? This is one of the issues that should have come out very clearly.

Another issue that needs to be highlighted in the National Budget Framework Paper is the issue of AGOA. This Parliament has passed a resolution and has taken a firm decision that AGOA be wound up and the money that was given to it last year, was to wind up their activities.

In this National Framework Paper, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is asking for more money for AGOA and Parliament has not been told why it has not wound up and why the Government is asking for more money. There is a problem.

On the issue of agriculture, we cannot claim to be representing the poor and yet many of us are voted to this Parliament by farmers and yet they are never taken care of in our budget. We are all very conscious of the Maputo Declaration of the AU; it requires us to give them 10 per cent. This is not being taken care of. Giving three per cent to agriculture is a shame. Last year, it was 2.7 per cent and this year it is a mere three per cent –(Interjections)- please let me finish and I will give you time to clarify.

The most disturbing is the issue of Cotton Development Authority, which was given Shs 10 billion this year through the supplementary budget. If that was done at all, Parliament would like to ask why; and in the National Budget Framework Paper, more funding is being given to the Cotton Development Authority to buy cotton for the private investor.

We have not even addressed the issue of Foot and Mouth Disease and yet we are putting aside Shs 20 billion; this year Shs 10 billion and in this particular National Budget Framework Paper Shs 20 billion, for a Government agency to buy cotton for the private investor – (Member timed out.) 

Let me conclude, Madam Speaker. This is a matter which must be addressed. As a farmer, I do not think it would be fair for this Parliament to pass a loan to be managed by a Government agency, to manage a private investment. That cannot be allowed.

Finally, Madam Speaker, on education, three universities were approved and we passed them in this Parliament, namely: Lira, Soroti and Kabale and they are nowhere in this National Budget Framework Paper. How are you going to fund them? You have to tell me.

We agreed and negotiated with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development that LC IIIs should be a mirror of LC IVs and Parliament, and that from this year LC IIIs should be paid honorarium of Shs 100,000 per month. This too is nowhere on the National Budget Framework Paper. What are we going to tell our people when LC IIIs are not being paid? What is happening is that we are dealing with these people at the lowest level. Madam Speaker, this matter must be addressed and we cannot just gloss over it.

The issue of RDCs is a very serious matter which must be addressed as well. The RDCs are supposed to monitor Government projects, but they have been turned into para-military political apparatus in our respective areas. I think this Parliament needs to re-define the role of the RDCs, and I would wish that Parliament should not just gloss over this matter.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

MS ALASO: Madam Speaker, I seek guidance. The chair should help me; it looks like I am reading a different report. I am reading this report on page 40 from where I raised the issue of Shs 133 billion for teachers’ wages and the committee also made a recommendation concerning the same. Now, I hear the chairman saying that that has already been provided for. 

Can I procedurally be guided, which part of the report should be ignored for me to be able to contextualise the debate? I would like to be helped.

THE SPEAKER: We shall ask the chairman to make conclusive remarks in which he will respond to that; let us first hear from others.

5.11
MR ABDU KATUNTU (FDC, Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and the entire committee for this report.

I note with concern the recommendation of the committee on page 23, regarding the National Physical Development Plan. There is no country that can talk of useful development without a National Physical Development Plan. We just have to look at our own history; even during the time of the colonialists, you go to towns that ended up being regional centres like Jinja, Tororo, Mbale, Kamuli, Arua, Fort Portal and Kabale. They were really planned towns with proper housing estates, sports facilities, commercial centres, roads and security lights.

What is happening these days with these mushrooming districts, they were just developing – they are no trading centres; they are urban slums and we have pressures of rural-urban migration. Many young people are coming to the cities and towns, which do not have any plans at all. Pit-latrines are being built on main streets, schools and petrol stations together with all at tenant risk. Really, how can we say that as a country today we do not have a National Physical Plan? 

When I look at my brother, the minister responsible for it, I just feel sorry for him. What have you done for the five years you have been seated in that ministry without a physical plan? What do you do –(Interruption) 

MR MIGEREKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Katuntu for giving way. He is indeed raising a very important matter that we need physical plans for all the emerging urban centres including Idudi, Busesa and so forth. However, due to budgetary pressures, we have been moving in a phased manner –(Interruption)

MS EKWAU: Madam Speaker, the Ministry of Lands and Physical Planning is one of the least funded in this country. It is one of those chocking - and we expect this House to garner support for that ministry so that it performs better and puts the country on another mark. Is the minister in order to defend an indefensible position and yet we are here trying to mobilise and help him to get resources for his ministry? 

THE SPEAKER: I think the minister is trying to mobilise this House to assist him get more money so that towns like Idudi, Busesa and Kitgum, among others, can get plans. 

MR MIGEREKO: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for the guidance. The fact of the matter is that, we have been in dire need of prerequisite resources in order to be in a position to produce the plans at the required pace. 

Our appeal to the House, therefore, has been that more resources be provided so that we can be in a position to anticipate the new pressures that are coming up in the different parts of the country, put these on paper and come up with plans that will guide everybody. I would like to thank the Member for raising this and even hon. Florence Ibi for her order which was walloped.

MR KATUNTU: Thank you very much and I would like to thank the minister for the response. But you see, I am just reading the report. The report talks about your need - that you need Shs 8.7 billion to develop this plan and this money has not been provided for; so, here is a country calling itself independent without a plan and all they need is less than $2 million equivalent to Shs 8.7 billion.

I am sure the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development also has a small trading centre or city which needs to be planned. Madam Speaker, we now have a big problem in Kampala; when you look at the original Kampala and its plan, it has been rendered basically another village. We should be looking at the Greater Metropolitan Kampala which includes: Wakiso, Mukono and so forth. We need to plan for a major capital city. 

No wonder during the Constituent Assembly (CA), a distinguished CA delegate was talking about shifting the capital from Kampala to Nakasongola because the Rt Hon. Third Deputy Prime Minister saw at that time -(Laughter)- I think the country had realised that we could no longer absorb the population, so we needed to plan.

Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, there is a bigger problem with physical planning. 

Madam Speaker, if you go to page 58, this is something I really know very well - as of now, court awards are Shs 477 billion; but the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development is providing a paltry Shs 9 billion! At this rate, if you divide Shs 477 billion by nine – anybody who knows mathematics can assist me – it will take 40 years to clear court awards, without those that are starting tomorrow; and most of these people  are business people.

Madam Speaker, people have suffered at the hands of the Government misdemeanours and they need compensation; they have gone to court to seek justice and they need Shs 477 billion. Today, they are providing only Shs 9 billion yet businesses are collapsing. Some of these people took up loans to engage in business with Government and Government defaulted on payment; they have gone to court, paid lawyers and after judgments, hon. Matia Kasaija thinks this is not a priority. So he picks only Shs 9 billion out of Shs 477 billion. You are killing people’s businesses, hon. Kasaija. People who sought justice are going to die without being paid. What do you do?

Lastly, I look at the legal costs being paid to private lawyers. Moreover, these are engaged by Government and they are being paid billions of shillings. Meanwhile, the state-attorneys handling Government cases are paid peanuts. We have raised this issue over and over again – not that the lawyers in private practice are the best; not that they are better-educated than the ones you have. You pay Shs 2 million to a Government lawyer to defend a big case and then for a small case, you pay a private lawyer Shs 1.5 billion – like the one my colleague was raising of London and so forth. Honestly, you are killing the morale of Government civil servants – people who wake up every day to work for Government and save taxpayers’ money. Thank you.

5.20
MS SAFIA JUUKO (NRM, PWD Representative, Female): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also join others to thank the committee for drafting this report and I would like to seek clarification on part one, paragraph 11 of the report, where the committee is noting that there is complete absence of the gender and equity guidelines, leading to the development of the gender and equity certificate.

I really understand the Equal Opportunities Commission has developed a checklist and indicators to that effect. They have used those indicators to grade sectors as to how they have performed. I know defence and gender ministries were graded among the best sectors. I would like to seek clarification from the committee as to why they are saying that Government needs to undertake another baseline survey to come up with those indicators.

Secondly, I also want to comment on table No.4 of the report, under “Unfunded Priorities”. Madam Speaker, year-in and year-out, we have been crying for increment of the disability grants. Since it was started, it is Shs 3 billion for the entire financial year for the whole country. However, for the other sectors like the youth, you will find that just one district like Kween receives Shs 2 billion per financial year for the Youth Livelihood Programme.

At least if there would have been a mention of the disability grants being under “Unfunded Priorities”, we could be getting hope that one day it would be considered; but nothing is mentioned about the disability grants. Thank you.

5.24
MR XAVIER KYOOMA (NRM, Ibanda County North, Ibanda): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also thank the committee for the report. Whenever we are in the budgeting process, the constraint is always the resource envelope, because activities are always many while the resource envelope is small.

I thank the committee because on pages 7 and 8, it is clearly stated that considering the countries in the East African Community Region, it is Uganda whose tax revenue to GDP ratio is always low. Actually, it is clearly stated that Uganda’s GDP ratio in the financial year 2015/2016 is 13.3 but for Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda, for the financial year 2014/2015, it was 20.9, 17.7 and 15.9, respectively.

They have even projected that we need about six years for us to get where Rwanda is.  They have even gone ahead to identify some of the bottlenecks: They say we have a large informal sector; there is tax evasion; we have a lot of tax holidays and exemptions; and there is lack of proper accountability for Non Tax Revenue (NTR). 

My question to the minister is: For how long shall we wait to generate enough revenue? What is our problem? We are rich and we have resources but this is an issue of management and so forth. What assurance do you give us? Do we really have to wait for six years? Even after six years, we cannot get to where Rwanda is; we need about seven or eight years to get to where Kenya is. Do we have to wait for this long -(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Thank you, hon. Xavier Kyooma and, Madam Speaker. The point that has been raised by hon. Kyooma is at the heart of transformation of this economy. Our economic model is hinged on a wrong framework. If you have a system of governance that is more of consumptive, you find that people start businesses but close after one or two years. You will not be able to raise the tax revenue to support the economy. Those are wrong fundamentals in terms of domestic borrowing, which leads to high interest rates and businesses collapsing. 

Therefore, whatever we do, we need serious reforms and the reforms will start from here – downsize the entire governance structure and put money in the productive sector of the economy. If we do not do that – whether after 30 or more years for whatever government, we shall always be complaining.

MR KYOOMA: Thank you, hon. Ekanya. Just recently, there was a statistics report that, for example, in Kampala here, the biggest percentage of taxpayers who are able, are actually not paying taxes. When we come here, we say we need money and indeed we need it; but if we do not improve on the tax revenue, we will always lament. Honourable minister, when shall we get out of this, since we have resources?

5.28
MS DOROTHY NSHAIJA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kamwenge): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I also stand up to thank the Budget Committee for the report they have presented to the House. However, I am rising on three issues: One is about the SAGE programme. It is very unfortunate that we come to this august House, discuss these issues and we think the ministry is going to implement them. I have been sitting on the Committee on Gender since I joined Parliament and in 2013/2014, they made a list of the districts that were supposed to benefit from this programme. However, since then, whenever the minister is changed, the following year they make sure that they allocate money to the district where the person in charge of the ministry comes from. It has become political. 

There is no proper criterion that has been given to us. I am saying this because it was on record and my district was among the 20 districts to benefit. It is very unfortunate that things keep changing but they do not tell us the criteria. The one that they gave us was that the indicative figures or indices that they used were for the 2002 census. To date, they have not given us a clear criterion that they are following. 

Let me give an example. In the 40 districts that they have earmarked - because according to the indicative figures or indices that they used, there were bigger districts at the time that were later divided, like Kyegegwa which was formerly part of Kyenjojo. When they identified money to be given to Kyenjojo, Kyegegwa benefited in due course. Now they have identified districts like Kamuli and Mayuge but they are leaving out other districts that were curved out of the greater districts. What criteria do they use? 

Madam Speaker, this difference of Shs 8.9 billion can be found from the Shs 50 billion that has been allocated for buying hoes. When we have our elderly people who are not going to go to the gardens to dig, why can’t we get the Shs 8.9 billion and leave the Shs 41.1 billion for hoes and then we roll out money for the 40 and add the 15 to make 65 districts?

Secondly, I would like to talk about health. The increase of 0.1 compared to the last budget allocation to health when our mothers are still dying during delivery – the maternal mortality rate is still high and we are increasing the money for this ministry from 6.9 per cent to 7 per cent – this is an addition of 0.1 percent. I really wonder. 

My people in Kamwenge are dying from Elephantiasis and we did report this some time back. When the officials came, they carried out research and also identified some doctors from Uganda to go to Ethiopia on a fact finding mission and research but there was no money. Now, out of 130 people from one sub county of Busiriba, 15 of them have died from the same disease, but we do not have treatment or anything –(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Let us hear from the Leader of the Opposition. Honourable members, you know if you just sit and expect that I will think about you – you know the procedure of Parliament that if you want to speak, you stand up.

MR EKANYA: I thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and my apologies. I would like to raise a procedural issue that this is the second National Budget Framework Paper based on this Public Finance Management Act. The Rules of Procedure in the past allowed for the National Budget Framework Paper to just be tabled here without debate and then be submitted to the President. Now under the new Act, we have put a provision that Parliament should approve and you have allowed debate for this. 

Hence going forward, I am seeking for your indulgence that we need to make a provision where the alternative government will be able to make a response.

This time we thought that this budget will be implemented by the new Government that will be sworn-in in May 2016, and that new Government is likely to be FDC and so we did not see the reason of having an Opposition response. However, for the subsequent years, we need to make a provision for whoever will be in the Opposition, so that they will be able to make a response. 

In addition to that, Madam Speaker, this is something very serious. A government that wins power always has a manifesto and this is serious across the board. The NRM and the FDC manifestos must, according to the Public Finance Management Act, be consistent with the budget. Therefore, we also need to look at the law; what time shall we be passing a pre-election budget? These are issues that your Office, Madam Speaker, needs to look at. I thank you.

5.35
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Mr Phillip Wafula Oguttu): I thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairman for the report. 

According to section 9 (4) schedule III, the National Budget Framework Paper is supposed to have or indicate the projections for money supply, the exchange rate, the rate of employment and unemployment, interest rates etcetera. These are all missing and yet all those economic variables are supposed to be clearly indicated in the report.

On transport, communication and roads, we have an on-going investigation in UNRA where we have so far heard revelations of leakages and theft of money and unnecessarily expensive costs per kilometre of our roads. It is possible that if we had the report before we did this budget, the money that we need for roads may be less or the available money can do more roads. Therefore, it is important that we take advantage of that report so that we make a more scientific and sensible budget for our roads.

Madam Speaker, Government has in the last three years talked about setting up a bank for the cooperatives. The one before was ‘killed’ by the Government for whatever reasons and yet they found it working very well. Now they want to set up one with Shs 35 billion that was mentioned at one time. 

Our shadow minister for finance presented here a Bill but he has not been able to process it because of lack of a certificate of financial implications. We are lucky that there is a court ruling and we are no longer bound by that. However, we would have seen that because these banks are very important to agriculture; we do not see any money in the budget for that bank and yet this is going to be the fourth time that you are talking about the bank and not implementing it at all.

Government has also spent money and focussed mostly on this “Nigiina” thing to do with village savings, which are not useful at all. Instead of focussing money on marketing cooperatives and production cooperatives like it used to be – the honourable finance minister knows that during our times, we grew up and we were educated with money from cooperatives because they were well managed. 

I would have, therefore, expected the minister who benefited from Kafumiro – [MR MATIA KASAIJA: “Can I give information honourable colleague?”] - You refused to take my clarification last time but you can. 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Madam Speaker, I thank you. Hon. Wafula Oguttu, I also thank you for giving way. 

Cooperatives are private enterprises and all we need to demand from Government is to create an enabling environment -(Interjections)- yes, I have been a co-operator since 1952 so I know what I am talking about. My father brought me up in a cooperative and we started our own cooperative in our village on our own initiative without anybody assisting us. Then they come together and form bigger, national and international cooperatives.

Therefore, if we have to start a cooperative bank, which I support vehemently, then the cooperatives should take the initiative and Government can come in to give a helping hand.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Mr Minister. Busoga Growers used to employ 23,000 people but it was sold by Government; the Banyankore Kweterana was a cooperative owned by private people, and it was also sold by the Government; Masaka cooperatives and West Mengo were sold by the Government; the Uganda Cooperative Bank was sold by the Government - (Interruption) 

MR MATIA KASAIJA: Order, Madam Speaker. The Government has never sold any cooperative. What happened is that the Government liberalised the market. The thriving of cooperatives in the 50s, 60s and 70s depended on monopoly. They were the only people who were buying the produce. Therefore, is the honourable member in order to tell a lie that it is Government which killed the cooperatives? Is he in order to say that Government sold the cooperatives? The cooperatives died a natural death, as a result of competition.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not think I have the facts on how they died so I will not rule on that matter. (Laughter)

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Madam Speaker. You know how they “died”. Government has what they call, “The Agricultural Credit Fund.” This is a good fund. It is a small fund so far and from what I have seen, this fund has been in one region mainly. We would have expected the minister to increase this fund such that the people of Busoga, Karamoja and Northern Uganda can also benefit from the agricultural credit facility. So far it is just in one region – it is not a bad thing and do not take it away from them but just increase that budget. We also want to borrow money and grow some of these things, which others have been growing and earning billions of shillings from.

Madam Speaker, an honourable member talked about the elders’ fund. This fund was initially an idea from the FDC manifesto and it was good for Government to accept it as a good idea to implement. We had promised to give elders Shs 50,000 and using the voters register, we knew that there were about two million elders in the country. Government chose to implement this and decided to use half of the money we had promised but also chose only 170,000 people. That is discrimination, Madam Speaker.

In Busoga, in the last five years, no elder has got a shilling from this fund and wherever we go they keep asking us as to what is happening. Some have died without getting this money. It is a debt to these elders from other areas which have not got this money. Who would have expected to roll this out now? It is because it can be done and there is money; you can do it.

There was a proposal to cut money for hoes and give it to the elders. However, I think Government can provide money for the elders so that they do not feel so cheated and discriminated against as is the case now. In Busoga, it is a big issue and so in some parts of Uganda.

Madam Speaker, the issue of health insurance; we are all aware that actually the worst performing sector in service delivery is health. Government has disregarded health centres II or changed policy on that which is okay and we have said we are going to concentrate on the health centres III. These days you are even stopping us from visiting hospitals because you are doing wonders in health centres III, and that is where we should go but these health centres III have no services because there is no medicine or they are understaffed. 

You provide to a health centre III Shs 90,000 a month; what can that money do? They can’t slash the compound, they can’t pay the guard and they can’t pay for electricity or water! This is what you are providing here. We thought you would increase this fund so that we can improve on health service delivery in our country. It is where we are performing worst and deaths have increased largely because of this poor health service delivery. 

We have talked about health insurance. They have had their health service delivery improved because the insurance takes on and they pay the providers and use the private sector to deliver the service as long as the insurance pays. Government has talked about this for a long time but has failed to implement the health insurance. What is the problem? I would have expected to see that in this National Budget Framework Paper.

Madam Speaker, the defence budget keeps on growing; it is a monster. It is always eating more monies and we are now in Shs 1.1 trillion. We are not at war anymore. Yes, it is good to protect our borders but must we have this money increasing every day and people are dying because they cannot get medicine in hospitals? Why don’t we have a revision of this budget - 30 per cent of it is classified. That is the slash fund for somebody –(Interruption)

MR SSEWUNGU: The information I would like to give to my Leader of the Opposition is that the issue of the army budget increasing annually is pertinent. They are increasing the budget but the soldiers are not getting any increment; even the privileges they used to get were big, but it was all reduced or cut.
I do not know what the 10 representatives of the UPDF here are doing about their fellow soldiers. But this issue is very important because soldiers are bound by oath; they cannot talk for themselves but they are complaining and we risk something that will explode later.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you, Mr Ssewungu. Let me summarise. It is ironical and shameful that our soldiers lived better under Gen. Idi Amin: They were better provided for; they had uniforms; they had shops; they were clean; they had better equipment yet they had very little money. However under this –(Interruption)

GEN. TUMWINE: Madam Speaker, this House is considering the budget in general but the Member on the Floor is creating the impression that the defence budget is for war. He goes further to say that he would prefer to be under Amin’s time or Ugandan soldiers would rather be under the regime of Idi Amin and have shops and all the things they were looting instead of the defence sector being for protection of life and property. He is thinking of gratifying soldiers with illegal means. 

Is he in order to impute improper motives to the whole Government of Uganda, which has been budgeting for the benefit of soldiers as the economy improves and as a percentage of the whole budget? Is he in order to wish to be under Idi Amin’s time?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think let us avoid emotive issues. Maybe there were those who were happy to be in Amin’s time but there are many who are not. Therefore, I think let us concentrate on the National Budget Framework Paper.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I said it was shameful that Ugandan soldiers were better provided for by Idi Amin than by this government. They never slept in grass thatched houses. I did not say that they were looting but they had army shops where they bought subsidised commodities, they had a better consistent uniform which was known. Therefore, I know what I am talking about -(Interruption)

COL (RTD) MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable colleague in order to continue evoking bad memories about dictatorship and brutality in this country where thousands of Ugandans died and others went into exile because of dictatorship under Idi Amin? Is it in order for a Member of Parliament to bring up Idi Amin here when we are discussing the budget of Uganda? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Leader of the Opposition should restrain himself from continuing along those lines. Please, conclude so that we can finish with the National Budget Framework Paper.

MR WAFULA OGUTTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Some facts can be bitter. However, it is regrettable that we lived under Idi Amin. 

Madam Speaker, the defence budget is 30 per cent classified. Why is it that about Shs 400 billion is classified? We do not know what it does. These are issues which have to be analysed.

The last issue I want to raise is about ICT. When the President was addressing us, he said that one of his six pillars was ICT. I used to sit on the ICT committee; I am an old man but I appreciate what ICT is and what it can do for the country. However, you have 0.1 per cent of the budget for ICT, for this priority area and this pillar on which the country is standing; there is something warped about our thinking in that. How can’t you provide money for ICT which is a pillar? I think there is something wrong. Other countries are moving forward and you cannot even budget and provide for a computer or laptop for a secondary school. 

Madam Speaker, we appeal to the Government to revisit this National Budget Framework Paper. At least cut Shs 100 billion from defence and put it in ICT so that we can have some development in this regard. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have some comments from the Chairperson of the Budget Committee and we conclude.
 
5.55
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Amos Lugoloobi): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I thank you and the honourable members for the response and for the issues that have been raised to enhance the quality of our report. We do believe that the Executive will put all these into account before producing the final National Budget Framework Paper, the basis of which budget estimates would be worked out and brought before this House.

There were certain issues that were raised and I felt that I should provide information. There were issues relating to teachers’ salaries and I responded that subsequently, we received an addendum to the Budget Framework Paper that provided for the teachers’ salaries and the increase of Shs 133 billion. 

I would like to apologise for the contradiction that appeared in the sectoral section of the report. We were in a hurry because we were supposed to present this report the other day and we did not have enough time to clean out those contradictions. The addendum came in at the very last minute to address that problem -(Interruption)

MS NYAKIKONGORO: I would like to seek clarification from you; because I have tried to read through the report but I do not see the long awaited women fund. We were interested in knowing how the Shs 50 billion is going to be spread. Is it going to be spread to all the districts or to 20 districts only as it was proposed? I have read through and I am interested in that fund. Is it also in the addendum?

MR LUGOLOOBI: That money is found in the schedule on page 71. There, you will find the money for salary enhancement for primary and secondary teachers; the presidential pledge of Shs 133 billion; and the enhancement for university teaching and non-teaching staff - someone raised that - and it is Shs 78.5 billion. That has also been found. 

The money that you are talking about is on page 72 under that schedule, annex 1, item No.8, women and youth, and the provision is Shs 100 billion. The details on how this money is going to be availed to the women entrepreneurs are going to be worked out by the relevant sector, and I think this will come through the policy statements. For now, a provision has been made of Shs 50 billion for women and Shs 50 billion for the youth.

Madam Speaker, I thought that I should also talk about the buffer stock. We were divided on this issue of the cotton buffer stock. In fact, some members strongly felt that we needed a buffer stock for other commodities just as we have one for cotton. The issue here is that following the liberalisation of the cotton sector, there have been challenges for local industries in finding raw materials during the off season to fund cotton. This is because this cotton is bought by international merchants and, therefore, if you do not protect the local industries they will not have raw materials. Therefore, the idea here is actually to maintain a buffer stock; to sell this cotton to these local industries during that period of shortage. We felt that was a good idea –(Interruption)

MS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, this is the Chairman of the Budget Committee and not a member of the board of Fine Spinners Uganda Limited. The fund he is talking about is to get cotton for a private investor. The argument of the committee is that if the Government wants to improve on production or availability of cotton, the Government has to invest in the production sector– the farmers. The Government must facilitate the farmers so that the output from farming can provide more cotton for the industry. Is he really in order to misguide this country?

The people who grow cotton in this country are the poorest of the poor. Are you going to tell me, a Member of Parliament, that I give you money to create a buffer stock, which the Cotton Development Organisation (CDO) will use to buy cotton to ensure that somebody’s private company strives to the disadvantage of the farmer? Is this honourable member in order to hurt me as a farmer by saying that the buffer stock is to justify more production when we can only get cotton by facilitating a farmer directly? 

You do not increase cotton by buying - from where? If there is no cotton, where does CDO get cotton from? If it is to import from outside then Fine Spinners Uganda Limited can import for itself. Why should Fine Spinners Uganda Limited use our money to import cotton for themselves? Why don’t they import directly? If it is Ugandan cotton, it should be us to provide that cotton through farming. Are you in order? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, can you explain what this buffer fund is about?

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the Member that we are talking about the cotton value chain. When we talk about a value chain, we talk about the various options along that value chain. The buffer stock intervention is at the level of value addition. There are interventions relating to those players at the level of value addition and there are also interventions at the level of farmers. This buffer stock intervention is to facilitate the investors in the processing of cotton. 

Therefore, I do not think that there are contradictions. We can have additional measures to support farmers, but there is no contradiction because the farmers actually need the processers and the country needs the processors. We have just explained here that we import more than we export. If we need to export more as a country from our cotton, we really need to support the value addition in cotton.

Madam Speaker, there was another issue raised about the national physical development plan, and I thought that I should provide information. In the addendum in annex 1, we have received additional resources for the national physical development plan of about Shs 3 billion. It falls short of the Shs 8 billion that was asked for, but at least Shs 3 billion has been provided. The ministry confirmed that with the Shs 3 billion they should be able to go a long way in developing the national physical development plan.

Regarding SAGE, my understanding is that this year alone Government will be able to roll out SAGE to 55 districts besides the 15 where this programme was before. I think that the minister is here and he can provide additional information -(Interruption)

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (LABOUR, EMPLOYMENT AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS) (Mr Kamanda Bataringaya): Madam Speaker and colleagues, I would like to give information. The Leader of the Opposition was talking about discrimination on the side of Busoga and Bugisu sub-regions as well as the criteria. I would like to say that SAGE started in 2011 in 15 districts as a pilot project. Four districts were chosen from Karamoja sub region: Amudat, Nakapiripirit, Moroto and Napak. In West Nile, we had Zombo, Nebbi and Yumbe. In Teso sub region, we had Katakwi and Kaberamaido. In the central region, we had Kiboga and Kyankwanzi. In the Lango sub region, we had Kole and Apac. The western region had Kyegegwa and Kyenjojo. When we approved more funds we extended to 20 more districts –(Interruption)

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, following this SAGE concept, the elderly persons were really happy that the Government had a project to help them – giving them Shs 20,000. However, some of these elderly persons are very disappointed that they do not even get this money in time. Even those districts where some of them were registered, some of them miss for three months and the money comes once.

To add insult to injury, more than 50 elderly persons who are supposed to get their pensions and gratuity in my district were told not to worry, that they would be put under SAGE. Some of these elderly persons are demanding gratuity to a tune Shs 10 to Shs 20 million. Some of them are sick and they are being told to wait for SAGE and yet they are not even on this list. I would really like the minister -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Ekanya, how can you substitute pension for SAGE?

MR EKANYA: That is how the district officials are confusing some of the elderly persons in some districts in the country.

THE SPEAKER: Follow it up. Pension and gratuity cannot be substituted for SAGE.

MR BATARINGAYA: Hon. Ekanya was giving information but I was just informing this august House and thanking the Members. We started with 15 districts as a pilot project and we have added 20, which include Kamuli, Namayingo and Mayuge. Thereafter, five districts will be added every year. My request is that you give us more money so that we roll it throughout the country.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please conclude.

MR LUGOLOOBI: Madam Speaker, there were comments made about funding for the agricultural sector. I would like to draw the attention of Members to table 3. The funding to the agricultural sector has increased from Shs 480 billion in 2015/2016 to Shs 737.7 billion. That is an increment of more than 50 per cent. It is not a small increment and I think we must start by appreciating. 

It is not easy to find more resources in this budget. Remember that the overall budget ceiling has not increased dramatically. We are trying to pick resources from within the same budget. You will also note that the security budget has actually reduced from Shs 1.6 trillion to Shs 1.5 trillion. [HONOURABLE MEMBER: “The percentage?”] – Do you want the percentage of the reductions? The figures are there; just look at table 3 and you will see the reduction.

Madam Speaker, as I wind up, I would like to thank you and the Members for all the responses. We believe that the Government should be able to produce a better National Budget Framework Paper based on the comments that we have made, particularly on the variables that have been missing in the report. We hope that the published final version of the Budget Framework Paper will contain all these missing variables. I thank you so much.

6.10
THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Matia Kasaija): Madam Speaker, I have just about two or three points to make: 

The first one is on agriculture. We have debated this matter in the House and we have said that we should add more money to agriculture. Colleagues, I would like to let you know that when we are running the affairs of the state, we have to prioritise. It is not that agriculture is not a very important sector per se, but we must look at the other sectors which support agriculture. What is more important- is it to put more money in the hands of the farmers when there are no roads and electricity? For us in Government, we believe that these other sectors which are a priority and will make the farmers get even better money and improve their businesses should be handled first.

Secondly, I heard the President recently in his campaigns say that he wants me to put aside one trillion shillings for the NAADS programme; that is agriculture. When I give facilities to people who add value like what my sister here, Cecilia Ogwal, talked about and if I facilitate an investor to put up a factory to process our cotton, coffee and beans, all that is also part and parcel of agriculture. Therefore, when we are talking about the Maputo figures in regards to agriculture, we should bear that in mind.

Minor as it may be, honourable colleagues, - I am a farmer through birth and today, and I am not a small farmer - to say a hoe is not relevant is to ignore our background. Many of our people in the rural areas still depend on hoes to produce. Even I, the so called commercial farmer, still need a hoe. [MR SSEWUNGU: “You are promoting DP.”] I am not talking about DP –(Laughter)- but I am appealing to the House to appreciate a hoe, given the current status of our economy. That is the point I am trying to put forward –(Ms Kamateeka rose_) No, I will not take the information because I would like to wind up, Madam Speaker.

Lastly, on tax mobilisation, we invested heavily in the ID project and one of the intentions was to bring in our businesses. As you have heard, the bulk of our business community in Uganda is informal, therefore catching them is very difficult. However, when we have IDs, then we would be able to know them because when they come for a service, they must produce that ID and then we would ask them for their Tax Identification Number (TIN) from the tax authority. That way, we should be able to improve our tax to GDP ratio.

I am informed that in calculating our tax to GDP ratio, we do not include the Non Tax Revenue (NTR). We are working on this and making similar comparisons with our brothers and sisters from Kenya, Tanzania and other countries in the East African Community. When we include the NTR, our new statistics should then be able to go up and become comparable. So far, we have been comparing things that are not comparable - they are not the same.

Hon. Cecilia Ogwal, the duties of the RDCs are well articulated in Article 203 of our Constitution. If any RDC goes beyond what is said in this Constitution, then that individual is committing, in my view, something that needs to be handled by the law.

Finally, I would like to thank the committee for a wonderful job. We had a very good interaction with them and they have produced a very good report. When we come up with the final Budget Framework Paper, it will be improved by their output. I would also like TO thank you, Members. I know you have a lot of things to do but your response in coming here to do our business today has been very encouraging. I wish you all the best in the performance of your electoral processes. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, thank you very much. I put the question that the House do approve the National Budget Framework Paper for 2016/2017 and 2020/2021. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR EKANYA: I seek clarification, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Clarification on what? There is no one contributing, so I do not know what you are seeking clarification on.

MR EKANYA: Madam Speaker, section 19 of the Public Finance Management Act demands that the minister publishes a pre-election economic forecast four months to the elections. This is a very important aspect to help us avoid inflation. In the last election, the country suffered inflation to a tune of 30 per cent and we lost a lot of money. This projection will guide the Government, business people and the international community, and it will even help us to measure how the Government has spent money during elections. We shall use it as a tool after elections.  

May I seek clarification through you, Madam Speaker -

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, we have taken a vote on that matter. We are on the next item.

MR EKANYA: No, it is not related to what we have passed, Madam Speaker. It is the law.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, the ministry had already raised the issue of the second reading and it is now the chairperson of the committee to give a report.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, please report.

6.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, COMMITTEE ON FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr Robert Kasule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. This is the report of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development on the Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015.

Madam Speaker, I will skip the introduction, methodology and maybe start on the key highlights of this Bill. 

This Bill is to: 

1. 	Introduce Islamic banking;
2. 	Introduce agency banking;
3. 	Introduce bank assurance, which is insurance provided by banks;
4. 	Regulate mobile banking and money transfer.
5. 	Reform the Deposit Protection Fund (DPF) which is domiciled in Bank of Uganda; and 
6. 	Access to Credit Reference Bureau services.

Committee Observations and Recommendations  

    1. Introduction of Islamic Banking in Uganda

Clause 40 introduces special provisions on Islamic banking. Currently, section 37 of the Financial Institutions Act, 2004 prohibits financial institutions from engaging in commerce, trade, industry, insurance or agriculture except in the course of satisfaction of debts due to it. Islamic banking business products such as Murabaha (cost plus), Musharakah (partnership) and Mudarabah (profit and loss sharing) are prohibited. In addition, section 38 prohibits Islamic banking products like Ijara, Istsna and Mudarabah that are conducted through the acquisition of property by financial institutions. 

However, the committee notes that provision of Islamic banking and financial products by banks is growing rapidly in many countries. The committee was further informed that currently, 11 out of the 22 licensed conventional and commercial banks in Uganda have expressed interest in providing Islamic banking products to their customers.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that a proposal to introduce Islamic banking and its products be adopted subject to the establishment of a Central Sharia Advisory Board in the Central Bank to regulate banks providing Islamic banking products. The committee will introduce an amendment at the committee stage.

    2. Introduction of Bank Assurance 

Clause 11 seeks to amend section 37 of the Financial Institutions Act, which prohibits financial institutions from, among other things, engaging in insurance. The committee observes that: 

a) Banks in many countries, including in Africa, now provide insurance services to their customers, termed as bank assurance. This is usually in collaboration with an insurance company. 

b) Allowing banks to undertake bank assurance will provide a major boost to the nascent insurance market in Uganda.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposal to introduce bank assurance to go along with Islamic banking and Islamic insurance. 

    3. Islamic Insurance

The committee observed that since financial institutions will provide and will be allowed to sell insurance products, Islamic banks will also be interested in investing in insurance products. The Sharia non-compliant insurance products will cause the Sharia non-compliant risk of loss of confidence in the general public. Islamic banks shall require Sharia compliant insurance. The committee, therefore, proposes that the banks should be licensed to offer Islamic banking and Islamic insurance as well.

    4. Mobile Banking and Money Transfer Services
 
The committee notes that the Financial Institutions Act classifies the provision of money transmission services as financial institutions business that can only be conducted by financial institutions. However, telecommunication companies have entered into partnerships with commercial banks to provide this service and because of their wider outreach they have created deeper access for the rural and the unbanked population. 

The committee, therefore, observes that:

a) 	Innovation and technology developments have led to new ways of providing access to financial services. 
b) 	The law needs to clarify clearly and differentiate between mobile banking and money transfer services. 
c) 	Telecommunication companies cannot be engaged in mobile banking. 
d) 	Money transfer services offered by telecom companies have to be regulated by the Central Bank.   
e) 	Telecommunication companies have to play a limited role in the provision of money transmission services.

Recommendation

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposal to regulate mobile money banking and money transfer services in Uganda. However, it is important to clearly distinguish between mobile banking and money transfer services.

    5. Introduction of Agent Banking

The Bill seeks to introduce agent banking in Uganda. Agent banking is commonly referred to as branchless banking. This literally means the delivery of limited scale banking and financial services outside the conventional branches to the underserved population through engaged agents under a valid agency agreement rather than a teller or a cashier. It is the owner of the outlet who conducts banking transactions on behalf of a bank. A banking agent is a retail or postal outlet contracted by a licensed deposit-taking financial institution or a mobile money operator to provide a range of financial services to customers. 

The committee observes that:

a) With proper guidelines, agency banking will offer a viable solution to increasing and expanding the outreach of financial services in Uganda, particularly in rural areas. 
b) There is need for clear definitions on who an agent under this Act should be.

Recommendation 

The committee recommends that Parliament adopts the proposal to introduce agent banking in Uganda. The committee will introduce an amendment at the committee stage.

Conclusion 

The committee recommends that the Bill be passed subject to the proposed amendments as attached in the report. I beg to move. 

I beg to lay on the Table the file which the committee used as we worked. I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and your committee. The report has been signed by the necessary minimum of one-third of the members. You are free to debate. If you are happy, we will proceed to the committee stage.

6.27
MR ABDU LATIF SSEBAGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I am extremely grateful to the committee for having finally brought the report on Islamic banking. As you may be aware, we have been yearning for this arrangement for the last four years and indeed, the benefits that will come along with Islamic banking will be for all Ugandans to enjoy.

Madam Speaker, if you look at the commercial banks that we have and you take a look at the interest rates that they charge, definitely if you are a borrower, you do not have any opportunity of really making profits from the money that you have borrowed from the bank. When you read newspapers, almost on a daily basis many houses and property are being sold off simply because of the high interest rates on the loans.

With Islamic banking, you become a partner. When you borrow, the bank and the borrower become partners. When profits accrue, they are shared and when loses are made, they too are shared. This is unlike our commercial system where the moment you borrow and things do not work out the way you expected, you must pay to the last coin.

I, therefore, appeal to colleagues here that please, let us embrace Islamic banking. The countries that have embraced it have never regretted and even here, although we had no enabling laws, some commercial banks had already started creating windows because of the opportunities that come along with Islamic banking. 

There are many banks, especially in the Arab world, that are very interested in coming to Uganda and also establishing Islamic banking. They have only been waiting for a legal framework under which they can operate. Therefore, the time is now and – (Member timed out.)

6.29 
MR MATHIAS MPUUGA (Independent, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson and his team for this revolutionary report, especially in as far as amending the Financial Institutions Act is concerned. I have only a little bit of a challenge before I fully embrace the report as a representation of the preferred amendments.

The amendments seem to cross over various other territories relating to the financial sector and when I look at the extent of consultations made, my thinking is that the consultations were limited. Some of the key sectors consulted were Bank of Uganda, Uganda Bankers’ Association and Uganda Muslim Supreme Council but I do not see the Uganda Insurance Commission, which is a key partner. I believe that these amendments could be, by infection, amending the Insurance Act and I will have to be guided on that. 

I do not see consultations that were made with the Uganda Communications Commission during the process of trying to amend that part of the Financial Institutions Act that will affect relationships between these companies and the money transfer business. I thought that this particular amendment was a big opportunity to bring all these players on board to make sure that the sector is properly regulated, because it has so many flaws and is prone to abuse. 

Otherwise, the intentions are noble. There are amendments to take care of agency banking in the narrow financial sector that we have and this could be revolutionary. However, my sense is that the committee could have done much better to widen the scope of consultations to make sure that we do not have to come back here and again be compelled to amend other Acts to be able to make them compatible with this particular amendment. I submit. 

6.31
MS JOVAH KAMATEEKA (NRM, Woman Representative, Mitooma): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think I should have raised a point of procedure. 

However, under the objects of the Bill, No.8 says something about clause 1 and it is said that the operations will be conducted in accordance with the Sharia law. To the best of my knowledge, this Parliament is supposed to put in place a law enabling the whole nation to adopt Sharia law, which has not been done. Therefore, would it be procedurally correct for us to sit here and deliberate that we can adopt Islamic banking and adopt Sharia law when we have not put in place that general legislation that the country adopts Sharia law? I have an objection to the House even debating this motion without having that enabling legislation first in place. Thank you.

6.34
MR MILTON MUWUMA (NRM, Kigulu County South, Iganga): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I rise to support the committee and also appeal to Members, including hon. Kamateeka. I have a Muslim community in Iganga and they have been pushing us to have this law in place. There are schemes they normally run where they are supposed to access interest-free loans, according to the Quran. Funders are willing to give them money but because of the lack of an enabling law, they have been missing out. Therefore, I feel that this is a great opportunity for us to help our brothers and sisters who believe in that faith to access these resources and monies. 

This is a humble appeal that we support Islamic banking wholeheartedly. Regarding the details, I can engage my friend, hon. Kamateeka, and take her through the details of how best it can be implemented so that she does not have reservations –(Interruption)

MR SSEBAGALA: The information I would like to give my honourable colleagues is that when we talk about Islamic banking, it is not only going to benefit Muslims. We have many countries where Islamic banking is operating and everybody is a beneficiary. However, it must be guided under a certain system, which is Islamic banking or Sharia.

MR MUWUMA: Thank you very much, honourable member, for the information. That was just enhancing my argument that we need to embrace and support this cause.

About mobile money, I think the time is ripe for us to help the public because mobile money dealers and agents have been fleecing communities. You are transferring money but you are at the mercy of the dealer. If your money is not delivered where you are sending it, at times following up this money is a challenge. 

Therefore, I feel that we should support this law. The timing is right; since we are campaigning, we shall also tell our people that we managed to protect them and it is one of our achievements. I rest my case, Madam Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Before hon. Isabirye comes up, I would like to inform the House that three years ago, the Muslim Women’s Association of Uganda invited me specifically to lobby me to facilitate Islamic banking. That is when I realised that for some Muslims, they cannot access credit because the principles of their religion do not allow them to borrow with interest; so they do not borrow although they want to. Therefore, I would like to appeal that we do the needful.

6.36
MR IDDI ISABIRYE (NRM, Bunya County South, Mayuge): Thank you so much, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee and the Government for presenting this Bill for consideration by Parliament. 

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Uganda is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). That means like all the privileges that Uganda enjoys from this organisation, the introduction of Islamic banking in Uganda is not only coming to help the Muslim community but all citizens of Uganda. If you look at the framework of this law, it is going to help all citizens, especially the business community. Therefore, I would like to appeal to honourable members; Islamic banking is the best way to go. 

For countries that have already started Islamic banking, they are doing very well economically. The honourable minister, Fred Omach, is not a hajji but he can tell us how Islamic banking has worked in all the countries that he has traversed.

Madam Speaker, I would like to urge you to support this law. We needed this Islamic banking yesterday and we are going to benefit a lot as a country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.37
MS SYDA BBUMBA (NRM, Nakaseke County North, Nakaseke): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to those who have spoken before and thank the committee for coming up with a good report, especially on Islamic banking. 

Islamic banking is not new in Uganda. Whenever Government of Uganda borrows money from Islamic donors, it is borrowing under the Islamic banking system because they do not charge interest; they only charge service commission. That is why funding from the Arab world today is one of the leading funding to the Government of Uganda – from Islamic Development Bank, BADEA, the Saudi Fund, the Kuwait Fund, the Abu Dhabi Fund and many others.

Madam Speaker, Islamic banking has also been practiced before with the private sector under what was called “line of leasing”. I remember when I was in Uganda Development Bank, we used to borrow money from the Islamic Development Bank and we would lend it out under what was called line of leasing, where the borrowers would share profits and losses with the lenders. Therefore, what we are seeing today is just regulating this very good banking system.

If one checked with the countries where it is operating, it is for everybody, not only Muslims. It is for the entire community. Today, we are all crying about exploitative interest rates. Banks are like Shylocks today; they charge interest but end up taking people’s assets. Many businesses have gone under and many of their properties have been taken because they charge interest even where profits are not being made. Under Islamic banking, when one is making losses, the lender shares in them and when one is making profits, they are shared equitably. Therefore, this is very fair.

On the side of the Muslims, I think it is going to save them from committing riba because the money we borrow from commercial banks with interest according to Islamic principles is riba. It is unreligious -(Interjection)- Yes, it is a sin. (Laughter) Therefore, it is going to save Muslims from borrowing sin-tainted money. Some people may be worried that it is difficult to manage but it is actually the simplest to manage because you check on each other and there is no problem.

Madam Speaker, my sister, hon. Kamateeka, was hesitant to approve Islamic banking on the grounds that we do not have Sharia law. We are not going to operate strictly under Sharia law - the Sharia law that you hear about in Sudan, which people are worried of. No, this one has got clear principles. Kenya is operating Islamic banking but they are not under Sharia law. However, we still need Sharia courts for other things and these Sharia courts are provided for under the Constitution. Therefore, what the Government has to do, I think under some other arrangement, is to establish Sharia courts, which we need for other things and not necessarily for Islamic banking.

Madam Speaker, my last point is on agency banking. Agency banking is urgently needed. Many of our rural areas are unattractive to the big banks; they cannot go and establish branches there because of the high costs involved in establishing branches. However, under agency banking, the costs of operation are very low because they will be operating through some agents and this would help to capture many of our people who do not have access to banking.

Uganda is on record for being one of the countries with the lowest rates of banking. Therefore, agency banking is going to attract many of our people to bank, thereby improving their businesses. When their businesses improve, they will pay taxes, subsequently raising our revenue. 

Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I call upon all the colleagues here to approve the amendments as presented by the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I see general support for this Bill, so I will put the question that this Bill be read for a second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

Clause 2

THE CHAIRPERSON:  Honourable members, I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3, agreed to.

Clause 4, agreed to.

Clause 5, agreed to.

Clause 6, agreed to.

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10, agreed to.

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12, agreed to.

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17, agreed to.

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22, agreed to.

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24, agreed to.

Clause 25

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, under clause 25, after 78(8) we propose to insert 78(9) to read as follows: “The Central Bank may license a biometric identification service provider for purposes of the credit reference bureaus established under section 78 of the Act.”

We also propose to insert 78(10) to read as follows: “For purposes of this section, biometric identification service provider means a legal entity established as a limited liability company and licensed by the Central Bank to compile, collect, consolidate, process and store biometric and personal identification data to identify persons, companies and enterprises for purposes of availing that data to financial institutions, micro-finance deposit-taking institutions, credit reference bureaus and such other credit providers that may have been permitted by the Central Bank under regulations issued under section 78(6) of this Act.”

The justification is that the financial card system is a key and integral part of the Uganda Credit Reference System without which financial institutions and Micro Finance Deposit-Taking Institutions (MDIs) cannot uniquely identify credit applications. The financial card is used to identify such individuals or entities using a person’s unique physical and other traits such as fingerprints as detected and recorded by an electric device system. I beg to submit. 

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that new clauses be introduced as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 25, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 26, agreed to.

Clause 27, agreed to.

Clause 28, agreed to.

Clause 29, agreed to.

Clause 30, agreed to.

Clause 31, agreed to.

Clause 32, agreed to.

Clause 33, agreed to.

Clause 34, agreed to.

Clause 35, agreed to.

Clause 36, agreed to.

Clause 37, agreed to.

Clause 38, agreed to.

Clause 39, agreed to.

Clause 40

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, the committee recommends that under clause 40, we insert a new Part XIIIA and Part XIIB as follows: 

Part XIIIA - Special provisions on Islamic Banking

Under section 115B, insert a new subsection immediately before subsection (1) as follows: 

“(1) There shall be a Central Sharia Advisory Council in the Bank of Uganda to-
    (a) advise the Bank of Uganda on matters of regulation and supervision of Islamic banking systems in Uganda;
    (b) approve any product to be offered by financial institutions conducting Islamic banking.”

The justification is that since all financial institutions carrying out Islamic banking are mandated to have Sharia Advisory Boards, there should be supervision at the Central Bank level to regulate the industry.

Part XIIB - Banks engaging in Bank Assurance Business

Under proposed section 115D, insert the words “or Islamic Insurance” after the word “bank assurance” and wherever it appears. 

The justification is that since financial institutions will be allowed to sell insurance products, Islamic banks will also be interested in investing in insurance products. The Sharia non-compliant insurance products will cause Sharia non-compliant risks of loss of confidence in the general public. Islamic Banks shall require Sharia compliant insurance. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 40 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 40, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 41, agreed to.

Clause 42, agreed to.

Clause 43, agreed to.

Clause 44, agreed to.

Clause 45, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 46, agreed to.

Clause 47, agreed to

Clause 48
MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, clause 48 - amendment to section 131. Under paragraph (b), insert a new subparagraph to read as follows: “(1b) providing for sanctions for non-compliance with Sharia principles.”

The justification is: to provide for sanctions for non-compliance with Sharia principles. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 48 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 48, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 49

MR KASULE: Clause 49 - amendment of the second schedule. In paragraph (a)(ia), insert the following: “Engage in any other Sharia compliant banking business.” In paragraph (b) (iva), insert the following: “to carry out any other function, which is compatible with Sharia.”

The justification is that the schedule was restrictive whereas there is a wider range if Sharia compliant products are introduced from time to time. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the question is that clause 49 be amended as proposed.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 49, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 50, agreed to.

Clause 1

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, we have a new definition under clause 1, amendment of section 3: 
    (a) Substitute “Musyarakah” with the word “Musharakah” appearing under paragraph (m) and wherever it appears in the Bill. We are correcting the spelling.
    (b) Substitute “Sharia’h” with the word “Shari’ah” appearing under paragraph (m) and wherever it appears in the Bill.

The justification is that the spellings as they appear in the Bill are not consistent with generally acceptable Arabic grammar for non-Arab countries.

MR OMACH: I have a further amendment, Madam Chairperson. On page 4, immediately after the definition of “agent”, include the definition of “agent banking” as follows: “ ‘Agent banking’ means the conduct by a person of financial institution’s business on behalf of financial institutions as may be approved by the Central Bank.” 

The justification is that the term “agent banking” is not defined in the Bill but is used in various sections of the Bill. Agent banking is a key concept in the Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015. I beg to submit.

MR OBOTH: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to get clarification from the honourable minister. Given the explanation of “agent banking” and now the definition, are you not divorcing the two? Your definition here says, “’Agent banking’ means the conduct by a person of financial institution’s business on behalf of a financial institution as may be approved by the Central Bank.”  

I googled the word “agent banking” and its meaning. Listen to what Google says: “Agent banking means providing limited scale banking and financial services to the underserved population through engaged agents under a valid agency agreement rather than a teller or cashier.” That backs up the argument brought by hon. Syda Bbumba. We are looking at a place like Paidha where Standard Chartered Bank is not able to go. However, they can get a Jalonyo from Paidha who does some business, not necessarily banking, but can be able to have an agreement and perform certain limited functions of that bank on behalf of that bank.

I know the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development loves the word “financial”- “Conduct by a person of financial institution business…” You are restricting and saying that this agent must be a person of financial institution business. Even those words, “financial institution business” are as vague as they sound. A person of financial institution business - I need some clarification.

THE CHAIRPERSON: What do you propose as the definition?

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, what we would prefer the honourable member to do is to say that we stay the definition as provided in the Bill and not the amended one of the minister.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, when you look at the definition in the Act, the minister is just inserting a definition of “agent banking” immediately after “agent”. These microfinance institutions have been collecting money and vanishing from the public. When you go to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, they normally tell you that these are under tier II and they do not regulate them.

Therefore, we are looking at a situation where we are going to allow these agents to be dealing with the public. While we want to create a very close relationship between the agent and the bank so that the bank is clearly bound by the acts of the agent, my understanding of the definition by the minister is that he wants to close that relationship. If we leave it as it is, it will be up to the bank to agree under an agreement, which the customer dealing with the agent has an option to look at. In case of any eventuality, the bank will come back to the agreement they have with the agent.

The way I understand the minister’s definition, it is closing the relationship so that in case the agent – (Interjection)- Maybe you should first understand because that is the starting point. The point I am making, Madam Chairperson, is that it is from that perspective that as legislators, how do we protect the public from the starting point so that in case the agent who is engaged in agent banking misbehaves, we are to look at the principal? I can now allow my good friend to –(Interruption)

MR OBOTH: My basis of clarification was that I also know about the principles of agent and principal as in law. If you are saying that you are an agent of the other, you are bound by duties of an agent of the principal. If I am an agent of the Bank of Baroda, I am bound and I have an agreement. Whatever I do is construed as an act of the principal. That is the basis, hon. Paul Mwiru. I did not need to understand more than that basic principle of law of contract. 

To me, the definition in the Bill was just enough, unless the minister had more worries. Regarding the issue of closing the gap, you cannot try by this law to change what we know about agent and principal. That is by law.

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. The argument by hon. Oboth is very clear. I think in the phrase, the minister just missed out on using the right word. It should have been phrased as, “Agent banking means the conduct of a financial institution’s business by a person on behalf…” I think that sorts out the matter. The way it was framed was really a problem of English. That is why it has brought up a lot of misinterpretation. 

From the point of view of hon. Oboth and what the minister is trying to provide, the provision was supposed to mean exactly what hon. Oboth is saying. The only problem is the way it was phrased; it causes misinterpretation in the meaning. To clarify that, just rephrase the words or the sentence. Instead of reading the way it is, rephrase it. Use the same words but rephrase it to say, “Agent banking means the conduct of financial institution’s business by a person on behalf …” and it sorts out the whole matter.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I am wondering whether there can be an agent to do service on behalf of a financial institution other than banking, say maybe just collecting your debts; I do not know. I want to know whether there is a distinction between the general agent and agent banking.

MR KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I think the import here is as a result of the business of agent banking and it will be supervised by Bank of Uganda. The new definition brings in the Central Bank as the supervisor of agent banking; that is what they wanted to tie together.

THE CHAIRPERSON: I can be your agent just to receive applications and I stop there.

MR MWIRU: Madam Chairperson, the minister is not helping the House. The minister should give a litany of how these microfinances have been disappearing with public money. In Busoga alone, we have had over five. This is why we want the Central Bank to monitor what they are doing so that they know. 

When the microfinance institutions go with people’s money and you run to them, they claim that they are under tier II and they do not supervise them. That is the only explanation that Bank of Uganda has been giving us.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Let us find a solution. What is agent banking and how are we going to define it?

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, if the minister is comfortable, we need to put a restriction so that the agents should not be money lenders who are controlled under the Money Lending Act, who are charging 30 per cent per month and have created a crisis in the country. 

Madam Chairperson, the minister in charge of microfinance came to you saying that one of the reasons as to why we have not had a tier IV Bill is because of the money lenders. They are really holding the Bill. I have done research and most of the money lenders have been agents of commercial banks. They go to commercial banks, pick money at 15 or 20 per cent per annum and then they lend at 30 per cent per month. Therefore, we need to improve the definition so that agency banking will not include a company licensed under the Money Lending Act, so that we block that clause.

MR OMACH: Madam Chairperson, in the definition of agent banking, the person includes both individuals and corporate persons and it is important that the Central Bank licenses and supervises agent banking. The definition of agent banking is really supplementing the definition of agents. They are not in contradiction. Therefore, as far as I am concerned, I think that the definition that I am proposing should stand as it is.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Therefore, you are not substituting but adding? Are you deleting the proposal in the Bill and substituting it with this one?

MR OMACH: No, the definition of agent remains as it is but agent banking was not defined, so we are defining it. Unless somebody would like to add something more to this, I believe that what we are giving is sufficient.

MR EKANYA: Madam Chairperson, I asked the minister for clarification. How are you going to make sure that a person who is licensed under the Money Lending Act is not engaged in agent banking? This is because I know so many money lending companies or individuals that just go to the bank and pick your title. They are agents and have been doing it illegally. This is a serious crisis. Therefore, I am proposing that agent banking should not include a company licensed under the Money Lending Act.

MS AKOL: Madam Chairperson and colleagues, this law has provisions for whoever wants to do agent banking. We are only trying to define agent banking. This definition says, “Agent banking means the conduct by a person of financial institution’s business on behalf of a financial institution as may be approved by the Central Bank.” Therefore, there is a requirement for approval by the Central Bank and if this requirement is there, it means that there are other issues that this person or entity must satisfy. I think we should leave it to the Central Bank to determine this.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question that the clause be amended as proposed by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, as amended, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

7.14
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.

THE CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that the report of the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2015

7.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Financial Institutions (Amendment) Bill, 2015” be read for the third time and do pass.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, 

“THE FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2015”

THE SPEAKER: Title settled and the Bill passes.

Honourable members, at the beginning I made an appeal that we keep you for just one more night in Kampala so that we can consider loan requests and the statement from the minister. I also want someone to sort out the issue of Kampala. My MPs are telling me that their posters are being removed by KCCA. We had wanted the Minister for the Presidency to come and explain the rationale about the cost of placing a poster but we have not received that. We also need information on hepatitis and the 12 districts that are being supported. 

Therefore, let me appeal to you, Members, to remain and we adjourn the House to tomorrow, 2.00 p.m. I will try very hard not to keep you beyond tomorrow. House adjourned.

(The House rose at 7.16 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 7 January 2016 at 2.00 p.m.) 

