Thursday, 6th January, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament Buildings, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al- Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFERENDUM BILL, 1993

(Debate continues)

MRS. KALEMA (Kiboga County, Kiboga):  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Motion.  First of all I am very pleased that a number of hon. Members here have actually, eventually supported the Bill, although a lot started with not being quite clear whether it was proper to support this Bill.  But with the proposals to improve on the Bill, I think, a lot seem to realise that it is quite in order to have this Referendum Bill passed and be made Law.  I will try not to repeat what a lot of Members have already said.  On Tuesday and yesterday, a number of very useful contributions were made and I do appreciate and thank all those Members who have contributed very positively.  

I would like to say mainly two things on this Referendum Bill. One is the need for the Members of this House to be involved in the determination of the Referendum rather than leaving the matter only to the Minister.  This is actually in the interest of the country because apart from the fact that this is the Legislature and it is not making it only for the time being, we mean the Law to last.  Apart from being the Legislature, ministers change and a minister to be entrusted with just making - deciding on his own that he believes there is need and that it is in the public interest, I think it is necessary for him to refer it eventually to the NRC.  I would like section 3(1) of the Bill to read like this: The Minister may, if satisfied, that it would be in the public interest necessarily so to do, with the approval of the cabinet and the NRC or it could be - I am not a Lawyer - formulated in a better way, but I would like to see the NRC included there - may direct the holding of the referendum.  This is not to contradict what we have already passed in the CA Statute where the Minister, after the consensus has failed, in Section (18) - the chairman refers to the Minister to present to the nation for a resolution through a national referendum.  

For the CA Statute  - I think this should be in order because already the CA should have debated the matter and a consensus would have failed to be reached.  But for the Law in the country for all time where the Third Deputy Prime Minister and Attorney General felt that any Minister might have reason to call for a referendum, I think in that case the NRC should be involved.  I hope I am understood.  I am not contradicting with the Law that we have passed for the CA but for the purpose of this Bill, let the whole matter be referred to the Legislature.

Two; again it is the regulations.  It is said the minister may regulate. Section 5 (1): The Minister may, by statutory instrument, make regulations prescribing the manner in which a referendum is to be held. Here I am inclined to agree with hon. Tiberondwa and one or tow others that, we should not leave the regulations to the Minister and in any case it is worded in a very weak manner.  He may make regulations, he may not make regulations but I think the regulations should be made and this House knows about those regulations and the regulations should go together with this Bill when it becomes Law so that we do not face problems later on because of regulations: Regulations make a lot of difference to the Law.  I am just learning - I am not a lawyer myself but I am just learning how much regulations make a lot of difference to the Law. The Law may seem perfect, but then the regulations seem to mess up the Law itself. So, I wish that, that should also be considered by this House and when we come to the Committee Stage, that many people will support the regulations to be made now.

Lastly, I just want to, again, express that our people everywhere are very ready to exercise the power that they hold as citizens of this country to hold the referendum.  I am sure many of you have already educated them about the referendum. I am sure many of you have already educated them about the referendum and they are ready.  At the beginning some Members thought that people would need to be educated but that is not necessary because they know all the issues and the issues that will always be debated whether for CA or later on, which will be initiated by ministers - issues that concern the people.  They are the people themselves who presented their views that we read in the 28 chapters of the Commission Report.  So, that should not be really worrying.  I just want to say I am satisfied that the people are aware and they are ready to receive any instructions about the referendum.  Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.

DR. HIGIRO (Lwemiyaga County, Masaka): Thank you Mr. Chairman. The people of Lwemiyaga wish you, Mr. Chairman, a very happy and prosperous New Year. The same wish goes to all Members of this august House.  

I am standing to support this Motion but I had joined many who have expressed the feeling that this Bill was rather harassed through and many points of value were left out because of wishing to come to a solution I will only mention some of those parts that have been left out. The Bill proposes that initiative should come from a Minister.  Already, many Members here have said that the NRC should be involved but I am also saying that if the initiative can come from the Minister, then there should be initiative coming from any citizen of Uganda.  Should there be that very important issue either from one are or in the whole of Uganda, there should be that opportunity for a Ugandan with support of a good number of Ugandans to propose that a referendum be held and this proposal could come through here, through any Member of this House.  If a Minister can initiate or if government can initiate, since we are not creating conditions for democracy - then that part should come and I think any section of Uganda should have a room and I know that there are some amendments that have been made to that effect which I hope we shall support.  

Secondly, this Bill is proposing that the Minister, having initiated also supervises and declares the result.  This is wrong; outright wrong.  I think we should have an independent Electoral Commission which once the decision is taken from here - from this House that a referendum be held, then that Electoral Commission takes over -(Applause)- and having taken over, will deal with all the matters that are concerned with all the regulations which will have been passed by this House and results will be declared by that Commission. (Applause) We do not want to go back to the history that led us to go to the bush.  We want to be going forward.  We should have a Commission supervising these referenda.  Moreover, it appears this is Law that we are really concentrating on a referendum.  I would suggest whether it is just understood or implied, that this Law supersedes all the other Laws that we have been passing. Once this is passed then that is the procedure for all the referenda in Uganda; not to have one person who can do it, another one who can do it and so on.  No, we want to have a formula that is acceptable, which even in 200 years’ time will be there.  So, let us be very careful about this Law so that we do not make it just for a moment and stop there.  

Mr. Chairman, with these points, I support the Motion and I hope those Amendments will go through and I believe the Minister - thank God - I spoke when he was already in the House.  I hope he will have taken it clearly.  Thank you very much.

MR. NABBURI (Chwekwi County, Moroto): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I would like to begin by making one or two remarks before I go into discussing the Referendum Bill. The remarks I would like to make are, (1); I would like on behalf of the people of Karamoja to thank the people of the neighbouring districts of Karamoja and the Members of Parliament from those areas for the hospitality they have accorded to the people of Karamoja who have moved into those neighbouring districts in search of grass and water for their animals. (Laughter) Mr. Chairman I would also like to convey our apology -(Interruption)

MR. HARUNA ADAM:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, when the hon. Member holding the Floor is thanking the Members - I mean the districts which gave the hospitality to the Karimojong people, the Member should know that the Karimojong when they go on keeping large heads of cattle this problem will never end.  I think it is time that they should reduce the number of cattle so that they participate  - so that they do not move but participate in Agricultural activities.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Laughter)

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am a very close neighbour to Karamoja and I would like to inform my dear Friend that while we may - I am not saying we shall welcome the Karimojong to our areas, we would like him as their representative to tell them that when they come, and they are free to move to any part of Uganda, they should behave and they should reciprocate the hospitality of the neighbouring districts by being hospitable to them.  It is on record that when these people come with or without our permission they misbehave heavily and I do not have to explain because it is already on record.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NABBURI: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the two hon. Members for the information they have given but I would like to start with the first one and say that by moving into the neighbouring districts, the people of Karamoja are learning a lot on the best way of living a civilised life and already many who have move into the neighbouring districts are carrying out a lot of trade and commerce in those neighbouring districts.  The Karimojong - (Interruption and Laughter)

MRS. KULANY: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I have some information.  While it is true that we have welcomed the Karimojong in our districts, we are only concerned about the way they are behaving, in that they are coming with guns.  Can the government also explain to us why they are free to move with guns while other citizens are not? (Applause)


MR. NABBURI: Mr. Chairman, the point raised by the hon. Lady ties up with the one that was given by hon. Atubo. As I said before, the Movement is doing a lot to educate the Karimojong on how they can live a civilised life.  The issue of guns is one condition that they government is aware about.  I do not think I have the answer to the question of the Karimojong who are carrying guns.  We have a problem of the people in the neighbouring countries who are also hostile to the people of Karamoja.  I think government has a plan to protect the people of Karamoja and eventually when they are secure or when they are guaranteed of their security, the issue of the guns will not be a big one.  

I would also like to add here that we are indeed very grateful to Brigadier Shef Ali.  He has done a lot of public relations work there.  He is doing a lot of politicisation on the people of Karamoja on how they should use the legal guns they are carrying.  What that man requires is a good team to work with.  At the moment there are some fellows who are there, who are trying to confuse the good work that the officer is doing in the region.  So, I think the issues about Karamoja are always too controversial whenever we raise them in the House.  So, now let me turn to the Bill Mr. Chairman.

I would like to say here, I personally have been either a spectator or a participant in the politics in this country since the time of Independence.  It is over 35 years now that I have either been a participant or a spectator and in all these cases we have seen things happening and this Bill which is before this House now - I think is aimed at avoiding a situation where Ugandans are reduced into a situation where they just become spectators and see things happening and do nothing.  

Hon. Nekyon the other day mentioned the 1962 Constitution. There was the issue of the lost counties.   That one was enshrined in the Constitution. Everyone who went to Lancaster in London to frame that Constitution came back, at the back of his mind, knowing that there was going to be a referendum on the lost counties.  Then there was the issue of Karamoja.  The British knew that Uganda was attaining Independence, Karamoja had been deliberately left behind by them.  They also came up with a proposal which they sold to our brothers who went to London. One of them I think was Cuthbert Obwangor.  We had also a few from Karamoja.  They said the rest of Uganda will get Independence.  Karamoja will get some semi-autonomy.  There was going to be something like Karamoja Act that will govern that region. 

Indeed at the time of Independence, there was nothing you could talk of about development in the Karamoja region at that time.  Karamoja was virtually a zoo where you needed a permit to enter. So, there was this Act that was brought to us - the people of Karamoja through the District Council. We saw it and we thought it was good.  It was good for the people of Karamoja. It was meant to uplift the standard of the people of Karamoja.  It was meant to bring about rapid development in the region.  So, the Karamoja Act was received.  Indeed within no time we saw roads, we saw schools being built, administrative units, we saw health centres.  No sooner did we learn that this august House which was a Parliament that time, that was around 1965, sat here and a few Members from Karamoja who happened to represent Karamoja in this House decided that, that Karamoja Act should be repealed. Karamoja Act was repealed and Karamoja was left as it was and left with the little development that took place; but, if he had a Law like this one that time - we as the people of Karamoja would have raised voices.  However few we would have been, we could have said no, let Karamoja Act continue so that Karamoja is developed because that time we had an administrator who  -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, thank you. I would like to inform my hon. Colleague - hon. Nabburi -who thoroughly understands Karamoja as I do, that he will find in Chapter 35; the Administration of Karamoja Act and Administration of Justice in Karamoja including jury system, it was energetically made by the then UPC/Government.  At that time Mr. Chairman, I happened with the blessings of God to be the Minister of Regional Administrations and ably gave light to Karamoja. What happened is this; all these laws were excellent. You find that they distorted an understanding of the primitivity of the people and the Minister, the late hon. Rwamafwa, who took over from me when I moved to the Ministry of Justice could not understand what Local Government means.  (Laughter and Interjection) Yes, my hon. Friend, the hon. Kirya is not here but hon. Nekyon was there. We were really Colleagues in Cabinet, shoulder to shoulder.  So, I am talking clearly the whole truth.   Now, as I said for example, like ebyaffe, we do not understand the Amendment to the effect of Article 180 of the Constitution of 1967.  

Now, we are ourselves fighting like dogs over the bone.  Karimojong are very clever.  As clever as they are - only that they have no proper environment and there is no close administration.  When I say close administration - look at the Minister - Butele, he is supposed to be in Karamoja not here.  How do they learn the desires - the desires that we want?  Because it is this House which is the highest body politic that should advise the government correctly but even they are not here.  How do they learn?

MR. NABBURI: Mr. Chairman, I am glad for the information hon. Obwangor has given.  Mr. Chairman, the problems of Uganda are only of consulting the people, there is no trouble with the Karimojong.  In 1966, there was the crisis, they call it the Buganda crisis.  Then came the 1967 Constitution.  If we had a Law like this; because the 1967 Constitution abolished the kingdoms. If we had a Law like this, the issue of kingdoms touched the majority of Ugandans, and we could have gone to a referendum and asked the people of Uganda that there is a crisis.  What do we do? But because we did not have this kind of Law, somebody, just by a stroke of a pen with a pigeonhole Constitution said the kingdoms are gone and there was chaos.  

So, for me there are those who say that this Bill is long overdue, but others say it is timely.  For me there is nothing long overdue, and there is nothing timely.  Uganda is here today, tomorrow and forever.  If in our wisdom in this House, we feel very strongly that we should have a Law like this.  We are not doing it for the movement.  We are doing it for the good of the people of Uganda, so that in future there is no dictator who can trample on this House. If he dictates we shall tell him, let us go to the people.  The people of Uganda will decide.  Even people of Uganda, with the kind of mchaka mchaka we have gone through, are also violated - we shall all take arms and fight that dictator.  (Applause)

Some of my Colleagues yesterday raised issues connected with human rights, the freedom of association and so on and so forth, but is it only this House which is to determine when the freedom of association of the people of Uganda is violated? The population of Uganda is 17,000,000.  I do not know how many of those will be entitled.  Are they not entitled to say that, look, you people in this House you are not listening to us, you have violated our rights? 

That is why I say, this Bill is very important.  Questions, which would have been difficult, have been answered yesterday.  Members were raising issues of situational bills.  Hon. Eriya Kategaya, the First Deputy Prime Minister said here that, this Bill was given to us in July last year. There was ebyaffe, and the Bill was in our hands already. But now some of us, even including myself, at the beginning - (Interjection) Oh, yes, I thought the Bill was coming because of the Ankole. But we are told the Bill has been with us for some time.  So, there is no question of it being situational, it is the people of Uganda we want to save now, this great Parliament which has shaped the destiny of this country, with the guidance of the Movement that we should have this Bill in this House, if we have to have any amendment, let us have them here.  

I now come to the issue of the Minister, deciding on the referendum. I would like, to appeal to this House that this power should not be taken from us.  In fact, even better now we are from counties which is good enough.  So, if in your own county, you cannot be listened to then where else do you go?  In 1970, UPC wanted us to have an election of one plus three, one plus three was supposed to disable all those aspirants whom UPC did not want.  I was given a Constituency in Karamoja, and then I was supposed to come to Busoga where the late Nkutu was, and then go to the late William Kalema.  I was trotting all over the place, that time I was a Secretary General, I had a vehicle but what about those who did not have vehicles? Why were the people of Uganda if we had a Bill like this at that time, it would have been better to ask the people of Uganda whether the election of one plus three would have been viable or it would have been possible.  That was just one way of saying  - (Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that even when we have got laws in place, like now the leadership of this country has shamelessly evicted Mr. Okello from his house in Nakasero without giving him an alternative accommodation, and I would also like to say that the hon. Member now holding the Floor was a very strong member of the Uganda People’s Congress and he is still.  (Laughter)

MR. ADRIKO: Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to add a word of clarification, to the point raised by hon. Tiberondwa.  It is not true Mr. Chairman, that Government -(Interruption)

MR. NEKYON: Point of order. Is it in order for the Minister, to come to make a statement when there is a Member holding the Floor whereas what he should have done was to make a statement at the beginning of the Sitting?  He cannot, under our Standing Orders inform somebody who has informed somebody else.

THE CHAIRMAN: He is not making a statement; he is just clarifying the issue. 

MR. ADRIKO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The property which was occupied by the Government yesterday, was acquired, compulsory on the 4th of October, 1991, the landlord was given adequate notice to vacate the premises.  An Assessment Officer was appointed to value the property for the purpose of compensation, the value was returned at 2,500,000 dollars; and it was to be rented, a rental value of Shs.9, 000,000/= per month.  Subsequently, there are rules, interest in this matter and valuation was done by a panel of four valuers led by the Deputy Commissioner of valuation. I think that, it is very important in view of the erroneous press information which has come out, that Members get informed.  

So, as I was saying, the valuation was done by a panel of four valuers; this valuation was further checked by three other independent valuers who coincided with the valuation returned by the panel of Government valuers.  The landlord demanded compensation of Shs.7 billion or rental of Shs.31 million per month.  This as you know is taxpayers money, and the Government had taken the proper steps to ensure that a fair and adequate compensation would be arrived at and paid. The landlord refused this and subsequently the Government had to occupy the houses because of reasons of State security.  Mr. Chairman, therefore, I would like to inform hon. Members that there was no question of shamelessly evicting the landlord.  Thank you.

MR. NABBURI:  Mr. Chairman I am glad, hon. Adriko has ably answered the issue regarding the house of Mr. Okello that was raised by hon Tiberondwa.  Now, I was also attacked by hon. Tiberondwa for raising issues or matters that were mismanaged by the party to which I belonged in the 60s. (Laughter) If we want this country to move forward we should not be blind to what happened in the past.  Definitely, we must admit that even as a party that is the UPC we made blunders. (Laughter) And if we think that we can cover them, the people of Uganda already know enough about these tricks and about these blunders in 1961/62 when we had two Elections.  Why was it necessary to have another Election in 1962? When we talk about Lukiiko, the people of Buganda elected their Representatives to Lukiiko.  Why did we grab them from Lukiiko and brought them here without asking the people of Buganda? If there was a law like this -(Interjection)- if there was a law like this the people of Buganda would have demanded that they elect their representatives directly to come to this House, but because there was no law, the people of Buganda were lured into a deal which brought catastrophe to Buganda later.  There was  -(Interjection)- in 1967 there was supposed to be a General Election and Obote as a President said, no Election.  What happened in 1971? Amin came in and this country was plunged into chaos.  I am not going to talk about the 1989 Elections; those who think that we extended our term, do not know the history.  We were elected in 1989, and we came to this House.  We found the Historicals here, and we were elected by the people; we were already here.  If at that time, we had a law like this, we would have gone to the people of Uganda and said, you have elected us from our counties, we are now here. Do you want us to continue?  They would have said, yes, definitely they would have said, yes.  

Now really coming to the Bill again, there is the issue of people who are illiterate, and I must confess here that even the region where I come from, 99.9 per cent of the people cannot read and write.  That is why somebody yesterday brought the issue of; ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ If you have to tick you say, ‘yes’ or ‘no.’  How can a Karimojong know where ‘yes’ is and where ‘no’ is? (Laughter)  These, Mr. Chairman, are some of the issues that should come out clearly in the regulations.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  My information to the hon. Member holding the Floor is, he has raised an important matter which touched me, and that, is that his people do not know how to write ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ Now, I was wondering in the fourth coming General Elections how are these people going to vote?

MR. NABBURI: Mr. Chairman, I think the Member is raising that point out of ignorance.  We have all the copies of the Statute.  We know the photos will be there, there will be my photograph, for Chwekwi County, and then Tumwwesigye also if he is contesting, there will be three very clear photographs and the people will be told, you look at the photo if you think Nabburi is the man, you put your thumb there. (Laughter) If you look at the three and you think, Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine is the man, who should represent us the thumbprint should go on his photograph.  There is no ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ So, really these are some of the things which should come up very, very clearly, in the regulations.

Finally, the issue of the Minister has stood out very, very clearly in this House, I think as hon. Mrs. Gertrude Njuba raised a point yesterday.  We cannot come here and claim to command the support of all the people in the county you represent here.  In Chwekwi, I have 40,000 people; how many voted for me in the last Elections?  Only 83 people voted for me. Now, out of the 40,000 there, may be, 10,000 can vote for Nabburi, the other 30 would go somewhere.  That is why it is necessary that referendum should always come out to determine the verdict on an issue which is crucial to the people of Uganda, and that is why we say now that this Clause which talks about the Minister on the advice of the Cabinet, you know, declaring a referendum, I think that one we should leave it to this Parliament.  We should leave it to this Parliament, let the Cabinet debate, approve it but finally bring to this House for consent.  So, Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.

MR. ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I will be very brief indeed on this subject of the referendum.  It is not clear that the majority of Members do agree that it is necessary to have a Law regulating the running of a referendum, should one be necessary.  I think most people who have talked agree on that point that in principle we all agree such a Law is necessary. I think now we have also agreed generally judging from what people have been saying, that it is necessary that the House or Parliament get involved in the decision as to whether a referendum should be held.  I think this is very necessary because you have in the House quite a good representation of opinion from the country.  So that, whatever is discussed here and it is found necessary then it is also likely to be acceptable generally in the country.  There was a question of resolutions that is to come - the Minister to bring a resolution to this House.  I think it is necessary, that in such a resolution we should also include an element of cost of the exercise so that when the House approves a resolution to go to a referendum they will also at the same time approve the expenses necessary to run the same.  So that, it is not then left vaguely that the expenses for running a referendum will be charged on the consolidated fund.  I think it is necessary that Members also know, how much, that exercise is likely to cost.  People have voiced concern about regulations for running such a referendum; and I think it is necessary that such regulations should also be exposed to considerations by a House like this.  

Now, what I am suggesting is that it might not be necessary to include in this law, regulations for running referenda is that when a resolution is brought to the House for a referendum to be held on a certain issue, then that resolution should also be accompanied with a set of regulations.  I am suggesting this because there is a possibility that not all the referenda that are likely to be held in the country can be covered under the same regulations, so that each referendum should come with its own regulations to be approved by this House.  Those are the only suggestions I wanted to make because all the other points have been covered and some of the points I have, are in my suggestion for Amendment. 

Before I sit down I would like to react to this issue that was brought to our notice by hon. Tiberondwa and reacted to by the Minister. This is a very, very serious issue.  I would like to inform you that it came to us; we considered it in our Sectoral Committee, on the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development.  We considered this issue, and the Minister assured us (and that is why we left it out of our recommendations) he assured us that everything will be done to make sure that, that house is acquired without unnecessary harm to the owner.  The matter as it stands now is very, very serious and I think it deserves the full attention of this House.  The rights of Ugandans are involved here. We are returning left and right properties of Asians of Ugandan origin and at the same time we are grabbing those properties that belong to Ugandans.  The argument that this House is in security area cannot hold water.  This gentleman applied for a plot there, and when he applied for a plot the State Lodge was already there and surely it should have -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you taking information? 

MR. ONGOM: No.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wind up because this is out of the Bill. We want to concentrate on the Bill.

MR. ONGOM: What I was saying, Mr. Chairman is that when the gentleman applied for a plot to develop that area, the State Lodge was already there, and if there was objection about security he should have been stopped; and moreover his plan was approved.  So, why was it not necessary to stop him at the stage? Now, you wait until somebody has spent a lot of money and then you take it away from him.  It is also known, Mr. Chairman, that, that house was going to be sold before the government grabbed it for 6,000,000 dollars, at least, that is what we know; and now the government is offering a 2,500,000 dollars, it is not fair, and I wonder why this is so. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.  Order, please. We are not going to discuss that issue now.

MR. ONGOM:  I think, Mr. Chairman, the point I want to make is that this is serious matter infringing on the rights of the citizens and the matter should be brought formally to this House for discussion.  That is what I am suggesting.

MR. ABU MAYANJA (Busujju County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to beg hon. Members to return their thoughts from the House at No.10 (A) Nehru Avenue to the matter before us; and I would like to begin my winding up by expressing my gratitude to hon. Members for the overwhelming support that they have given to this Bill. 

Yesterday, I think one Member, my hon. and Learned Colleague, proposed or suggested that the Bill should be referred to a Committee. Nobody else supported him but New Vision reported today, “CMs ask that the Bill be referred.”  It is amazing! Mr. Chairman, I would like to react first of all, on the some fears which were expressed about the occasion or the timing of the Bill; and I think, I will take the unusual step to inform the House, that some time in February or March last year, there was some kind of - I will not say, agitation, but movement in this House and out that the question of the referendum on whether to have multi-partyism or movement should be dealt with then and there, even before the Elections to CA had taken place, I took the occasion to ask my lawyers whether there was a law in Uganda at that time under which a referendum could be held.  They told me there was no such law, and they then went on, on their own, to draft this bill.  I liked it, I approved it, and I took it to the Cabinet some time in April last year.  And you know it takes time for matters to be completed there.  It was debated on; the minutes were confirmed and so on, and the Bill was eventually published in July.  So, it is not a situational Bill.  The Ghanaian draftsman, who wrote it, does not even understand the questions of Obugabe of Ankole.  So, really, these suspicions should really be allayed.  We are providing for a law, under which consultations can be made with the people to find out their views or their feelings about matters, which can arise now or in the future, and this is what the Bill is.  

As Members had noted - an essentially democratic measure.  I think having answered that, I will now just go to various specific proposals that have been made in the House about improving the drafting of the Bill and I am very glad, I am very happy with most of these proposals.  The first and the most important is whether a Referendum should be held at the decision of the Government or at the direction of Parliament, or both.  Personally, having listened to the Debate, the views of hon. Members, personally, I believe that.  It will be advantageous if the law provided for both situations. That is to say that a referendum would be held if so decided by government or if directed by Parliament. That happens to be my view and I think if hon. Members listened to hon. Mrs. Njuba yesterday; I will not repeat her arguments but there is a lot of merit in what she said.  

Whereas we can legislate that you, you will not stop in the way. Hon. Members in this House will not stop in the way of a question being put to the people; but we are legislating for posterity and a situation can arise when the government wants to know or to ascertain whether the decision taken by a Parliament is in conformity with the wishes of the people.  Now, if it is not and you cannot consult the population without the authority or the consent of Parliament; if Parliament will not allow you to consult the people, and if Parliament does not allow you to do that, then you either will not consult the people or if the matter is important, and you are a strong or sensible government, and you have the powers to do so, you may have to dissolve Parliament.  So, why go to all this?  

Therefore, I would like to commend to this House, that section 3(1) should be amended to provide as follows; “that a Referendum shall be held (a) if the government by statutory order so decides ‘or (b)’ if the legislature by resolution so directs; either throughout Uganda or in any area of Uganda and in respect of any question or series of questions etcetera.”  That I think would meet the best needs of statesmanship. 

A lot has been said about regulations, but modern legislation has become almost a science, and Parliament cannot provide for all situations. So, you have that Parliament provides for major general things and then leaves to the Executive power to make regulations to provide for particular situations. Such regulations may or may not be taken before Parliament for confirmation.  When you look - and I have gone back and looked at some of the Statutes we have passed here in the past - you will find that all of them, most of them provide that the Minister shall make rules for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Act, and shall without prejudice to the generality of that one, and then they enumerate the various areas in which the regulation can be made.  I think, if you ignore the fear, which some Members had that maybe, there was a hidden agenda about the Referendum Bill, you will find that there is no rational reason for objecting to section 5, which gives to the Minister, that is to say, the government, power to make regulations, but with this important proviso, that these regulation must be brought here, when they are brought here, when they are laid on the Table, and if they are not laid on the Table during the term that they should be laid on the Table, they lapse.  When they are laid on the table, then it is the right of any Member to raise a debate on any of these regulations; and if the House so wishes in the exercise of its sovereign rights, it can annul them.  I think this is a very  - I will not say generous, but I was almost tempted to say so - the important method of recognising the rights and responsibilities of Parliament.  

There was a misconception in the section which provides that the Minister can apply with or without modifications, and my hon. and Learned Friend, the hon. Member for Rwampara of all people, has said that Clause 5, (2) (b) when it says; “applying with or without modifications, the provisions of any enactment relating to elections including any provisions relating to election offenses,” that this means that the Minister will, without coming to Parliament, amend those laws, he said, that this is what it means. So, I think I shall have to explain with the indulgence of the House. (Interjection) 

Yes, the Minister could have made regulations which spell out how to carry out these elections in that to do this, the electors - people are put on the register; they object to whatever and so on, but the Minister can as indeed, I think be has done, with regard to the elections of the Women and Youth, the Minister can say that the National Assembly Elections Statute can apply to the holding of the Referendum, but that as it will not be appropriate to apply it whole sale, every part of it, you can except some sections of where it says; “Member of Parliament,” say,  Constituent Assembly, where it says; this, you say that. In other words, you do not re-enact the whole of this thing; you use the Act that is there, but you modify it to make it applicable for this particular section. Now, this does not mean that the National Assembly Elections Act will, itself be amended; far from it.  When it is being used for the National Assembly Elections, it will remain as it was enacted by Parliament and if it is being used for the purposes of electing Members of the National Assembly it will be used as it is; it only means that when you are using it for the purposes of the Referendum you utilise the modifications.  I hope this is clear, at least to lawyers.  If it is not clear to lawyers, I do not know what I can do for them.  I went to law school many years ago, but it may well be that my Learned Friends need a refresher course.

Now, my Learned Colleague says that indeed we could have said that he can apply, mutatis mutandis, we can say, mutatis mutandis, but that merely means “making the necessary modifications,” that is what that phrase means.  But the important thing is that the regulations will come here  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, I think that - the only other point that I would like to comment upon is Section 6, the expenses. I personally do not have tremendous problem with this.  The monies - the public funds of Uganda are controlled by Parliament.  So, whether we say, are they the Consolidated Fund or they have got to be voted every time, it is at the same an item. So, if it will make things easier for hon. Sibo and people who think like that, I am will to agree to their proposal that we can substitute for this, that the funds should be voted for by the legislature in Clause 6.  

So, I would like to really end by saying that there is nothing hidden here; we need a referendum law on the Statute Book before the Constituent Assembly starts its work, because the provisions of sections 17 and 18 of the Constituent Assembly Statute do envisage possibilities of holding a referendum or series of referendum and we should have a law by that time, there should be a law under which a referendum can be held.  But we should not legislate only for that, we should have a general law which permits the people of Uganda to be consulted on any important issues as we evolve our democracy for the better management of our society. Mr. Chairman, with those observations and concessions I beg to move. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill read a Second Time)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE REFERENDUM BILL, 1993

(Clause 1 agreed to)

(Clause 2 agreed to)

(Clause 3 sub-Section(1))

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that Clause 3(1) be amended in the third line by deleting the words “cabinet by statutory order,” and replacing those words by “legislature by resolution.”  I beg to move.  The reasons have been very well articulated by almost every Member who spoke on this Floor and I do not think really I need to go through it again, the purpose is that the Referendum should be approved by this legislature; whatever referendum is carried out should be approved by this legislature, by resolution. I beg to move. 

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, while I support the principal in which the Amendment is being brought, the spirit that it should not deprive this House, the proposal made by the Attorney General, that there should be two avenues in which the referendum can be held.  So, there is another Amendment that is proposed by hon. Elly Tumwine giving a similar proposal as the Attorney General and really it is in the interest of this country, that the proposal made by the Attorney General is not stampeded for the good of this country.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  I rise to support hon. Sibo’s Amendment, that any proposed referendum by the Minister should be referred to this House for approval before it takes place.  (Applause) I have a little problem though, because my Amendment almost is in the similar lines like hon. Sibo, but it introduces the element of approval by two-thirds majority of the House.  I do not know whether - because they are the same - to merge the two, or you allow me after his and I amend his.

MR. CHAIRMAN:  You can merge it if you want.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Sibo has agreed that we can merge the two.  In other words the Amendment before us  -(Interruption)

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, that is an Amendment to my Amendment.  I propose that we pass my Amendment first, and then he can amend my Amendment afterwards.

MR. WAPAKABULO: My understanding of the procedure is this, that we are discussing Clause 3(1), that it does stand part of the Bill in the form in which it is.  Hon. Sibo, has moved a Motion amending the original Motion which was before the House. (Interjection) Yes, there was a Motion that it does stand part of the Bill, in its present form.  Now, hon. Sibo is saying; no, it should not stand part of the Bill in its present form.  It should read like he has proposed.  

So, now we are discussing hon. Sibo’s Amendment and in accordance with the procedure we cannot discuss any other until we have disposed of his.  But he does not stop any one amending it.  So, hon. Butagira’s procedure that he should wait we vote and finish, it not correct.  He should in fact stand up and amend his, then we shall debate his first and when we finish his, then we go back to Sibo’s.  That is how the procedure is.  You always dispose of the lat Motion first, is you go making amendments.  So, we discuss his Amendment, but now a Member has stood up to move an Amendment to the Amendment.  So, we dispose of the Amendment to the Amendment first, then go back to the Amendment, depending on how it proceeds, we go back to the original Motion.  That is how I think it should be, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. CHAIRMAN: No, we are still on Sibo’s Amendment.  That is the one we are discussing.

MR. WAPAKHABULO: But if hon. Butagira wants to move a Motion he should move to amend.  

THE CHAIRMAN: He should wait until we move.  Are you contributing on Sibo’s Amendment?

MR. BUTAGIRA:  No, no, mine.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we have not come to yours yet.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I am trying to amend hon. Sibo’s proposal.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, we have not passed it yet.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Mr. Chairman, there are two alternatives either we proceed on hon. Sibo’s first and we go to mine, or I go to mine first which encompasses his, it is just a question of, really agreeing with one another.

MR. CHAIRMAN:  Okay, continue, please.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So, the proposed Amendment I am trying to make to Clause 3(1) would read as follows: “the Minister may, if satisfied that it will be in the public interest necessary so to do.  With the approval of the two-third majority of the legislature by statutory ordered direct the holding of the referendum.”  The purpose of this amendment is really this, we are leaving the initiation of referendum process with the Minister, and we are leaving the initiative with the Cabinet if they so wish and in the interests of the public having judged it. 

But we are saying, before we land into the referendum, let the legislature, which represents the people also be a party in this way. Yesterday we listened to argument that a referendum really should be held as the last resort, it should be an exception to the general rule that all matters should be transacted in this Parliament.  So, if you really want to go for that exception, and knowing well the expenses involved, we are saying that come here let us have a look at it, and if you are satisfied that, that really should justify the expenses involved, we are saying that, come here let us have a look at it, and if you are satisfied that, that really should justify the expenses involved, then this legislature will give a go ahead for a referendum.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My hon. Colleague, I do not know what has happened, but the clarification I am seeking, is, are you talking of two-thirds majority of the whole legislature or two-thirds majority of those present voting, sitting?  Because there is a difference, Mr. Chairman, this House I do not know how many times it has made two-thirds! Can we have a clarification as to what he is talking about so that when we come to support or not support, we know what we are doing?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BUTAGIRA: Mr. Chairman, I mean two-thirds of the legislature, legislature means the whole body.  The reason is this, that this is not a light matter, that if a referendum is to be held, two-thirds of the Members of Parliament should approve, and it is not just Members present and voting who may be just a quorum or 90.  So, I mean that, and in all circumstances, I can see that if a situation warrants or referendum, that these people will be present and give a blessing. 

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Many of us were very sympathetic to the Amendment moved by hon. Sibo, and conquered with hon. Butagira but we are now finding difficulty in understanding and I wish to ask for further clarification.  In most legislatures when you talk about two-thirds majority, you talk about two-third majority of Members present because I will tell you the problem you have.  You can call a Parliament - and many times three or four Members of that Parliament have died or are indisposed they are not in a position to make any judgement on the matter.  

Now, if you count two-thirds and include them, you are counting people who do not matter, who have already died; and therefore, it is very, very difficult to talk about two-thirds majority of the whole legislature.  So, I would rather that those who are moving this Motion help those of us who are sympathetic by saying that it is two-thirds majority of Members present.  I thank you, Sir. 

MR. LUBEGA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  If the matter is so important, as important as matters contained, for instance in the Constitution, the usual provision with respect to amending a Constitution talks about two-thirds elected Members.  And I can now refer you to article 3 of the present Constitution what it did provide; in fact it provided for votes of notice not less than two-thirds of all the elected Members of the National Assembly.  So, if the matter is that important we may have also to address ourselves to that effect. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.  Let him finish.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information. It was suspended by legal notice number one.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Mr. Chairman, although my understanding was that I wanted all Members, all elected Members. I did not want to be drilled from the principle that I think as of crucial importance and that is involving the legislature before any referendum is held.  For that matter I may - therefore, by way of clarification say that it should be the majority of Members two-thirds of Members present.  (Applause) 

Bearing in mind that, if the matter is subjected to a referendum, the people will decide. I am moving this amendment because we want to be in harmony with whatever action the Government is proposing.  We do not want to be in conflict and we do not want to make this House in conflict with people since it is the people who elected it.  So we want to work in consultation and therefore, that is why I am moving that before a referendum is made, at the initiative of the Minister or the Government, the matter should be brought to this House, and only if this House approves that by two-thirds majority of the Members present, will the referendum take place.  Mr. Chairman, I move accordingly.

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I oppose the two-third majority.  There is no question.  There is no earthly reason for interposing for making it almost impossible to consult the people; it is essentially undemocratic, it indicates a pathological, a paronychial fear of the people, and there is no reason why we should -(Interjection) 

No, I am willing to go along with hon. Sibo, then if it is the question of referring to the House, let us refer to the House and the House as a group by a resolution passed by a majority of its Members.  But when you go for two-thirds, why two-third what is being done? The referendum does not make a law, the results of a referendum cannot have legal effect, I forgot to say that a referendum cannot have legal effect until they are brought to Parliament and enacted into a law.  There is no reason for fearing to refer; this is a matter of just referring to the people getting their opinion. (Applause)

(Question put and negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: Now we are moving to hon. Sibo’s Amendment

MR. SIBO: Mr. Chairman, I do believe that I do not have to speak much about this because the Attorney General has already accepted the Amendment.  So, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 3 sub-section (1) be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 3 sub-Section (2))

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, I am proposing that we delete sub-Section (2) of the Bill.  The reason for this is the present one reads: “A Referendum shall also be held when holding of a referendum is required under the provisions of any enactment.”  The reason for this is that, when we pass this Statute, it will be the only Statute that will govern the referenda or referendums we are going to hold.  I am saying that then there is no need to refer to other enactments besides the one we will have passed under this Statute.  So, I am saying that, the sub-Section (2) is redundant; it is not necessary at the moment because all the referenda that we are likely to hold, will be governed by the Statute that we are now about to pass.  Mr. Chairman, I am suggesting, therefore, that sub-Section (2) do get out of the present Bill.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Mr. Chairman, I stand here to oppose that Amendment very strongly. I believe, it is ill conceived, you cannot make a law and then affect other laws without substantially debating in this House.  In the past, this Parliament or previous Parliaments have passed laws that may in one way or another affect what we are enacting now.  One of those for example, is the electoral law; you cannot say that because some of the provisions that we are discussing now impinge or relate to the electoral law, the electoral law goes overboard, that would be very dangerous.  

This august House in its own wisdom has already passed the Constituent Assembly Bill, which is now law which provides that in certain cases where there is conflict and there is no resolution by the Constituent Assembly, we would have to resort to a referendum; that was passed by this same House, same Members, I hope they are still of the same wisdom no one has lost marbles. Now that being the case, it is always necessary and the Attorney General was absolutely right that sub-Clause (2) of Clause 3, should be preserving that law.  And I think it would be really unreasoning to delete that section to throw overboard what we had already talked about for months.  So, I very strongly oppose the Amendment.

MR. LUBEGA:  Point of information. Mr. Chairman, thank you.  The usual construction or interpretation of laws is to the effect that newer laws bind the older laws and the rationale behind it is that people might even without specific repeals are over ridden by newer laws. That is, I think, an unusual point of interpretation and we should do corrections on that.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Chairman, the point made by hon. Lubega is only valid to the extent that if there is a conflict between the old and the new law, but this does not create any conflict at all.  Clause 2 does not create any conflict at all; in fact, it is a further extension of the powers of the House to call for referendum.  Parliament acts in two ways; either by seeing all resolutions like under the Civil Clause if I may call it, by the Minister and the Parliament. They pass a resolution demanding a referendum.  But also Parliament with its own deliberate decision, when making a law on any subject, it may include a provision in that law that this matter, if it becomes contentious or comes up for review, can be decided upon by referendum.  In such a case you do not come back to a resolution under sub-Clause 1; you proceed under Clause 2 to hold a referendum because another enactment of the House demands it.  Because the House will have already said so in the Bill, they do not have to revisit the subject.  

For instance, the use of the word ‘enactment’ here is deliberate, it does not say, when required by provisions of a Statute, it talks of enactment meaning in fact, in the constitution or the new constitution, the Constituent Assembly may provide that some matters be resolved by referendum. In which case, you do not come back here under sub-clause 2; you proceed straight   when the time arrives, it is only one you proceed straight under sub-clause 2.  Therefore, the two are complimentary they, in fact give Parliament more power to call for referendums where circumstances arise. (Applause) I oppose his Amendment.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, I also oppose the Amendment very strongly for the reasons that have been so ably advanced by my two hon. Learned Friends and I have nothing useful to add. (Applause)

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 3 sub-Section (3))

MR. KANYOMOZI: I am calling for division on that Provision.  I would have accepted the Provision if instead of ‘that’ in “any referendum held by the virtue of the provision of any enactment shall be subject to the provision of that.” I would have accepted if ‘that’ was ‘this.’  But since it is not, I am suggesting that it be deleted.  Again for similar reasons, we have in sub-Section (1) said that it is this House, this very House which should approve first the initiative of Government to subject the country to a referendum.  And I think it is proper, and I am appealing to the Members to realise their own importance as representatives of the people that they should in case of any referendum -(Interruption)

MRS. NJUBA: Point of order. Mr. Chairman is the hon. Member in order to propose an Amendment on the same reason that has already been rejected by the House? 

THE CHAIRMAN: This is Clause 3 sub-Section (3); we are on sub-Section (3), please.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I am saying that the importance of this House - a representative of the people is involved in this issue.  As I said, the Clause would have been okay if it said “under this enactment;” since it does not say so, I am saying, it should be deleted because it is denying the right of this House to approve the referendum or referenda before they are put to the people.  I am suggesting, that if - because I had not circulated that, I am going to suggest that, if the Clause is going to stay, I am saying if the Attorney General insists that it should stay, I would just amend one word; that this -(Interruption)

MR. KAVUMA: Mr. Chairman, the Member holding the Floor says; the Amendment he is pushing is not circulated is the Member, therefore, in order -(Interjections)- nobody has it, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Did you circulate the Amendment to the Members?

MR. KANYOMOZI: Yes, I sent to the Clerk and I sent a copy to you, Sir. (Interjection) Yes, I did, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please. That particular Amendment which you are moving, is not on your paper.

MR. KANYOMOZI: It is on my paper, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: sub-Section (3)? 

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Yes, I said, Clause 3, delete sub-Section (2) and (3).

MR. WAPAKABULO:  It or not, and vote on that.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, that is what he is doing.

MR. KANYOMOZI: So, I am saying, Mr. Chairman, that I would like this House to retain the powers to approve any initiative whether under the old Act or enactment, or under any other provision so that the House - this hon. House approves the provision before we go to a referendum.  Mr. Chairman, the reason is this, a referendum is -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Member from Kajara is asking the House to do one job twice; he is actually saying that after the House has made and decided to make a law to have a referendum they should then meet to have a law to decide a referendum in another setting.  At whose expense? Because the House has met, has decided that there should be a referendum on a particular area of political interest, then now you say that you write in a Bill to say that we should again meet and decide to have the referendum.  The public will laugh at you hon. Kanyomozi.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether hon. Karuhanga is a Lawyer but really, I am doing that, the Clause that I am dealing with, sub-Section (3) does not have the interpretation he is giving.  His interpretation is totally different from what I am really trying to say.  I am saying that the referendum which is going to be held should be passed through this House in conformity with what is in section 1(1), and I do not see any conflict or any repetition or anything. Mr. Chairman, I am saying -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, you get a seat - have you finished now?

MR. KANYOMOZI: Yes, I am nearly closing.  I am saying, Mr. Chairman, there are three series of how governments take decisions; one is to bring the matter to the legislature.  When the legislature fails or there is contention, we subject people to plebiscite or referendum.  When that one fails completely, then you go to the people for elections.  I am saying because of the importance of the matters to be decided in a referendum, because it is one step before the general elections or calling all the people to vote again it should be passed through here.  Reasons are many; one is the importance.  Two is the expense involved.  So, I am saying if anything is to be done, let it be done under the provisions of this Law.   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.  It is really based on a misconception, sub-Section (3) is providing for a situation whereby a bill is brought in this House and it is debated, and it is passed, and it becomes law signed by the President which says that, a referendum shall be held for instance, whether the Karimojong shall carry guns.  Now, if such a law has been passed by this House then, the holding of the referendum on that particular issue must be - that referendum must be carried out in accordance with the provisions if any of that Bill.  That is what he is saying. So, really it is a misconception and I oppose it.

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 3, sub-Clause (4))

DR. TIBERONDWA: I propose that we delete sub-clause (4) because you can have a referendum that does not only require yes and no.  You may sometimes have to deal with three or four answers.  So I propose that we delete sub-Clause(4).

THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Mr. Wapakabulo): Thank you Mr. Chairman. What I do recollect, I did speak on this particular Provision at one stage, but may be hon. Tiberondwa had gone to Igara to finalise a point with the people.

The point, Sir, is that this Clause does not prevent the asking of a series of questions, but it is only saying that every question you frame, should be framed in such a way that it can attract only one of the two a ‘yes’  or ‘no and I illustrated how we could have had the three questions on the lost counties; “do you - people - want to remain part of Buganda?”  They could say ‘yes’ or ‘no.’ 

Question two; “do you want to become part of Bunyoro?” The answer is ‘yes’ or ‘no’ and it was in that case no.

The third one is; “do you want to form yourself into a separate district?”  The answer is ‘yes’ or ‘no’, they said yes.  So, the thing is that each question should be framed such as not to be ambiguous.  It should fetch one answer, yes or no.  But it does not prevent you asking even, one hundred questions as sub-clause (4).  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 3, sub-Clause (4) be deleted as proposed by hon. Tiberondwa.

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 3, Sub-section (6))

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that section 3(6) be amended to read as follows: “unless a greater majority is otherwise required by any enactment, any question submitted to a referendum, under this Statute shall be determined by the votes of a simple majority of the persons voting in the referendum” and I want to add here in a situation - I want to add here something which after consideration, I think, could be important. I wanted to add that, “by the two thirds of the district councils;” the reason I am trying to make sure that two thirds of the voting people, pass whatever is being voted on, is in a situation where if you use a simple majority, a big number of the population will be left disgruntled and it can cause discontent and threaten the growing consensus, peace and security.  

And in a situation where, for example; why I am bringing in the addition, where for example, we are saying, should we move multi-party or Movement?  And then you have 51 to 49, there the situation might be complicated because a simple majority will have 49 per cent of the 8 million voting people not taken care of or opposed.  Now, in such a case where we cannot achieve two-thirds.  That is why I am proposing that it be resolved by the district councils and why I am proposing this; I am saying -(Interjections) 

I would like hon. Members to understand what I am talking about.  There can be situations, I have been informed, I am in support of two-thirds majority but in a situation where two-thirds majority cannot be possible and the example I am giving is, while you require two thirds, you will instead have 49 to 51 what do you do in that situation? So, what I am suggesting in such a situation is that, at least there should be an identification of a reasonable representation of the people that two-thirds add to what has been voted on to pass that issue.  An example I am citing here, is as proposed in the Draft Constitution on the issues where it affects the amendment of the Constitution.  If you look on page 41 of the Draft Constitution, it is citing issues on which a Referendum can be held and on a number of issues which includes political systems, prohibiting on one party state that shall require approval by the people in a Referendum.  It is proposing that the changing of the following part of the Constitution shall require two-thirds majority in Parliament and approval by two-thirds of all district councils in Uganda.  Now, in a similar sense, where we are going to a referendum, I would propose that we use the two-thirds majority and should the two-thirds majority not be a solution then we resort to the district councils.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  I would like to move an Amendment to the Amendment proposed by Maj. Gen Tumwine.  My Amendment comes under (6) -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Nekyon to bring an Amendment over an Amendment?

MR. NEKYON: Mr. Chairman, my Amendment under 3(6); I propose that you delete the words: “unless a greater majority is otherwise required, by any enactment” and substitute them with the following words, I quote: “any questions submitted to a referendum under this Statute shall be determined by two-thirds majority of the persons voting in the referendum”. In other words, I am removing from Maj. Gen. Tumwine’s Amendment only to bring in the district councils as a final arbitrators. My reasons are; in 1962 the whole country agreed that to amend a constitution, we needed two-thirds majority in Parliament.  ‘Parliament’ meant at that time to provide for the whole number, not just Members present voting. But now we transfer the final decision on the Constitutional Amendment from the House to the people themselves.  Therefore, I am saying, that we transfer that two-thirds from Parliament to the people so they decide by that method.

Number two; by the mere fact that the Bill says, “unless a greater majority is required,” it means that there are provisions elsewhere, which already require more than a simple majority and usually when you move from a simple majority, the nearest point is two thirds; and this is why I am also moving this because this Bill includes, not only simple cases but it includes also constitutional amendments.  They could go to cover even the higher cases.  Then I was to say, that the simple majority we are talking about is not as simple to obtain as many people think, for instance  -(Interruption)

MRS. MPANGA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If after you have given the question to the people themselves to decide, you do not get that two thirds majority, then what do you do?  You have to decide one way or another.  We have said either vote a Karimojong will have guns or not which the Attorney General quoted and it is 41, 51 then, you do not have the two thirds majority, what does the proposer propose - we do in that case? 

MR.NEKYON: I remember she was in a hurry; she is a teacher by profession and usually put it that for somebody to pass an examination they must have 50 per cent.  If somebody does not get 50 per cent, what is it?  That is the answer. (Laughter) 

Many of us - many of you, Members have spoken about simple majority, but simple majority is not as simple as it is.  Take a case where there are 1,000 voters and there are three positions as we had in the lost counties, 400 votes for remaining in Buganda, 300 vote for going to Bunyoro, 300 votes for forming a different district and then you say a simple majority is 400, but 400 is not a majority of 1,000; that is the problem! So, I think we should look at that before you rush to say this must be like that, then we have heard the hon. Naburri the leader of Karamoja -(Laughter)- who was saying that he was elected by 83 people out of 40,000.  So, we say here is a simple majority of 40,000 people, the simple majority is 83, that is ridiculous and then I want to say this, for us to lift a matter from here to the people, we are saying that we ourselves have failed to decide fairly on the matter, therefore, we want our people to decide on it.  

That is the essence of the whole debate.  Now, when we refer to that matter as a very serious matter, it is very contentious; it is about to break up the country into two or three.  Therefore, for us to silence those who will lose, they must be given the impression that they have got overwhelming opposition against their ideology, and this overwhelming voting of two thirds majority will pacify the country.  Because even if somebody was excited he will know, at least two-thirds majority of Ugandans have said they want this, we are only one third, let us accept the voice of the majority.  But if you go to the people and come out with a majority of one person out of this big population you have done nothing. I would rather say the Motion has failed, if it is just a simple majority. 

We are here, people coming from different sections; there are minorities in Uganda, minorities of religion, minorities of tribe, minorities of philosophy.  Let us take note that for us to run this country smoothly, we must protect not only the majority, but we must protect also the minorities from dictatorships of the majority. (Interjections) I am very clear; I am talking about the protection of minorities from the dictatorships of the majority as well.  Do not say you can have dictatorship only for a minority, you can have a majority which do not consider it, ruling things in such a way, simply because they have got the votes.  They do not take into consideration the future and the life of the minority.  This has happened in India, they had a lot of trouble and they had had to amend the Constitution.  In Rwanda, they have got that problem.  In Burundi, they have got that problem, so you have to protect the interest of the minority. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

THE MINISTER FOR TOURISM AND WILDLIFE (Mr. Wapakabulo): Thank you Mr. Chairman. I stand to oppose the Motion, in fact what the hon. Leader of Maruzi is saying is that the dictatorship of the minority should be encouraged, that in fact if you put a question to the people, you want an answer 51 per cent say, yes, you say no, that has failed because 49 per cent have said no.  That is what he is saying.  Then what is democracy? He calls it dictatorship of the majority. Sir, this provision is very carefully drafted if you may look at it.  It says, unless a greater majority is otherwise required by any enactment, a question submitted shall be deemed or shall be determined by votes of the simple majority of the persons voting in the referendum.  This is a Statute, we are going to be making a Constitution, the Statute is being shy, it cannot say categorically that everything shall be determined by simple majority, it is saying, that because there are situations when you may have to pass a law in respect of a subject and in that subject you may want to provide for a referendum and that law could be a Constitution.

This would be a conflict where this should be trying to tie the hands of a constitution when the constitution may provide for two-thirds majority three quarters majority.  So, it allows flexibility.  It is saying; some issues may be such that you take it by simple majority. Others, if the law under which they are being called to a referendum deem them to be so important, that law may lift it.  So, really we are leaving flexibility so that at any stage, when we are considering a referendum, subject to the question being asked and the subject matter, we can decide whether it should be a simple majority or a higher majority.  This law is saying a simple majority in all issues unless the law permitting, and that law will have been passed by this House, and therefore, this House will have decided, the law permitting that referendum could prescribe a higher majority.  In other words there is nothing more flexible than this clause and we should adopt it.  I oppose, thank you.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, having listened to hon. Wapakabulo’s comment just now, and having listened to hon. Member from Maruzi and the Mover of the Amendment, it seems to me very clear that there is an intention on behalf of the Government on its side that unless the law has already determined, that the requirement is higher than a simple majority, right, the future referendums.

According to this law it will be decided by a simple majority.  This is what the law is saying, the law - if you read this law, the implication of this law is, unless past Parliaments including this one -(Interjection)- wait.  The interpretation of this, to put it in a layman’s language is this; that unless there is an existing law, which shall require a higher percentage, future referendums under this law will be by a simple majority. 

The Debate, therefore, should rest by an additional sentence which says that; “any Parliament in future, may decide that this item should be decided by a simple majority or by two thirds majority” and I think, that is what we intend to keep.  So, to achieve that interpretation one would have to add at the end of this Clause 6, some other word, then the thing would read like this, to be able to certify all sides “unless a greater majority is otherwise required, by any enactment, any question submitted to a referendum under this Statute shall be determined by the votes of a simple majority of the persons voting in the referendum.” Now, in order to ensure that the future Parliaments have a chance to also demand that this is a very important issue, and it might divide the country.  We must add, “Unless Parliament decides otherwise.” 

MR. WAPAKHABULO: Point of clarification.  Thank you for permitting me to clarify.  I am surprised that on this occasion, and it might be the only occasion, when I may have to disagree with my Learned Friend hon. Karuhanga in interpreting or construing a piece of legislation.

When you read a piece of legislation you read it subject to the interpretation Decree or Act; now, the interpretation decree says, that when anything is required to be done as a Statute, it shall be done from time to time as occasion requires.

Secondly, it says, enactments of a Bill or a Statute speak from time to time. If you read those, into sub-Clause 6, what you are reading is this; unless a greater majority is otherwise required by any enactment; majority by any enactment, we are speaking now. They spoke, and we shall speak.  We speak from time to time; therefore, that is not the correct interpretation. In fact, he is misleading the House. I thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I am often guided by my very learned and good friend, Karuhanga, but in this type of interpretation I concur and accept the interpretation put on by the hon. Minister, James Wapakabulo.  Mr. Chairman, I think we should not split airs or do injustice to the English language because any word which reads; “unless a greater majority otherwise required by any enactment” does not confine us to history. It refers to the present and to the future as has been very ably described by my Learned Friend, the Minister for Tourism Wild Life and Antiquities and I used the word ‘antiquities’ -(Laughter)- wisely because in Law we depend on the President and the President is ingrained in the antiquities of legal history and the interpretation which the Minister has put on this words is supported, Mr. Chairman, by President.  But let us rally be very serious, on this matter we are talking about a referendum, a referendum rally deals with very isolated issues on which both the Government; even the Government is still divided; even cabinet is not happy and they are appealing to the last resort of court that is the referendum to the people, and therefore, the only way you can really have a final decision of the court is if that decision is final and is binding.  Because if you say that you are going to decided by a simple majority on this kind of referendum and then at the end if have 49 and 51 the question is lost, what actually are you doing, you building up the chaos and conflict that start the whole or question in the first place and you must avoid that at all costs. Therefore, really people who are arguing for these built in majorities on a referendum of this kind are saying let the matter never be resolved, which of course is risk for disaster for this nation.  So, the Minister is writing his interpretation. 

Secondly, I think that we should stick to a majority because we are appealing to the court of final resort and we should have a final answer to put and without going in further to countries and so forth.  I thank you Sir.

MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Mayanja Kakyama): Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment but let me start with the question of the interpretation.  It is a cardinal principal of law that a present Parliament cannot bind its successor we cannot legislate and say Parliament shall never do, because that is - once we leave here and bring another Parliament the other Parliament will do what it likes.  The other Parliament can repeal this Statute, or even this Parliament can repeal this Statute, so to take the interpretation contended for by the hon. Member for Nyabushozi is really untenable. (Laughter and Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, please.

MR. MAYANJA KAKYAMA: So, Mr. Chairman, really what they are saying that there might be in Acts of Parliament where this House has provided for greater majorities then in those situations, let those majorities maybe, there shall be a reason for having those greater majorities.  I, myself at the moment do not see them, because do you want these people to go and fight the other people? 

Secondly, if it is a question of law or legality, I have already explained that when a question is decided upon by a referendum it does not automatically becomes law, it must be enacted into by the appropriate organ which make law for that country or for this country.  So, if for instance, it was an Amendment or it was something affecting the Amendment of the Constitution in the human right clauses and we had a situation as it used to be before, then it would be necessary, if the House came here, to give effect to something seconded by the population.  The House would have to give the two to do the two-thirds majority itself or to use whatever procedure is prescribed by law.  But I think that, to make it - now say that, in every situation the referendum must be decided by a two third majority to create an empathy in a final Court of Appeal, where are we going to go from there? If we cannot resolve the question by the majority of Ugandans what are we going to do, are we going to condemn them to fighting it out?  Mr. Chairman the Amendment is, I think, not well conceived and I oppose it.

(Question put as amended negatived)

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 3 sub-section (6) be amended as proposed by hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine.

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 3 as amended, agreed to)

Clause 4(a)

MR. ARUNA ADAM:  I humbly beg to move an Amendment on Clause 4(a).  Mr. Chairman, there is a typing error here I would like to correct it, the quotation marks should be between a referendum and wherever it occurs. The word ‘wherever’ talks of this Amendment wherever it occurs within the Bill. My reasons are very clear as Members have read it; but to put more emphasis on it, if we do not amend this Section  -(Interruption)

MR. SEMAJEGE HIGIRO: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I had circulated an additional amendment to Clause 3 -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  We have moved to Clause 4.

MR. ARUNA ADAM:  Mr. Chairman, my reasons are clear; (a) if not amended it denies the right of voting to those who might not have registered during the public elections for some genuine reasons such as being sick, overseas studies and working in embassies, coming out of prisons, and returning from exile. I think the proof is that since the announcement of these Constituent Assembly elections, so many exiles have come back.  

The other reason is that those who had not reached the voting age at the time of public election taking place, particularly the young generation who step to their voting age from time to time, every day this young generation qualify for elections but if a referendum called that those who will have registered in public election should participate.  I think it will raise questions among the young generation.  

Another point is that some times people mostly register for public elections for specific reasons such as the type of election, personalities and parties, but when it comes to referendum, some might decide not to vote and this will mean that few people will vote on behalf of the majority.  Even if two to five million people vote, that will be just a small percentage of the population.  

Experience has shown to us sometimes when election systems are not clear, they always raise some denouncements by the other side.  So, this always leads to languor. I think this Amendment will make this referendum bill very transparent.  Nobody will complain that he has been denied the right to vote. I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, this Amendment which is very well reasoned and has obvious merit, has problems of being incorporated in the present statute, because the law requires certain minimum of residence, requires a certain minimum of qualification which have to be verified at the time of registration.  Now, in other countries what they have done is to enact a new law allowing these categories which the hon. Member has enumerated to participate in elections and referendum of this kind and, therefore, it will be necessary to enact additional laws making new provisions so that these people who are legitimately put forward could participate in this exercise and therefore, I find that to accept this amendment in its entirety as presently awarded may create problems for the Attorney General so for that reason I reluctantly oppose it.  Thank you Sir.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, I also oppose this Amendment, it is really impractical I have explained on the day I moved this Motion that I do appreciate the concern of the hon. Member who has moved this Amendment and we know that in a country, people grow up.  Those who were 17 and six months will become 18 and  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Others migrate from one area to another because of employment, famine, disease and so on and so forth. You do to provide for that situation. However, in a law like this you provide for this in the general law of elections whereby you empower the Electoral Commission from time to time to update the register that is the answer to this situation.  We must provide in our general law, we must empower the Electoral Commission and require the Electoral Commission to always be keeping the register of voters up-to-date by registering those who were young and have grown up by crossing out those who have died, by putting those who have migrated into where they are now residing and so on.  And we must also provide for a postal voting by people in our embassies or Ugandan abroad and that kind of thing.  That we will do when we become more sophisticated but at the moment we cannot even run a simple election here in Uganda.  So, we have not quite moved there, but we are going there.  So, I oppose this Amendment but I sympathise with the reasons for bringing it -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 4 sub-section (a) be amended as proposed by hon. Aruna Adam.

(Question as amended, negatived)

(Clause 4(b) agreed to)

MR. ADOKO NEKYON: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an Amendment by adding ‘c’ immediately after sub-clause (b) so that it reads as follows: “all referenda shall be conducted by the Electoral Commission.” The idea here is that in our draft Constitution we have proposed a standing Electoral Commission and eve if we do not have one now, we should have an Electoral Commission.  The reason is if you say you are going to have a referendum it is a serious matter and the body conducting this referendum should be independent.  A body in which everybody can have faith instead of the Minister going to conduct it or some District Administrator conducting a referendum.  This is why I move that we must have an independent Electoral Commission conducting any referendum.  I beg to move.

MR. TUMWESIGYE:  Mr. Chairman, I have no objection to the Amendment of hon. Nekyon except that it cannot really be seen because 4 reads that; “the persons entitled to vote in a referendum under this Statute are.” Now, if you have to provide for conducting it, it has to be something else.  I think we should create a new provision for that.

ABU MAYANJA: In other words to accommodate hon. Nekyon’s Amendment, Clause 4 would now become sub-section (1) and when we put sub-Section (2) to provide what he is trying to say -(Interjection) In that case I would not like to oppose this but I would like to add a few more words which would be in the record so that they can be written, it is where a permanent Electoral Commission has been established because we do not know now whether this Electoral Commission when it may not be there.  So, I say that where or when an Electoral Commission - a standing Electoral Commission has been established or set up, then a referendum shall be conducted by such an Electoral Commission.  

I hope hon. Members see my reason; the reasoning is that at the moment the Electoral Commission is only for the Constituent Assembly, there is no standing Electoral Commission for Uganda.  So when you say that this is a law which is providing for all time - an indefinite period and if we say right now that it shall be by an Electoral Commission which  -(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA: Mr. Chairman, I do support the proposal by hon. Nekyon, the argument being given by the Attorney General is not applicable because what he was saying is that in the event of a referendum being required, there must be an Electoral Commission set whether there is one which is permanent or not.  The implication of the Amendment is that an Electoral Commission should be set according to the normal -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Then withdraw what you have said.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, with the clarification given by hon Mwandha I withdraw my opposition and I accept the Amendment proposed by the hon. Member.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 4(c) be inserted as proposed by hon. Nekyon. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. HIGIRO SEMAJEGE: Mr. Chairman, this is about initiatives we have already said that initiatives can be undertaken by a Minister and the Cabinet but we also spoke here at large that there should be initiatives also from the general public the citizens of Uganda, and for that reason an Amendment is being added which reads; “any citizen supported by thousands of other citizens from the cross section of the country shall have the right to request for a referendum to be held on any matter in the public be submitted to the legislature by any Member for the approval of the Legislature by resolution,” You will realise that while initiative can be taken by the Government there are many cases where the general public can also feel that certain cases should be brought for referendum and we should give that chance to be held, since we are creating conditions for democracy. 

It is always strange when the kirasha today is having a quorum; it is always strange, when democrats are afraid of democracy I find them mere demagogues rather than democrats when they do not allow democracy to operate.  I think the spirit of the Bill today has been the people and there is no way you can restrict democracy to the chambers of the Attorney General, my only reservation would be on the numbers I would find thousand a bit to small.  I would go for hundred thousand verified signatures in which case, the people of Uganda can demand from their Government to hold a Referendum.  It will be issues whereby the people themselves feel - the elite in Parliament and Government have created themselves into a clique and we must allow them the opportunity to make that demand.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

ABU MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.  It is very difficult, administratively, if the population wants to have a referendum, they should do so through their Members in Parliament.

THE CHAIRMAN: To whom are you giving the point of order now? I now put the question that Clause 4(c) be added as proposed by hon. Higiro of Lwemiyaga.

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 4 agreed to)

Clause 5(2)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya, are you moving an Amendment or not? Okay, take your Seat, if you are not.

MR. WANENDEYA: For clarification - democracy you must know what  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Wanendeya, please, accept democracy.  If you are defeated, you are defeated.

Clause 5(3), any amendment? Now I put the question that Clause 5(3) do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5(4)

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, I am moving the Amendment 5(4) on behalf of hon. Butagira.  I move that Clause 5(4) be amended to read as follows: “Regulations made under this Section shall be laid before the legislature within 31 days after they are published in the gazette for approval before any referendum is held”.  

I intend to make that this proposal is positive and it is intended to protect the three clear provisions that will be stated in the regulations.  It is vitally important that when a resolution is passed by this House that a referendum should be held and before publishing it, the regulations should not go into effect.  We have agreed that a referendum should be held.  We should equally be consulted when that particular regulation is going to be held. This is doubly important because as a law is made, every regulation will be made for every particular referendum and therefore, this can be either generally, or, for a particular case. (Interjection) 

Yes, it is very clear there.  And, therefore, this regulation should be brought to us, we approve it, and it goes into effect.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NEKYON: Mr. Chairman, I was bringing a similar Amendment and hon. Butagira is asking me to move mine and of course on his behalf.  But since hon. Omara has already moved, I would like to support the Amendment. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Use the microphone, please.

MR. NEKYON: I was saying that, the hon. Butagira is asking me to move my Amendment because it combines both his and mine.  Since one has already been moved, I would now like to support the Amendment as moved by hon. Butagira through hon. Omara.  The reason here is very clear. There are different valuations on each referendum.  They may be at local level or national level, but issues may be completely different.  So, the regulations will also be diverse.  It is therefore, necessary for us to ask the minister to come here with an entire set of regulations, so that we read them and approve them, amend them or reject them before the holding of any referendum.  There is a provision under 5(5) says; “here any regulations are annulled by the legislature under this Section, the annulment shall not affect the validity of anything done under them before the date of annulment.” This provision says, the Minister can make the regulations in his office on that referendum, they bring the regulations here after the referendum has already been held.  The Parliament says, no, the regulations were not right. But the Minister says, in any case, we already held it is a referendum.  So, nothing can happen.  This is nonsense, pure nonsense.  

So, what we want is that the Minister must come here, tell us what regulations are the questions to be put to the public, we pass them and then at the end there is no question of nullification afterwards. We must do things in a advance.  Not by doing surgery.  We want treatment instead of surgery. My Amendment was saying that; we delete clauses 4, 5 and 6 and substitute them with the following: “all the regulations governing conduct by the referendum shall be laid before the National Assembly for approval before the holding of such a referendum.”  These are the Amendments, so we want the approval before the holding of any referendum.  And that is what we are supporting now. Thank you.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support this Amendment.  Mr. Chairman, we have often said here, particularly those of us who are on the side of Government that, there is a lot of suspicion that Members suspect that Government is doing this and the other.  I think this is the one time when I should appeal to the Government that we should not be suspicious on the law - an Amendment that is going to improve the law.  Any government that does not have support in the legislature or in this House shall not have any business governing this country.  Therefore, we can only be sure that where a Government is above board, is reasonable and I am sure the NRM is, no one can question it reasonably.  Then it brings a law, and it is good law and good regulations, it will get support.  Referendum is about very important issues of Constitutionalism of public interest and so forth.  Therefore, regulations that govern those regulations are similarly important.  

Therefore, in brief, I see that you want to wind up.  I very much support this Amendment.  It is a very reasonable Amendment and it conforms to the democracy of the Uganda we are trying to build.  Thank you.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am afraid, I will not be able to accept this Amendment, but I am going to propose a compromise which hon. Members can also listen to and if found reasonable, maybe, they can support me. I was going to amend - to move the division of clauses for sub-Section 5 and 6 so that, the provision that the annulment does not affect the validity of a referendum is removed of anything that they are under.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

MR. ABU MAYANJA: But otherwise, the proposal made by the combined forces amount to turning the process of making regulation into the process of enacting a Bill itself. Let me also explain; it is not true that for every referendum, there shall be a separate set of regulations. No, the regulations, when they are made here and when they are being approved; they become permanent; they become the future of the legislation.  So, when I am holding a referendum I do not have to make regulations every time.  No; but the reason why an enabling clause was written like this, is because you may need a different set of regulations.  For instance, if you are holding a local - in other words, you can have regulations for general and regulations for or a variation of regulations for local or particular referenda and they will be here and they will be approved.  

So, I think that sub-Section (4) should stay as it is, but in order to remove the fear that the House thinks that you go and make regulations you cut off the referendum and you subject the House to a fait accompli and a rubber-stamp.  That fear should be removed if we remove these two sections.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to move a compromise in those terms.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 5, sub-Section (1V) be amended as proposed by hon. Butagira.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5, sub-Section (5)

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 5, sub-section (6) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 5 as amended, agreed to)

Clause 6

MR. SIBO: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I move that Clause 6, be amended to read, “The expenses incurred in holding of any referendum under this Statute, shall be voted for by the Legislature.”  This is really a technical issue.  The expenditure, out of the consolidated fund is as provided for in the Constitution.  Now, we are not amending the Constitution.  This is an ordinary Statute.

MR. ABU MAYANJA: Mr. Chairman, I accept the Amendment. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 6 be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 6 as amended, agreed to)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I propose to add Clause 7 and this has been raised by hon. Wapakabulo a little earlier, that the provisions of this Statute shall supersede provisions of any other conflicting enactment relating to referenda.  (Laughter) The operating word here is -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please.

DR. TIBERONDWA: If they conflict -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed, have you finished?

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, the most important word here, if the provisions of previous clauses do conflict with this one, then this one should supersede those previous ones. If they do not conflict, then there is no problem.

MRS. MATEMBE:  I oppose that Amendment because it is by implication of the law as you heard from hon. Wapakabulo that once in a new Statute, if there is conflicting provision with a prior one and you have to decide, the current one takes precedence.  So, you do not have to provide for it, it is by implication of the law. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Dr. Tiberondwa, are you satisfied with the interpretation?

DR. TIBERONDWA:  If that is true - I am not a lawyer, Mr. Chairman, but if that is the interpretation, I accept.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, so you withdraw.  Are you moving an Amendment?

MR. KARUHANGA:  Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I do not your Amendment.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I am moving under Rule 65, Recommittal; because now wee have finished and the Rules say that if I have something to say for Recommittal, I have to do it before the Minister is called upon and it is Rule 65.  (Applause and Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, proceed.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As you realise, for the first time in the history of this House, today, Members did make an attempt to stand up and to say something.  I want to move that we do discuss again under Rule 65, the question of initiatives, because in my view, Mr. Chairman, it is within the established Rules of Procedure.

THE CHAIRMAN: But you can move it any other day.

MR. KARUHANGA:  So, we can now adjourn so that you allow me, because it has to be now.

THE CHAIRMAN: I will give you time any other day, please.  Proceed, please.

The Title

(Question put and agreed to)

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): I wanted to move that the Title, the Referendum Statute 1993 be changed to 1994.

(Question put and agreed to)

COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): I beg to report -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I am very grateful to this opportunity; you have promised that you will open this  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Not today, but I will give you a chance.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, the only thing we can do now, is that, I move that we adjourn so that we do not go to the Third Reading because that is what it should be.  So, I move that we adjourn.

THE CHAIRMAN: Take your Seat.

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL  (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that a Bill entitled ‘The Referendum Bill 1993’, was considered by a Committee of the Whole House and passed it with some Amendments.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the Whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu Mayanja) Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Referendum Bill 1994’ be read a Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The Title settled and the Bill passes)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: And with that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting. We adjourn until Tuesday, next week at 2.30 p.m. Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.4.5 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 11th January, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.) 




