Tuesday, 2 January 1996       

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair)

(The Council was called to order.)

MOTION

MR BWANIKA BBAALE (Katikamu County, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, when you wisely adjourned this House last Thursday, the Members wanted more time to ready through the Bill, and I believe they have now sufficiently read the Bill, and I hope they are going to give it full support.  However, I would like to make a few corrections in the report that I presented here; in fact, the corrections are not substantial but it was a question of numbering the clauses in the Bill which  - in fact, there was no agreement between the clauses I quoted and the clauses in the Bill, and for that matter, Mr Chairman, I have issued an errata which I believe Members have which can assist the Members to synchronise the report with the Bill.

I have given some corrections, for example, on page 2 of the report No.11 (e) - I had quoted in report clause 9 to 11, but it is now renumbered clause 11 to 13 as it appears in the Bill.  Clause 12 to 17 is renumbered as clause 14 to 19 in the final Bill; and on page 3, on 11(h) the Members discussed this issue, and I had quoted clause 45, instead of 47.1, now the correct one is 47.1; then on 11(i) instead of 83, it should be 85 as it appears in the final printed Bill; and on 11(l) instead of a new clause 88.3 it should be clause 93 in the final Bill.  So, is 11(m) instead of clause 89.6 as it appears in my report, the correct one to agree with the Bill is clause 90 sub-clause 8; that no child shall be remanded in custody in adult prison.  Now, clause 11(n), instead of 95 which I had quoted in my report, the correct one is clause 97 as it appears in the final printed Bill.  Clause 11(p) instead of clause 103, the correct one is 107; and in clause 12 I had quoted 106, it now becomes clause 110 in the final report.  So, Mr Chairman, these are some of the corrections that I wanted to make so that we agree with the final Bill.  

Furthermore, there have been some mistakes in the Bill, which I also want to take this opportunity to correct.  From clause 11.5, we have decided to redraft this clause to read as follows: “A Local Government Council shall keep a register of disabled children within their areas of jurisdiction and give as much assistance as possible in order to enable the children grow up with dignity among other children and develop their potential and self reliance.”  This has been the agreed position of the committee, Mr Chairman.  

When you move to clause 47.1(b) the printing is 36 years, but it is not years, it is 36 months.  So, I request the Members to make that correction.  

Lastly, Mr Chairman, it is clause 110 talking about punishment, this one says that a person who contravenes any of the provisions of this Statute commits an offence with exception of a person convicted under section 99; but the correct section is 103, because 99 is talking about after care, it has no relevance with this section.  Therefore, the correct section to be quoted in this Bill is 103.  

Mr Chairman, Members made contribution on my report on the Floor and some Members, like hon. Magezi, supported; hon. Elyau was worried about the penalty, that he was worried that how will the child raise UShs100,000 to pay.  In fact, I think, I had not read the Bill very well, and that is why the House was adjourned, but not I think he has the opportunity to read the Bill.  This Bill provides two possible penalties, one for anybody contravening the provisions of this Bill commits and offence and on conviction, may be liable to a fine not exceeding - he can even be fined UShs 1 but not exceeding UShs 100,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding - you can be imprisoned for six hours, one hour, 30 minute, or six months.  So, this one gives a lot of leeway to presiding magistrates to give punishments.  

Now, the second one does not go necessarily to an individual but it is related to a person who does not give privacy to the child.  For example, if a child has been molested and a newspaper goes and publishes his name, his address, his school, that one will have committed an offence, and the punishment is provided for in 103, any anybody who now publishes - if I could read it, Mr Chairman, 103;  “A child’s right to privacy shall be respected throughout the court proceedings in order to avoid harm being caused to him by undue publicity, and no person shall in respect of a child before a family and a children’s court publish any information that may lead to the identification of a child, except with a permission of the court.”  So, now if you go ahead without the permission of the court and publish the name of this child, you contravene this section.  

For example, if you publish the name and the address of the child, the school the child has been attending, if you show any photograph or any other matters likely to lead to the identification of the child, you commit an offence.  Why are we providing this one?  For example, some of the children really go through very bad situations!  I can give an example who has been defiled, if you publish that name and it goes on record, this child will go up and that thing will be haunting her.  So, we want to keep that privacy; and now if you contravene it, anybody who commits an offence and he is on conviction liable to a fine not exceeding UShs 500,000 or imprisonment not exceeding six months.  

Mr Chairman, I think the other Members who contributed last Thursday were just objecting to the way we had handled it, that the Bill had been hurriedly presented and that we wanted to bulldoze the Member, but I am happy that in your wise ruling you decided that way, and those Members who objected where hon. Ongom and hon. Abu Mayanja, and hon. Higiro’s concern was to inform the child - I think, in the Bill we say, as soon as the child has been arrested, his parents must be informed within, I think it is about 48 hours.  So, Mr Higiro’s concern is covered in that.

So, Mr Chairman, with those remarks I request this House to humbly adopt my report and pass this Bill for the good of the Ugandan child.  Thank you very much.  I beg to move. (Applause)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT
  
MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, it appears the mood of the House is to pass the Bill, so soon after the season of good will, to all men, far it be from me to wish it to be otherwise.  But, I want to make these two observations just for the record.  Because I failed to get an opportunity, I could have said them later; one, this Bill has been modeled on European legislation, and it has completely failed to take account of our situation.  For instance, I cannot for the life of me, imagine how a Children Bill can fail to mention the extended family and the responsibility of the extended family.  It is going to be many years, decades before what we can provide by way of social welfare in institutions by council, the Secretary for the Children can take the part of the extended family in looking after orphans and children who are otherwise unable to get the attention and care of their parents -(Interruption)

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that clause 7, sub-clause 2 on page 11, takes care of that situation; that where the natural parents of a child are deceased, parental responsibility may be passed on to relatives of either parent.  That is the extended family; those are the relatives, Mr Chairman.  Further on, where there is parentage of children - it is somewhere in 65, page 33 and so on, that the parental responsibility is not confined only to the biological parents, but the relatives, the guardians and where those are not available then foster parents and in extreme circumstances adoption.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I am grateful for the information, but as I said we will pass the Bill, but it is a very great flow, and I would advise the hon. Minister to go and study the question of how the extended family looks at - it is not defined; in fact, it is not even mentioned, it talks about a responsibility of a guardian; father, mother and a guardian, something like that.  Mr Chairman, I also think -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the word ‘extended family’ may not appear in the Bill, but for some of us who have worked in the committee of social services to examine the Bill in detail, every child in whatever circumstances, with whatever status is catered for in the Bill.  It may not be adequate, but I think, the Bill has gone as far as possible to provide for all possible situations involving the children of Uganda.  But I must say the word ‘extended family’ cannot be found in that Bill, and I do not think it is necessary to have it if everybody, including people in extended family, are included in the Bill.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I wish to inform the learned hon. Member that he knows very well that we do not legislate for the obvious; we do not legislate for the goodwill. The extended family is obvious in our culture in Africa.  So, in the Sectoral Committee we were legislating for those things, which are always neglected; otherwise, the extended family is there to stay and they will always address their role.  So, hon. learned Member, I request you to be with us and read the Bill carefully and support it.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I am with them; I said at the very beginning that I have all the goodwill of the season towards the passage of the Bill.  But you see, the second point which I would like to draw attention to, because for that one you will find if you are not careful, that the child, especially, the young ones - because the Bill has also made another mistake in my opinion and which I want to draw the attention of the House to.  It says a child is a person under the age of 18; now, we used to have children and young persons.  

So, anybody under the age of 18 - the other day when I was Minister of Justice and Attorney General, the Judges were blasting me, they said how do you expect us to punish men for so called ‘defiled’ young women of 17 plus?  You see, in making this law, it is necessary to recognise and make a distinction between children for different purposes.  There are purposes for which somebody of 18 may be considered a child.  I have been reading last night the great author Edgar Allan Paul, married his cousin when she was 14, and of course, the Muslims know that the Prophet married Isha when she was 9 -(Laughter)- but the marriage was consummated. 

So, Mr Chairman, I do not want to waste the time of the House, I am informing the Front Bench there that when they should have an opportunity to look at this Bill, how it is functioning, how it is operating and we come for making some Amendments, they should - one of the things that they should have done, and they have not done, is that they should be different ages prescribed for different purposes.  They tried to so only in one section about punishment, that a child below something is punished to three months, and then a child - but there are so many different situations that ought to be looked at, and to define a child as a person of under 18 for all purposes is unscientific and not good.  

So, with those observations, Mr Chairman, I say let it be.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Motion for presentation and consideration of the report of the Sectoral Committee on Social Services on the Children Bill, 1995 be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE CHILDREN BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT   (Mr Baguma Isoke):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that, ‘The Children Bill, 1995’ be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Bill read a Third Time.

Title settled and Bill passed.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CHILDREN BILL, 1995

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR GENDER AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT   (Mr Baguma Isoke):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill titled: ‘The National Council for Children Bill, 1996’ be read the Second Time.

Mr Chairman, this Bill, the NCC Bill, seeks to establish a Council that will co-ordinate -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, the point of order I am raising is that this House should not be ambushed.  Because when we adjourned last time, there was no indication that this National Council of Children Bill will be coming for debate today.  In consequence I did not bring, I have not revised it; it was published such a long time ago, I do not even remember when, and now for the Minister to read it a Second Time when Members have not advanced their mind to it; is it in order for the hon. Minister to ambush this House and expect Members to debate a Bill when their minds are not directed towards it?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  The hon. Minister is in order.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I think what is important now is to let the Minister go into the Second Reading, which would vividly remind us more about the Bill, and if we find that we are incapable of contributing on this Bill, then it is only thereafter that you can a serious objection.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  Mr Chairman, I thank you for your wise ruling.  The National Council for Children provides a national co-ordinating organ and a mechanism for effective implementation and monitoring of all policies and programmes related to the survival, development and protection of the children of Uganda.  As outlined in the Uganda national programme of action for children.  This programme was prepared and endorsed by government in 1992 November, and was launched by the then Vice-President on behalf of the President in 1993, 16 June the day of the African Child in Kamuli.  Mr Chairman, hon. Members are aware that Uganda is a member of the United Nations and a signatory to the Un convention and rights and welfare of the children.  

During the World Summit for Children held in New York in 1990, our President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni together with 158 other world leaders signed the world declaration and Action Plan committing this country into preparing a National Programme of Action for children.  Government endorsed that programme which emphasizes Uganda’s commitment to it.  All these actions fulfill the UN Resolution of putting children first whenever resources are being allocated.  This call means that children must be on the national agenda, especially, when we know that our children are our future generation, and these children must see us put this slogan into practice.  

The situation analysis of children in Uganda still indicates that many children still die at an early age.  The 1993/94 statistics reveal that in Uganda one child dies every six minutes.  Our infant mortality of about 110 per a thousand is one of the highest in the world.  Unfortunately, most of these children die from preventable diseases and causes, like malaria, diarrhoea, measles and the like.  Many more children lack opportunities for education, some due to poverty and high educational costs, but others due to negligence and lack of seriousness on the side of parents.  Children suffer from diseases arising out of unsafe drinking water and yet over two million are children living under difficult circumstances affected by poverty, civil strife, neglect and abuse.  While the number of orphaned children is increasing daily due to HIV/AIDS pandemic many children of 3,800 are living on the streets as street children in Ugandan towns.  Government realised the need to specifically focus on children and accord them priority in the national development efforts.  This is the basis for the Uganda National Programme of Action for children which the NCC sets out to operationalise.  

The ANPAC sets out policies, goals and strategies for child survival, protection and development.  It is the framework within which child related activities are co-ordinated for maximum utilisation of resources, from government, the donor community, non-governmental organisation and local committees.  The activities which are multi-sectoral in nature cover the areas of health and nutrition which are implemented mainly by the ministries of Health, Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries and Local Government.  Water and environmental sanitation implemented by the Ministry of Natural Resources; basic education by the Ministry of Education and Local Government; child protection by the ministries of Gender and Community Development, Justice, Local Government and Labour and Social Affairs.  

The social economic policies of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning provide a medium for resource mobilisation, sufficient allocation of resources, efficient and effective utilisation of those limited resources.  It is also an observed fact that many of the activities on the ground are implemented by NGOs in direct touch with the individual families and local committee.  It is this multi-sectoral nature of the activities and the implementors of child related functions that led to the recommendation to establish a co-ordinating body, the NCC.  The recommendation was made by a national conference that was held in 1990 November that was organised by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning as a follow up of the world summit for the children.  That same recommendation was re-affirmed by another national workshop that took place in July 1992 that discussed the ANPAC in detail.  

The main functions of the National Council for Children are set out in clause 5, on page 6 and will be; one, to advise on policies and programmes priorities in regard to child survival, child protection and child development; two, to ensure proper planning and co-ordination of all child based programmes within the guidelines of ANPAC; three, to review regularly and identify obstacles to the implementation of the ANPAC and advise on feasible solutions to overcome them; four, to mobilise, expedite and monitor resources for ANPAC activities, and five;  to act a clearing house for information and data on children situation and activities throughout the country.  In general terms, therefore, the NCC’s functions are based on operationalising the Uganda National Programme for Children, providing a structure to follow up and monitor the progress of goals as set out in the ANPAC.  The world summit and OAU summit on African children held in Dakar in 1992.  

Since 1992 when UNPAC was launched, an interim steering committee was inaugurated within the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs that was then handling children affairs.  This committee was charged with a responsibility of publicising the UNPAC, and drafted the Bill that we have already passed, the Children Bill, and this very one that is now under the Second Reading, the NCC Bill, to lay the legal foundation for establishing a structure to implement the set objectives in the two laws.  So far, since that time an interim secretariat was established in 1993 with staff drawn from the sectoral ministries to implement that programme.  Heads of department, Permanent Secretaries and district leaders have been briefed on this National Programme of Action for children.  This took place since 1992 and it is ongoing.  

In the period August-September 1993 research teams covered the whole country to assess the situation of children and mothers.  Several national consensus conferences have been held, the most recent being a month ago November 1995. All on children, to provide the latest information on the situation of children, setting challenges facing policy makers regarding the welfare of children.  So far, three conferences have been held, the one in 1993, 1994 and the last one last year. These conferences on the situation of children and mothers were under the auspices of the interim NCC.  Every 16th day of June, has been celebrated as the Day of the African Child, and since 1993 this day has been marked, the latest celebrations being held in Luwero in June last year.  All these celebrations have been very successful events involving children speaking out to the world, highlighting their potentials, their needs and challenges they face.  

Hon. Members will recall that the children had a mock discussion on the draft Constitution and presented their memorandum to His Excellency the President.  This had never happened in the lives of our children in the country.  We are looking forward to more innovative functions and activities of this nature under the NCC.  A most challenging task has been to decentralise the National Programme for the Children to the districts and lower down to the local governments, the town councils, the sub counties and the divisions; and this process of decentralising the UNPAC as I speak covers 24 districts.  When this Bill becomes law the rest of the districts will be covered under the NCC activities.  The above activities have mainly been co-funded by government, donors and district administrations.  The purpose of decentralising the UNPAC to the districts and sub counties where possible is to work towards ownership of the programmes related to child survival, child protection and child development, and these programmes should be sustained by the local governments and the communities through this decentralisation and involving all the players at the grassroots. 

This Bill is establishing the NCC, it will enable the performance and the co-ordination of all those activities, not under my ministry responsible for children, because they are so many ministries responsible for children; the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Health, Agriculture and all the other ministries handle children matter, but this body the NCC will co-ordinary all those activities and come out with one multi-sectoral programme for the future of our children.  This Council will not in any way interfere with the implementation of programmes in the line ministries; rather as I have said it will ensure an integrated implementation of the programmes by these ministries and enable the problems of children to be addressed at all levels by everyone concerned.

The Social Services Committee has had a chance to discuss this Bill, this Bill has been with us since November, 1994 and I believe the content is very well familiar with all hon. Members of the NRC including my elder and Friend hon. Abu Mayanja.  

With that background, Mr Chairman, I beg the NRC to give support to this Bill;  it is short, it is clear, it is aimed at implementing those objectives which we have already made into law in the Children Bill.  It is a good law, and I believe we shall pass it expeditiously and, maybe, this afternoon.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

MR BWANIKA BBAALE (Katikamu County, Luwero):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, and hon. Members of this House, you will recall that this Bill was printed in November, 1994 and then elapsed with the session and the recent First Reading was done on 6th July, 1995, but the contents as the hon. Minister has said have remained the same.  The Social Service Committee looked at this Bill, it is a very small Bill and discovered that the objectives are, actually, very clear; because unlike the Children Bill whose objectives is now to provide legal protection for the children, this Bill is going to provide a mechanism to co-ordinate the services of the children as the minister said; you will find the Minister of Education handling children matters, Ministry of Health handling children matters, different NGOs are handling children matters.  

So, this Bill now is coming into force to provide a mechanism whereby co-ordination can be realised.  Also monitoring - the figures we have heard are really very alarming figures whereby every minute six children die in Uganda.  So, we need a body which is going to monitor these developments and assess how far Uganda has gone into reducing this trend in this country.  

Right now there is no machinery, you just go to different ministries and get these figures, but right now this Bill will provide that machinery and also will provide evaluation mechanism; how far have you moved in realising or in achieving the objectives of the UN convention, the African Charter on the right of the children, and above all to see how the decentralisation on this level - how far has each district gone into giving good services to the children.  So, the Sectoral Committee looked at the objectives and is of the view that this is a good Bill which this House should pass.  

The Bill contains seven parts and 30 clauses.  The first part deals with preliminary, that is clause 1 and 2, and the second part deals with establishment, objective, functions and powers of the council, that is clause 3 to 6, and part three tackles the composition and tenure of office of the council members, that is clause 7 up to 9; and part four deals with the committees of the council; part five deals with management and staff of the council, that is clause 12 to 18; and part six deals with finance, clause 19 to 25 and the last part deals with miscellaneous.  

The committee has made some proposed amendments which, I think, have been circulated to you Members, which we have worked out, and we have proposed some amendments, for example, on clause 1, we want to say that this Statute may be cited as the National Council of Children Statute 1996, because really things have changed, we are in 1996; and also we want to propose some Amendment under clause 3.2 that the council instead of being called a semi-autonomous, we shall call it a self accounting council;  then on clause 6(b) there is a typing error for which we are really making a correction;   and clause 7.1, the original draft of the Bill was talking about the Council members - that the council shall consist of not less than 25 and not more than 37;  the committee found that the council of that size really cannot do much, so we are proposing to bring an amendment that the council is of not less than 15 and more than 21 members, and we have also made a proposal as to which one should not be members of the council, and also we have under clause 7.1(a) - the original Bill was saying the Permanent Secretary or an officer, we are proposing an amendment to say that somebody to sit on that council should be a senior officer not below the rank of an Under Secretary, to be a member of the council;  and clause 7.15 they are talking about the Minister of Women Development, Culture and Youth;  this one we are making a proposal to amend it to Minister of Gender and Community Development.  

Mr Chairman we are proposing deletion - because as I said once we reduce the number from 25 to 15, then we have to propose some ministries which will not be members of this council because when the committee analyzed the work of the council it found that some of the ministries really had very little to do with the NCC; therefore, they did not necessarily need members to represented on the council, and these ministries we propose to be deleted and ministry responsible for foreign affairs, Ministry for Justice, Ministry for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Minister for Internal Affairs, Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting; the National Council of Social Services, the Directors of institutions; international NGOs, we said those ones can be, if there is anybody under this one who is a specialist, the Minister has been given some powers to appoint him to come on it but not representing that particular body.  

On page 9, clause 7.1 we are proposing that - you see, the other members are representing ministries, but there could be some individual members from the public who may have contributed, who may be knowledgeable in the affairs of children.  So, we are proposing that the minister also appoints four members of the public who shall be persons of proven integrity, good repute and knowledgeable on the children matters.  

The committee again - you see this House has been having a problem with allowing minister to appoint officials to run these bodies, and we are saying that the minister now will, on the advice of the Council, appoint these people.  He will not be acting alone, but he will be using the council to assist him to appoint some of these members.  Clause 8.4 that one we have recommended deletion, and of course, we also looked at how the Minister would remove the Chairman if The Children Bill, 1995 was not active, and we say that The Children Bill, 1995can also be removed because of misbehaviour and two, because of being unable to perform the function of the Officer of The Children Bill, 1995.  So, we are including those two conditions, misbehaviour and inability to perform.  

In clause 10 we are saying the Council shall set up, not appoint now, we are saying the council shall set up, and instead of making so many committees we are now proposing that the Council will set up four specialised committees, one on capacity building; this one will not be dealing with helping some districts and organisation to build capacity to be able to cope with the problem of the children, and also we are proposing a committee called Research and Data Management, because you need information, you need to do research so as to be able to make a good policy for the children.  Another committee will be communication and advocacy, which we want really to go to the general public, to talk about issues of children, persuade government policy makers to make good laws and good policies for children; and the last committee which we want to be set up is the Finance Committee, of course, whose objectives are straight forward because being finance you know that it is dealing with money.

Clause 12, originally the reading was management and staff of the council, the council shall have a secretariat to assist in carrying out of its objectives and functions under the statute; and there is an establishment of the secretariat, and under 14.2 the Secretary General shall be appointed by the Minister and shall hold office upon such terms and conditions as may be specified in the instrument of appointment.  

Now, we are saying that the Minister will not have powers alone, he will be in consultation with the council to appoint the Secretary General; so is the Deputy Secretary General, we are also proposing that when the minister is appointing these people he should consult the members of the council.  Mr Chairman, the establishment of the National Council of Children is not an attempt by government to establish yet another parastatal as some Members may think.  The members of the sectoral committee are of the view that the service of the children are performed by different ministries and certain NGOs and agencies; therefore, there is a need to have a body like the NCC to coordinate, and monitor and evaluate the programmes for the children in this country.  

Clause 7.1 of the Bill provides for the council of not less than 15 and not more 21 members; The Children’s Bill 1996 which this House has kindly just passed ensures among others protection to children, it does not cover all the services needed by the children; the National Council of Children will, therefore, as you have seen in the Bill be legally obliged to ensure that there is no child in Uganda denied services and will monitor and also evaluate a programme for the children.  

I would like to thank, Mr Chairman, the Ministers who handled this Bill, hon. Eteker Ejalu, hon. Chebrot, who have really prepared this Bill for this house.  I would also like to thank you, Mr Chairman, and Members of this House and the Minister of Gender and Community Development and the staff of the Ministry of Gender and the first parliamentary council, and of course, last by not least, Her Excellency the Vice President who have extended the Social Service Committee with a lot of support to have come out with this final proposed Amendments.   Mr Chairman, hon. Members I wish to call upon you to support and pass this Bill.

With those few remarks, Mr Chairman, I beg to move and support the Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, just as one of you raised the case of this Bill having been circulated impromptu, and again to be fair to the hon. Members a little more time needs to be given to them so that they go and review what they considered in July up to date, so that we speak one language.  With that I am adjourning the Council until tomorrow, starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 3.30 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 3rd January, 1996.)






