Wednesday, 5th January, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al- Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFERENDUM BILL, 1993

(Debate Continues)

MR. KATO:  Point of information.  Is it in order for us to debate this important Bill when the Attorney General is not here?

THE CHAIRMAN:  There is a Minister standing for him.

MR. KATO:  In person?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is here, proceed please.

DR. ADONIA TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi):  Mr. Chairman, the people of Igara County send New Year’s greetings to you and to His Excellency the President.  They are only worried that last year, although it has been a peaceful and happy year, it has not been economically prosperous, people are very poor, and there is poverty everywhere.  I welcome the idea of consulting the masses through a referendum, but I would like to state that the legislature, just as my Colleagues have said, and not the Cabinet should make a decision on this very important matter.  

I, therefore, want to add my voice to the previous speakers that the legislature must be the body to decide or to approve on one, the subject of a referendum, two the geographical area of the referendum and the regulations governing a referendum including the framing of questions to be answered by the voters as well as the interpretation of the results.  I think these matters are very, very important and they should be decided upon by the legislature.  

You may recall that during the debate on the CA Statute I pleaded with you and with this House to reject Clause 18(3), which gave the President excessive powers to call a referendum on any subject before, during or after the CA deliberations.  You remember, I was harshly over-ruled by you and I accepted.  When this Bill is passed which I hope will happen, there will be three methods of calling a referendum; one, by Minister under Clause 18(1) of the CA Statute, two, by the President under Clause 18(3) of the CA Statute and three, by the Legislature through this Bill.  If you think about this, we are going to have problems.  This is the same subject - a referendum and we have three methods of dealing with it.  

I also want to remind you and to remind this House that Clause 3(1) of this Statute conflicts with Clause 18(5) of the CA Statute, which stops referenda on matters of local nature.  The CA Statute states that on matters of local nature, the local people will negotiate with Government and this Bill now gives power to whether we say NRC or the Minister to call referendum on any subject without restricting him regarding matters of a local nature.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the CA Statute is a specific law for a specific purpose and this one is a general law pertaining to referendum, and therefore, when we are talking about the CA, it is specified specifically for the purpose of the Constituent Assembly elections and that is that.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, there is nobody more aware of this one than myself.  I am definitely aware, but I think it would be causing legal confusion to have - this is a general law governing all referenda and I do not see why you have separate laws for one referenda, then this one, then that one and then we come to make - why do we not wait and make separate laws for every type of referenda, if we are not going to abide by this one.  

To avoid this conflict, I am, therefore, proposing an Amendment that the provisions of this Statute, supersedes any other enactment that conflicts with it.  So that for any referenda, the legislature and not the Minister or Cabinet or President, shall decide, that every referenda is referred to this important House.  If we do not do this, we shall go on having legal problems as we are now experiencing on the ‘ebyaffe’ Statute.  

You recall here I told you, Mr. Chairman, that the Monarchy in Ankole is going to cause problems if you subject it to the general law, and you can see what is happening now.  Every newspaper there is Barigye, there is Ankole ‘ebyeitu’ and hon. Kanyomozi is calling it ‘ebyabu’ and that kind of staff.  I think we should not pass situational, laws, we should pass laws which involve everybody and then live by those laws.  Recently, the Leadership of the country has made a statement that where the politics do not follow this law, that politics will be followed and the law will be neglected.  I think these are very serious remarks and if we do not follow the law, what is the use of passing laws in this House?  

I want to express concern about the timing of this Bill.  There are speculations that this Bill is intended to cause a referendum on multipartyism and mono-partyism, whatever, but I would like to caution this House and caution Uganda that if the aim is to stop multi-partyism, the moment you go for a referendum I want to assure you, that the multi-parties will win overwhelmingly throughout Uganda. (Laughter)  This has happened in Malawi and it will happen in Uganda and it will happen anywhere where people are given a chance to choose, they cannot choose to be subjected to one method of rule -(interjection)- so, I would like, therefore to caution this country and to caution this House, that whenever we pass laws we should pass them so that they can apply to this country for posterity but not to pass laws whenever they fit the ruling group.  

We have in Clause 5(i) they say, ‘the Minister may by Statutory Instrument make regulations prescribing the manner in which a referendum is to be held’.  I really do not know whether the Attorney General is very serious with the way he writes his laws.  If you do this by statutory instrument, the statutory instruments can be passed without debate, you can only make some remarks and they are not subjected to debate so that if we follow this law as it is, we can take this country for a ride.  

With these remarks, I would like to propose that consideration be given to the possibility of the Minister bringing laws of this nature with their own regulations.  How we are passing this law and when we have amended it there will probably be two or three lines of this law.  Why can the Minister not bring this law together with the regulations as we did to the CA Statute?  I do not want to propose rejection of this Bill, but if I had my way, I would have asked the Minister to go back prepare the regulations and bring this Bill when it is complete.  Because we now have a community dealing with the Police Bill, we have this really shallow Bill for us, it contains nothing.  

So, I do not really know, if it is the wish of the House, I would like to refer these few lines of this Bill to a Committee to deal with it so that we can deal with it when all the regulations are there, because what are we going to pass in two days, three days at public expense?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. LUBEGA (Rubaga Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Before I make any comments or observations on the referendum Bill, I would like to state that I am happy that the Minister of Justice and Attorney General is here in person as I speak, secondly, I would like to make an observation relating to the registration for the CA, registration for the voters, or by voters for the CA which have been taking place over the last one month.  We provided it under the CA Statute that a period not exceeding 30 consecutive days should be provided, in fact, by an announcement in the gazette for the voters to register.  This is provided in the Third Schedule of the Statute.  

Rule No. 4, is very, very specific and mandatory that the days where no to exceed 30 days.  But we did not tie our hands completely, under Section 30 of the CA Statute we provided that the Minister may, by Statutory Instrument amend the Third Schedule, that is including Rule No. 4, if he amended it necessary.  But we also went further and stated and provided that by doing so, the Parliament must approve whatever the statutory instrument could contain.  

Now, I have noted that the days were extended by 10 or so days for registration of voters.  That as far as I am concerned was a very welcome thing, because I had also rung up the Minister of State for Constitutional Affairs and expressed the wish that some extension should be made, but I also did advise that he had the powers himself, through section 30, to extend the days, subject to the approval of this House.  Now the days were extended, and to the best of my knowledge the Minister has not sought the approval of this House, which means in effect that the extension is null and void unless I am educated otherwise. (Interruption)

MR. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Thank you.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that the Minister of State for Justice and Constitutional Affairs is right now on the way seeking to seek the approval of the House. (Laughter)

MR. LUBEGA:  Well, I half-heartedly welcome that, because as I said I really had wanted that the days be extended because for reasons which were given by some Members yesterday, the Civic Educators were not on the ground in good time, and that made a lot of confusion.  Now that the Attorney General is saying the Minister is on the way to seek approval, this is welcome but we should not retrospect our laws, you see, because we are always available, we can be called upon to -(Interjection)

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that, may be, that when the Minister arrives he will not only have the proposal that we approve what he has done, but he may also be having in mind the idea that we amend certain parts of the CA Statute.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LUBEGA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Now, I would like to move on the Referendum Bill.  I am going to be as brief as the Bill itself.  One, by saying that if we allow Clause 3 to go un-amended, we shall put this country into problems.  While I have confidence in the Ministers and in any Minister that may propose by statutory instrument, or for that matter legislate for the referendum, I am aware of the intentions of NRM.  When NRM came into power in 1986, they promulgated or a law was put in place referred to as the legal Notice No. 1 NRM officials at that time were very much aware that Members of the Executive of Government including the President are normally very reliable people.  

But despite that, the NRM went on to suspend, in fact, to delete Section 64 of the 1967 Constitution, which was giving powers to the President when Parliament or NRC is in recess to promulgate ordinances into laws.  NRM foresaw that the executive could as well easily ensure the powers of what would have been powers of the Supreme Council of the Legislative Council of the country.  So, they said that Section 64, must be deleted and it was deleted under paragraph or Article 13 of the Legal Notice No. 1.  For the same reason, NRM foresaw that a President cannot be even allowed to go that far; President of the whole country, we cannot in this Parliament - and I call upon hon. Members to heed to this - we cannot leave the powers in the hands of just a Minister, by statutory instrument which is not even debated in Parliament according to the draft to pass statutory instruction.  That cannot be allowed.  

Therefore, I support very strongly the proposals by the earlier speakers in this House, several of them, that when a referendum is to be decided upon, the decisions should be made by this House and not any other person. I am sure as I speak about this, hon. Sibo has put in an amendment to the effect that where -under Clause 3 of the Bill where the words ‘Cabinet by Statutory Order’, the last line of the paragraph should be replaced, where they appear, these should be replaced by the words ‘Legislature by resolution”.  This is, I think, a very good amendment, it should be this House, and I would like to go further and also support Members who have proposed that when a decision is being taken in this House, that a matter should be subjected to a referendum, the two thirds majority should decide, because it is a very, very important matter as far as the House is concerned, I am not talking about the Legislature in the countryside, but here. 

I am also aware that fortunately or unfortunately, in the paragraphs requiring two thirds majority, in the Constitution, that paragraph was also suspended, and because of that, if we do accept this proposition, that two thirds majority are required in this House in order to decide on a matter that should be referred to the referendum, this provision should be specifically stated in this Bill when amending this Clause 3.  

The idea that this Bill is very bony, I think it is acceptable to most of us.  If you are going to have a comprehensive law on the referendum, we shall not have to be satisfied with a mere skeleton of ideas that have been put to us.  So, it is very, very important that as we have provided in the CA rules, regulations relating to the procedures of elections and elections, are usual backed up by very comprehensive legislations in uncertain terms, what we are passing today, the referendum Bill is part of election rules aspects, it is very important that we formulate rules of procedure comprehensively in this Bill. Otherwise, we are going to have a Bill that is going to be subjected to interpretations and the interpretations are usually made and should be made and have to be made by the courts of law, when we are not here, then somebody moves that the courts of law interpret what is not clear.  This law must be very, very clear in specific terms and in order to be so, all the rules of procedure, under the rules or otherwise, must be spelt out clearly in the statute.  If the Minister does not have sufficient time, this is Uganda, we are not running anywhere, we are comfortable enough we can allow him to revisit this matter so that we discuss a comprehensive Bill.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to say at the out-set, that I will endeavour not to repeat what my Colleagues have already said, because basically, I think they have made excellent contribution and therefore, in the interest of time and good debate, I will not go to their points, but I must say that I basically agree with them.  

The opening remarks of the Attorney General contained two important statements, one that this referendum Bill is short and none controversial, and he also said that the Bill is for general application, that any Minister can use it, the Minister for Agriculture, the Minister for Health, the Minister for Finance, the Minister for Local Government and so on and so on.  I do believe that the weakness of this Bill lies basically in its being too short and controversy around this Bill also lies because it is none specific. I would like to say that this Bill is a very important one, in that, in the practice of good governance, and in the practice of involving people in decision making, we are, as the Attorney General himself admitted for the first time in the country, making referendum part of our laws, and I do agree with him and previous speakers, that this is an innovation, an innovation therefore, which calls for all our intelligence, all our honesty and all our ability to ensure that we make a good law.  If this referendum which we are initiating into our law, is made into a bad law, then even subsequent amendments will already have caused a situation in which people become suspicious that a referendum, which we in this House have made, was not made for a good purpose.  

What is the spirit of the Bill?  When we are talking of the law, we normally talk about the spirit of the law, the spirit of the Bill.  I do not believe that bringing this Bill at this time was intended for the Minister of Agriculture, I do not believe that the issue is between cassava and potatoes, because I do not think that the issue in Uganda today is to call a referendum by the Minister of Agriculture whether Ugandans should choose between cassava and potatoes as a national dish.  I think there is something to me more fundamental than just cassava and potatoes, and therefore, I think it is in this respect, that we should assist the Attorney General in particular and Government and people of Uganda in general to make this referendum Bill a good one, and I intend to do that.  

One case that has been quoted is the case of Denmark, where a referendum was held by the people of that country to decide on their future participation in the European Community.  It was not only really Denmark, but I do believe that this issue of participation of Members of the European Community, referendums were held in most, if not all of the European Community.  Why was this held?  It was held because the issues there were so fundamental. It touched on sovereignty.  The European countries were deciding on the issue of moving towards one Parliament, towards one economy, one currency, one passport, they want to get rid of the borders, on issues of customs, and these are issues which are so fundamental that they touch on the Constitutions of each country, on their dependence on each other, and therefore, they were so important that it called for each country to hold a referendum.  

On the contrary, if we look at the common market, which is being created in North America, I think it is called North American Free Trade Area; Canada, USA and Mexico.  A referendum was held because all they want is something which we in Uganda and other PTA countries want, namely to have markets where we can move freely and sell our goods.  Basically, it was not touching on the issue of Sovereignty, it was not touching on the issue of citizenship, it was not touching on the issue of legislation, and that is why in North America, creating a market situation was not an issue of a referendum, but in Europe it had to be.  

So, I want to say that the Bill is a fundamental piece of legislation, very fundamental, yet in this form it is lacking details; it is so sparse and it will be subject to abuse.  My fear is that if we pass this Bill as it is now, it is going to be a bad law, and it will be a subject of abuse.  If a referendum is to be a positive, democratic instrument of good governance, then this Bill must be completely overhauled.  

A lot has been said how this Bill should be overhauled and I have pledged to this House, that I am not going to go back to what previous speakers like hon. Sibo, hon. Kanyomozi, and hon. Butagira and hon. Adonia and many others have said, I take their point as they have said them and I really call upon the Government and Minister of Justice to look at this critically. But if we are to say that the Bill must be improved upon and over hauled, I do not know whether it is going to be over hauled by simply putting in amendments as we intend to do at the Committee Stage.  The issues there are so fundamental to me, that if I had my way out and I intend to propose it, that we should not rush - we should not rush.  

Hon. Damiano Lubega said, look, let us give the Minister time, he can go and bring back the regulation; this House is not on fire; we are not going to be dissolved I hope tomorrow. If we can give the Minister a week, he may come out with what we really need and, therefore, even to help the Minister more, I think that if this Bill is referred to a Select or Standing Committee, to assist him like the Police Bill, we may come out with an excellent and well improved Bill.  

One of the issues that I tend to raise at this stage, is what is going to be the actual conduct of the referendum?  By this I mean, I expected that in this Bill, in this known thorough Bill, issues like when the Minister declares or whoever is authorised o call a referendum, how is she going to say this today on the 5th of January, 1994, a referendum shall be held in Uganda, and if you get a crusade government, they may say a referendum is going to be held next week.  

Interested parties in those issues to be decided by the referendum may not be given enough time to go to the people, talk to the people, or to debate the issues and, therefore, while the goodwill may be there from the hon. Minister of Justice and Attorney General now, but we are making a law in our book which is going to be used in 5 or 10 years, God willing or God unwilling, we may not be in this House or in this country to see it through, but somebody will use it; now, can we - I would personally be very keen, to say that once a referendum is called the following Schedule or steps must be taken.  One, a specified period must be declared, a minimum period must be stipulated, interested parties must be given time to be heard, and so on and so on.  This is a very fundamental provision and I expected that without such provisions in this Bill, the Bill itself is a bad law. 

Let me finally draw to the attention of this House, as others have done, the issue of regulations.  Particularly, Clause 5, sub-Rule 1 and 3. The Minister in Clause 5, is given very wide powers indeed, it says; The Minister may by statutory instrument, make regulations prescribing the manner in which a referendum is to be held’, and in sub-Clause 3, ‘regulations under the Section may be made to apply either generally or to any particular referendum’.  The real power, and I want to say the real power in this issue of making the law of the referendum lies in the regulation, not in this bony piece of legislation.  The power is hidden there, and that is where we want the Minister to come out with regulations, and like hon. Butagira has already pointed out, Parliament can be side-stepped and hoodwinked because you are told that, you may be on recess, a referendum is called, a bad government can decide to keep Parliament on recess indefinitely, those 30 days will pass and, mark you Parliament is called not to approve, but to annul.  You see, in other words, the regulations are laid before Parliament, not for any other thing, but for a negative purpose - that is it already assured -(Interruption)

MR. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I think it is really outrageous, if I may say so, for my hon. and learned friend, when the regulations are laid, they obviously will be laid for the purpose of being approved, but the purpose of speaking of annulment was to indicate the extent to which the powers of the House can go.  They can go if they see that these regulations, they do not like, they go to the extent of even annulling them.  So, the power to approve is obviously implied, but if they do not like them, they can annul them.  I am sure, hon. Omara Atubo does understand that position.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Attorney General, I think there is a word I wanted to use, but I think I will reserve it.  But I will only tell the House that if you read carefully sub-Rule 4, it says, ‘Regulations under this section shall be laid before the Legislature within thirty one days after they are published in the gazette and shall be subject to annulment’.  Just as you know, I would have liked a situation where it is more positive than simply calling us, if you want to annul, annul if you want to approve, approve, but the way the whole thing is drafted, is that you are hiding power and this is my point, you are hiding power in the referendum or in the regulation and you can go as far as you want within those thirty days and by the time you call the House to annul, the matter is already a fate accompli.  This is the issue I am raising -(Interruption)

MR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to inform the House through you, that there seems to be confusion about resolutions and laying before Parliament.  There are three types of resolutions that may be laid before Parliament for a number of actions.  There are what is called affirmative resolutions, negative resolutions and informative resolutions.  For affirmative resolution, Sir, the Minister is obliged to lay the draft regulations before the House.  They never become law until this House has passed an affirmative resolution approving them, then they become operational.  For a negative resolution, the Minister makes the resolutions, the draft regulations, they become effective immediately, but they are laid before Parliament and if they are annulled by Parliament, they are annulled without affecting what the Minister may have done under them, and that is the present one which we are discussing.  The one for information only, the Minister makes the resolutions, they are laid before Parliament for information only, and they have no power either to annul them or to approve them.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  So, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the former Attorney General for being so clear in the information, and that is the point I was driving at, that you lay this after you have already done your action and really it is already a fate accompli.  

Finally regulations; my interpretation in reading this is that it appears that regulations will be made for every particular referendum to be held, in other words, the draftsman is conceiving a situation where you do not have a general regulation governing all the referendum, but when Government wants to call a referendum, then particular regulations will be made. I have come to this understanding, because of the way Clause 5(1) is written; ‘the Minister may by statutory instrument make regulations prescribing the manner in which a referendum is to be held’.  In other words, while this House is thinking that we should have a general regulation in the Schedule governing all the referendum to be held in future, the way Clause 5(1) is drafted speaks of a situation in which a Minister is going to make regulations for every referendum to be held, and if you look at Clause 5(3) my argument is further reinforced by Clause 5(3) which says, regulations under this section may be made to apply either generally or to any particular referendum’.  

This way of not being clear in the law is not, Mr. Attorney General, of interest to this country, and I think that if we are innovating a law of this fundamental nature, let us come out very clear, because for whom is the interest of a referendum being held?  A referendum is being held for the interest of the country, and let us be transparent, let us be clear, and let us be open about it, and with these remarks, I think that this Bill should be thoroughly over hauled if it is to be of any benefit to this country.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MRS. NJUBA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  There has been a lot of talk about section three (3), of the Bill, that is about the fact that the Minister or a Minister and Cabinet should be the ones to initiate this referendum idea, and people - Members sorry do not appear to be happy, a number of Members are saying that, NRC or the legislature should be the one to sanction the holding of a referendum.  

In my own opinion, I do not think that is practicable, because under normal circumstances the legislature should be the one to pass laws.  Why should a government feel that it is necessary to have a referendum, why should any government feel that it is necessary to go and ask the population what the answer to the particular question should be?  It is because a government is charged with the duty of looking after - running the country and sometimes it happens that a government may have the feeling that there is a difference between what the legislature is saying and what the population appears to be saying.  

That is the only time that, I think, a government should want to really ask the population, ‘is it true what your representatives are saying in the Assembly is actually what you want?’  That is the only occasion that I envisage - that a government should want to ask the population.  Now, if you are asking the population to guide you on the thinking of a legislature, how can you go to seek for the legislature’s permission to ask the population whose ideas you think may be different? (Applause)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member who is on the Floor, that there is an impression that seems to be created that government is the administration in power at the time.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that Government is a trinity, and legislature is part and parcel of Government.  That there is a competent authority that might have to call a referendum is a matter of negotiation.  Thank you. 

You used the word government; in fact, I wanted to say Cabinet. The executive think that what the legislature is saying may be different that does not mean that there is a fundamental difference between the executive and the legislature on all things, but you may have a feeling that from what you hear in the air, there appears to be a difference between what the people are saying and what the legislators are saying.  Therefore, what do you do, you go to the population and ask the question, and do you want this or the other?

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, Cabinet is a part of the legislature, two, the legislature represents the feelings of the people, they are their representatives, three, the Government does not operate alone outside the whole entire system.  So, I find it very difficult for the argument from the hon. Member holding the Floor that the Government could have different feelings when part of that government, particularly in a Parliamentary system, is also part of the legislature.  Cabinet ministers are representatives.  

MRS. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I agree with hon. Kanyomozi and there is nothing new he is telling me, it is possible for me to be part of this legislature and find that there is too much controversy on a certain issue that as a Minister, I am no longer able to make up my mind until I am assisted -(Interjections)- no, why, why resign because the people elect you to come here do not really surrender all their power to you, they retain something, they retain the right to say we want this or the other?  If you think what you are saying is actually what the population is going to say, why fear, let there be a referendum and I am sure that no Cabinet will ask for a referendum unnecessarily because all Cabinets are always aware of the financial implications involved.  

MRS. NAMUGENYI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform hon. Mrs. Njuba that, we do not just fear the people we represent, but because the people sent us here to do anything or their behalf that is why we want to discuss any issue first and when we think it is beyond our powers, then we send it back to the people.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. informer that -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

HON. MEMBERS:  Namugenyi,

MRS. MATEMBE:  I would like to inform hon. Namugenyi that, at times the representatives of the people have tended to use up the people’s powers and misrepresent them, and this is a fact, for instance, Mr. Chairman, last year on the extension issue, we sat here okay, and some of us had asked the people; others had not asked up to now -(Interruptions)- this hon. House should really deserve that title and earn it so that we can proceed to debate.  That is one example where up to now we are being accused of using up people’s power to extend our period, and when we were going around throughout the Constitutional exercise, these people were pointing a finger and up to now they are saying, and I think this is one of the circumstances that we are looking at as having used up the powers.  

Another information - we may find a case you know to supplement what Mrs. Njuba is saying, where you find like for instance in the current draft constitution, people were demanding direct election of the President, and you may find that in such a case, where the other people are elected in terms of multi-parties, you find that this President and his Cabinet have a minority in this House, in which case they are interested in actually creating stalemate and failing the Cabinet to proceed.  So, in such a case, it would be wise and reasonable to appeal to the people, if you do not do that, how do you resort to the same House that is not supporting that to give you the mandate to do it?  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. NJUBA: I thank all the hon. Members for all the information but please allow me to proceed.  For me I think what would be more appropriate what may be we should ask for is that, in cases where the NRC - no the legislature also finds that they would like to ask the population about what the Cabinet is doing, suppose the legislature feels that the Cabinet is insisting on something that the population does not want.  Maybe what we should ask for is that, there should be room for legislature also to initiate or request for a referendum.  I would find that better point to support rather than saying that all referenda should be sanctioned by the legislature.  Because in most cases where I have seen referenda being held, it is really where there is a difference between what appears to be the position of the population and what appears to be the position of the legislature.  

So, I think it would not be workable to insist that legislature - I do not think I need any more information, I want to proceed and I am leaving that point.  Somebody was arguing that this law may - no this government has a habit of making situational laws.  First of all, I do not think that is true, but even if it were true, for me I think usual governments bring Bills to be debated to solve certain problems you make laws to answer certain problems in the community.  If at any one time Cabinet finds that there is a problem here, and this problem cannot be settled or solved in any other way other than bringing a Bill in the House, I do not see anything wrong in bringing to the House a Bill.  So, first of all, I do not think it is true that this government is always bringing Bill just to solve a single problem but even if it were, I do not see any problem with it because, after all, they bring these so that you hon. Members can make laws to assist Cabinet to solve problems.  Some people were saying that okay, in case of a referendum we should have a two-thirds majority of the people voting before we accept the verdict of the referendum, now, a referendum is held when everything else I think has failed.  Now, if you come to the last resort an then create conditions where even the last resort cannot come up with an answer, then what?  Suppose you go to a referendum and you get a 51: 49 – (Interruption)

HON. MEMBERS:  Then go for elections.

MRS. NJUBA:  Then what?

HON. MEMBERS:  So failed.

MRS. NJUBA:  So, I think a referendum should be allowed to have a simple majority because that will be the verdict of the majority of the voters or those people who cared to vote.

Yesterday there appeared to be - I do not know whether I misunderstood - there appeared to be an argument that a referendum may not be held on constitutional matters, I do not know whether I misunderstood, for me I think in my own humble opinion, on matters that affect the constitution that is why a referendum should be most needed.  Because sometimes the matter is so important that you want to ask everybody to cast his or her vote on this matter.  I do not think it is true, I do not know I stand to be corrected, I am not a lawyer but I have a feeling that even on matters concerned with the Constitution, a referendum may be held.  And, because of that argument yesterday people were saying that some matters on which they suspect that this Government wants to propose a referendum, they should not be proposed because those are Constitutional matters.  Personally, in this particular - and I suspected that they are talking about an issue like whether this country should sometime continue with the Movement type of politics or party- politics, that is what I suspected, I do not know whether it was true but if that was true, in this new Constitution which we are going to make -(Interruption)

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Lady has admitted that yesterday she did not understand, and the same Lady is refusing information, we want to inform her so that she can understand. (Laughter)  Is it in order, therefore, Mr. Chairman, that having admitted that she does not understand certain things that she should refuse information?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MRS. NJUBA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not think I want to waste my time answering the hon. Members.  So, what I was saying, before I was interrupted, was that in our Constituent Assembly Statute, we want to make a new Constitution, we are trying to amend our Constitution, and we want to make a new Constitution.  So, even if it were true that a referendum may not be held on a matter to amend the constitution, it still would be alright for us to hold a referendum on a matter that we want to put in our new Constitution.  Because we were not going to amend the Constitution, we are leaving the old Constitutions aside, we are making ourselves a new Constitution and we think we should go in that new Constitution agreed as far as possible.  So, I do not see anything wrong that should prevent us from going ahead in our constituent Assembly debate to hold referenda to clear certain points where we think the Constituent Assembly Statute has not come up with a clear cut position.  So, Mr. Chairman, with those few comments, I support the Bill.

MR. SSERUNJOGI (Kawempe Division, Kampala):  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for allowing me to speak on this important Motion.  Members of this House are suspicious with the way the Referendum Bill was brought in.  I have a feeling - why Members are suspicious.  One; when the NRM Government came to power in 1986, it had its own programme prepared in the bush known as the Ten Point Programme.  It made it clear that it was going to be consistent with the programme, time came after having expanded the House, they asked for an extension period of five years.  Some of us never supported the Bill whole-heartedly, others supported.  Now, we heard accusations from outside this House that we are here to eat and that they have extended our stay in the House. Therefore, our mandate given to us by the electorate, was being questioned.  

Secondly, just a few days ago, we had the Constitutional Amendment Bill deleting Article 118 from the 1967 Constitution.  This was clearly made, and it was passed that all districts or areas in Uganda which require their traditional rulers, should be allowed to have them.  This was clearly debated, and to our amazement, there is a controversy now in Ankole that Barigye should not continue with the programme.  Now, that issue is still going on in Ankole and we are wondering why the government has not made a firm stand or make a statement about that.  That brings suspicion that possibly government is not consistent with what they said in their Ten Point Programme.  

The third point, why we are suspicious with this Bill, in the State House Press Conference of last week but one, the President made it clear that even if Judiciary takes a stand, he was going to nullify the Court ruling.  So, on those three points we are wondering why this Bill is coming now when CA elections are due to take place in a few days’ time and possibly Members who will he elected will discuss the constitution of this nation.  After having said those three points above, I would like to echo the points raised yesterday by Members that Article 3 should be amended and I support the proposal put across in this House by hon. Nekyon that this Article should be amended.  

You see have three types of representatives here, we have representatives who were elected directly by the people from the field, we have nominated representatives and we have historicals.  Now, a person who failed to pass through the electoral process was at a later date nominated by the President and is here now, supposing he is a Minister and can this House say that he can speak for the people?  That is why we say that as long as he is here, we do agree that he was nominated, others are historicals, but he has not mandate from the electorate that he can speak for the electorate.  Therefore, Mr. Chairman, my point is that -(Interruption)

MR. KIGOZI:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my Colleague and friend that not all Nominated Members necessarily failed to go through the elections.  There are some Nominated Members who were nominated without having failed in the elections and I want to make that very clear in case they think that any Nominated Member is a failure.

MR. SSERUNJOGI:  Mr. Chairman, if not all did not go through the electorate process, but since they have no mandate from the people outside this House, I therefore, say that they still have no mandate of speak for the people and I still maintain that.  Another point is the Constitutional-making process. It is clear now as earlier put across to us by hon. Lubega that the process is actually in a difficult situation.  During 1990-1992, the Constitutional Commission conducted a lot of seminars for wanainchi and we were given time to educate the people, get the views through memoranda and submit to the Commission. But during the Registration exercise, civil educators were not given ample time to educate the masses and that is why registration was very poor.  People were reluctant; they did not know what to do because they were not educated to do that.  It appeared that Government has probably a hidden agenda as far as the Constitution is concerned and that is why it is bringing in this issue of referendum during this time.  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor now, that Government and those people who were in the bush naturally had a programme.  When we were fighting, we were fighting to bring democracy and naturally bring what is happening.  For instance, we have talked about the Constitution making for which you have all consented to take part, and now when you come to debate in this House and say Government and those people in the bush had a hidden agenda, I fail to understand why you are even participating in this constitution making process.  Because in the bush arrangement and you are in an expanded House of the bush, because this House was expanded and, therefore, people who are here are joining the bush people and you are an expanded Member.  

Therefore, you should not get worried about what is happening.  Referendum, is to smooth that process so that there is no question of doubting whether you are satisfied or not satisfied, everybody should participate comfortably, be satisfied, if you are defeated as the Chairman yesterday warned us, if you are defeated you should accept the defeat if you defeat you should accept also to come in honourably.  So the whole thing is when they bring in a referendum, it is not a hidden agenda, it is something to do with adding on some few spices on what is already a good making.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

NR, SSERUNGOJI:  Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Member, but I would like to draw his attention to the fact that when we left here before December for a recess, you clearly indicated to us that you go, come back after elections.  I am wondering why elections have not been able - we have come back before elections take place. Article IV of the Bill, 4(b) is clear that - I would like to quote, ‘where the referendum is to take place only in a particular area, the persons registered as electors for public elections in that area on the date when the voting is to take place there’.  I am requesting the hon. Minister and Attorney General to note or to allow Members of the public who had not registered during the last exercise to register for referendum, because there are some who were under aged, there are some who were sick, some were out of the country.  So, if a referendum should be held in a particular area, people should be allowed to register and be allowed to participate in the elections.  

I want to conclude by requesting the Minister to let the House know the details or regulations concerning referendum before referendum takes place, we should know the details so that people participate when they fully understand why a referendum takes place.  Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks, I support the Motion.

BRIG MOSES ALI (East Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am sure that many of us who are going to talk now are going to repeat good points that have already been mentioned by some of our Colleagues, and since we are elected Members, we are not going to refrain from saying what has been already said because it is our responsibility to say it.

Any law or Bill whatever it is, being formulated has a purpose, intentionally for the good of the country and the people.  All of us seated here, are seated here as a result of history of bad laws, and now we are trying to write a new constitution because it has been advanced, because of previous bad laws.  So, bad leaders make bad laws and bad laws do not make bad leaders.  I do not know.  

I want to say that NRM has done a lot of good things, but I want to express my fear that we are now reaching a stage also, like hens at home laying eggs and then turning around to drink their own good eggs that they have laid, so that these hens have no chicks!  So, the historicals, together with all - in fact, all of us are historicals, even those who did not go to the bush; they fought whatever they were doing whether in passing messages, whether in seeing what is happening -(Laughter)- not only the 27; everybody here is a historical, that is why personally I am happy that we are now going towards the end of this word historical because everybody is going to be measured on the same yardstick.  What I am now saying is, this country is now tired of bloodshed.  So, a law must be clear, by the way, the lawyers are the first to run away having confused this country with their laws. (Laughter)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you.  I would like to inform my Colleague that though lawyers run away having misled the government, yet the laws that are made are made through the advice to the so called Prime Ministers or Presidents who misuse, who abuse the law by itself per se is good, except that it is the intention by those who mislead the Presidents and the authority of government in the country of Uganda, the laws are always good.  So, therefore, there is no question of blaming the laws; blame the mischievous mis-informers.

BRIG. MOSES ALI:  Mr. Chairman, I do not want to see a situation where this country is going to break again into chaos, because of dubious laws, because of the law which we do not understand, because of a law which will put a lot of power on one man and that one man we do not know his security, maybe, he is not insured.  So, we can wreck the country because you have mounted on him the power which I think is too much for him, is too much for him or her for the matter but because we have not had the Attorney General, that is ‘her’ that, so we talk about him.  There are a lot of invaded hidden facts in these laws which are put nice in words, but when it comes to be interpreted now on the ground, when somebody has taken a blind tube and something comes out of that, then that is a bad interpretation of that law!  We do not want to reach that stage.  

So, I am just simply appealing that I do not repeat all what has been said. Let us have a sincere law with good hearts and we advance to build on what we have already started as a broad based government, let us continue from here and get what is good for us.  But if we say Attorney General will declare referendum, now if you declare the referendum now – the Attorney General to declare the referendum in Ankole where the situation is so delicate, what will happen?  Whatever happens in Ankole affects the whole country; take a country as a body.  

So, we do not want these things to happen, we must be clear minded, and we must actually make the country to decide on their fate, not one person or two people or even the House - the House they say has already been bought, we have been bought Toyota Stouts, how can a person be bought by a Toyota Stout?  So, it is not.  It is because of the good of the country that is why there is peace up to now.  You can take your Toyota Stouts, but we have extended the five years we are peaceful and if need be, we may extend for the sake of peace. (Laughter) 

So, I do not want to waste a lot of time repeating, repeating, repeating, but let us put in mind, that our priority must be to keep this country peaceful, and let us have good laws from good leaders, semi-educated and so on.  We have good leaders, let us have good laws, if you make bad laws there is something worse that we will not even recognise you that you are the one who made that law.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Motion.

MR. WANDIRA (Bbaale County, Mukono):  Mr. Chairman, I thank you very much indeed for giving me this opportunity to join my fellow Members of Parliament to settle the problems of our country Uganda.  I have few points to say something on the topic on the Floor that was presented by the hon. Attorney General to this House for the betterment of our country, the referendum Bill.  

Before I say something on this Bill, I would first of all like to thank most sincerely the Government of Uganda for the wonderful help extended to me, because without the assistance of our beloved Government, I would not have stayed for all these months in Mulago Hospital -(Applause)- my heartfelt gratitude goes to all my friends in all the districts of Uganda who were able to render services, like Mrs. Victoria Ssebagereka and hon. Ssebagereka the Minister for Public Service who used to run all my responsibilities in my absence.  I also thank some of those hon. Members of this House who have supported me both morally and financially during the difficult days I have been in Mulago Hospital.  I want to express my special thanks to all the staff of Mulago Hospital in your presence especially Professor Kiryabwire, Professor Kamya, Professor Kigonya and Miss Nyanzi physiotherapy department for their entire efforts to care for me for the whole year.  I am most grateful to them because they are still keeping on the spirit up to this moment.

Lastly, I am appealing to all Members of this House of Parliament to take it that it is our duty to mobilise all the people in Uganda to elect people who are reasonable and who have Uganda at heart to make the best constitution but not to allow the untrusted people who will land us into the problem of the past. (Applause)  

I strongly support the Attorney General’s Referendum Bill because without thinking very seriously about the referendum and let things go as they were put first, this Constituent Assembly may turn into an Assembly similar to the Parliamentary debate of previous bad regimes which had opposition in the Assembly and the result will be very bad.  We shall not achieve anything.  

The reason why we are asking for a new Constitution is to break the old Constitution. But if at all we are not careful during the elections, we might elect Members who are going to land us into problems of the past.  This is because some of these members who want to be elected are those same people who made the 1967 Constitution, which plunged our country into the problems we have been experiencing during the past 20 years.

Lastly, we are very grateful for the effort you have put in making the country so peaceful.  All the people appreciating the peace and tranquility being carried out in our nation are still wondering how you really managed to carry out everything for this nation.  In some other area apart from Ankole, people are worried very much why the area of ankole is not like the rest of the parts of the country, most of the people are complaining that the Head of State has got advisors who are directing him in the wrong path -(Laughter)- yet we see that some of our ex-leaders like Mutesa II, like Amin and Obote were not able to succeed due to wrong advisors.  The people advising our beloved President Yoweri Kaguta Museveni to get friends and advisors who have Uganda at heart because we find that most of these people who have elected traditional rulers in other parts of the country are helping him to see the problem which is in Ankole, people are getting so suspicious of this point.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. KAVUMA (Kyadondo County, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for this opportunity to contribute to this Bill, I will declare my total support to this Bill right from the beginning for the following reasons.  In mind or to my mind this Bill represents the apex of the struggle of the people of Uganda to be the political body in this country. They are struggling for supremacy in the political field, and I am saying it is the apex because there was the armed struggle that we all know about, and this question of empowering the people was a very, very central point in that struggle.  

Some Members have expressed fear that if this Bill was to be passed into a Statute and a referendum was to be organised we have a population which is not yet well informed, in fact some Members went as far as arguing that they as Members are not even supposed to teach the population.  If we are leaders in a population which lacks information and we create access to this information, I think it is our duty to educate or pass on this information to the people so that they can take appropriate decisions, and I think even without saying a law this Parliament should make - should be understood in that manner because when you are a Member of Parliament you are really supposed to go and teach the people about what laws we pass in this House.  

Another reason why I support this Bill is because I see it as an improvement on the methods of work in the management of public affairs in this country.  We sat here, we legislated and we extended the interim period of this administration we did a correct thing but if this law was in place and we had consulted the people through the mechanism it is trying to set up, we would have got the same results and we would not have had anybody pointing any figures at the NRC that there was something a miss in the way the issue of the extension was made.  I think this is an appropriate time to improve on the methods of work so that when a situation arises where the population should be consulted there is ready mechanism for doing so.  I think this Bill is also a very important step in the consolidation of the people or whatever goals they have so far achieved in the political field.  The people have always been struggling to become masters of the political destiny of this country and when we have a piece of legislation like this one on our Statute Book, I think we shall go down in history as a legislature that provided a mechanism that will answer the people’s justified call in this regard.  

I know we are representatives of the people, but I can also see a situation where a legislature can be out of tune with what the population thinks or wants to be done at a particular moment and on a particular issue and I think in that kind of situation since Parliamentarians are representatives, it is not wrong to go back to ask the people who sent the representatives to this House, whether they approve of what the House is doing and in fact, I would go further and say, that although there is a provision that the Government can initiate this process of consultation we may not have gone the full way, I think there should be a provision also where the population, if they so wish could initiate this kind of referendum. (Applause) 

I am not saying they should only do it through this House, but they could also - we could legislate and say that, okay, if say, one thousand registered voters in two thirds of all the districts of this country demanded that they wanted a referendum could be organised.  I am saying we may have a Government today that is very, very responsive to the public feeling, and we may also have a Parliament that is responsive but what the population says and the Minister would not deem it in the public interest to put into motion that process of consultation.  I think we can think about a way where the population can also initiate this process of consultation.  

Some fears have been expressed about the requirement of a simple majority in making a decision through this referendum. I do not see anything wrong with this because in fact, if we are already worried that even a simple majority could be difficult to get through a referendum by people who may not be very keen to vote an the rest of it, I do not see why we should make it even more difficult when we go to the population and provide for a two thirds majority which may in many cases be impracticable.  That kind of situation would create a stalemate and stalemates are not terribly good in matters of solving or managing problems in society they can end up into very disastrous results.  

Arguments have also been put that this Bill should have all the regulations we need to ensure that we know what we are talking about, I really disagree with this, because I think as legislators we must consider the principles in the Bill and leave the regulations as we normally do to the relevant authority which makes those regulations taking into account what is happening in the country or any part of the country where it is required at a particular time.  It would be wrong to make regulations in this House; that duty could be left to the appropriate authority, if we want control we can say, okay, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor of the House that in case - politically speaking the case of initiative in a referendum is highly important that the population, the masses must be connected to a referendum initiative, not the Government because the people will say the question we must do it through a political spirit.  

MR. KAVUMA:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. Member amplifying on my worry that we should really go down even beyond this House and reach the people I do not think we are disagreeing in principle his approach understanding may differ slightly from mine.  

I was saying, really if Parliament was to make regulations here and then we found that they need to be amended you know how long it takes to come and debate things and then cause an amendment it would - it is therefore, I think in the wisdom of Parliaments and this House also that it has left these matter which are really more procedure than substantive law to the authorities that are entrusted with the administration of any particular statute.  

With those few remarks, I retaliate my support to this Bill because I can see it is a Bill that is intended to strengthen the population in the control of the political organs of this country and of course we know that many times we have been let down by some of the political organs of this state, the people must never relinquish the power they have struggled for and obtained and we should never appear to legislate as if we fear total emancipation of the population by giving them or by enabling them to exercise the powers they have fought for, they have died for and will continue to defend.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OMADI (Butebo County, Pallisa): Mr. Chairman, thank you for giving me this opportunity.  But before I make my two or three points on this Bill, I want through you to inform the Government that people in the rural areas are very, very poor, they have no money, food is scarce and they need Government’s attention, chiefs have not been paid their salaries they are working for nothing.  

In fact, parents are unable to take their children back to schools this week and government should be thinking in terms of referendum to allow the parents also to suggest the referendum whether the Government is doing the right thing to make them poor and deny their children to go back to school. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. OMADI:  Mr. Chairman, even Members of Parliament are very poor, they are pretending here to put on coats to be smart, but their allowances to the tune of Shs. 2 million, Shs. 3 million, Shs. 5 million have not been paid by this august House -(Laughter).  So, that is the information I want to give to the House that there are certain sectors in our society who are enjoying themselves while others are suffering.  Trade between Kenya and Uganda is dying but what is surprising, Certain individuals are busy putting up mansions in Kampala and other rural areas, where do they get money that is what the ordinary people are asking us.  

Now, having told the country that Members of the parliament are poor and I would like to put this question to the House, how many Members of the House are saying they are well off?  I do not want them to tell me, let us put our House in order before we blame others.  Now, let me come to the Bill.  I was in this House with hon. Mayanja way back in 1960s and hon. Minister knows why the past Government failed, the governments failed because they would not listen to the voices of the people and as a result there was chaos and some of us had to end up going into exiles, but hon. Mayanja survived and remained here -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. OMADI:  Those who survived had to play a low profile but I am requesting my hon. Friend to listen to the views that had been expressed by the Members.  The law in fact, which the Bill is trying to bring through this House has been long overdue it should have been brought here in 1988 so that by the time the Commission which was going to inquire into the system of the Constitution that we should have should have been considered along with that basing on that Bill.  But since it has come at the right time -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform my hon. friend for the very long time since 60s and the Members of this august House, the issue of a referendum had a reason to come about because you seen to be confused.  A referendum arose from the fact that in September 1989 under Statute 9 of 1989, that it was decided by this House that the NRM and NRC - this august House, should extend its life for five years, to do what?  To make the noble White proper constitution for Uganda, why?  Because a statutory body is in our history and it cannot be challenged. The Uganda Constitution Commission was made by statute to study and review our constitutional environment so that we get the right national constitution. Why?  Because from 1966, Uganda by unlucky opportunity had 7 Presidents, namely, Mutesa, Obote (twice), Amin, Lule, Binaisa and our present President.  Why?  Each one of them, if you do not read the Constitution of 1967, The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, which enabled everybody the open opportunity to grow and develop and get in any position whether, a President or a Prime Minister, and what not -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Are you debating or giving information?

MR. OBWANGOR:  So, we did this because we said that the Constitution must be made and because -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, give information and stop there.

MR. OBWANGOR:  If you read Chapter 6 of the report to the Uganda Constitution Commission it will give you the -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please, take your seat.  Proceed please.

MR. OMADI:  Mr. Chairman, first of all, I was saying before hon. Obwangor stood up, that the hon. Friend of mine who is here with me in this House should listen and take in consideration all the points which have been raised by Members.  He should not imitate the arrogance of the past rulers.  I am saying this in good faith.  If a referendum is to be respected, it must be made in an acceptable manner.  The referendum of 1962 that was in the Constitution of 1962 - I am saying the referendum was in the 1962 Constitution.  You see, I am not responsible for your ignorance of what happened. (Laughter)  That referendum - the 1962 Constitution provided that the lost counties of Buyaga and Bugangaizi should be held after a two years’ period, and when the referendum was carried out, the people in those counties decided to go to Bunyoro Kingdom.  A Kingdom that is now a subject of dispute and, when that decision was made by the local people in those areas, there was a problem.  And the problem was that, the then President declined - I do not want to use the word refused - declined to sign the assent copy after we had passed a Bill in this House, for those people to go where they want.  And this same House - Obwangor was here, hon. Kirya was there, Mayanja was there, he was there passed a law saying that, if the President declines to sign or to give an assent to a Bill to become a law, then the Prime Minister shall do it and if the Prime Minister did it, then shall be deemed to have been signed by the President and that culminated in the problems that we had to face in this country.

I therefore, would like to appeal to hon. Attorney General to make sure that we pass this referendum Bill that will be accepted and respected.  Some hon. Members have been saying here, that some of you have over stayed.  But, I think some of you have also come too early. (Laughter) 

I would like to say that some of you have come too early to this House, and that is why you are lowering the debates of this House.  Some of you, I am not saying all of you.  I am very careful in my choice of words. (Laughter)  But let me end up by saying, age is wisdom.  And in fact, I am proud to say the way in which you conduct yourself in this House is showing that, you have now the grip of this House and you are doing a commendable job. (Applause)  I would like to appeal to the hon. Minister to take in my words of wisdom and to take into consideration all the points that have been raised in this House.  I see you just seated there doing nothing but he should be writing all these points down. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Omadi, my hon. Friend of long ago, that I am alert and I have listened to what he has said and all he has said amounted to this that I should listen to what other Members have said, he himself had not made a contribution.

MR. OMADI:  Mr. Chairman, once I respected the hon. Mayanja as a Minister, but I am only afraid he has to say that I have said nothing when I have in fact contributed.  I think you see, it is his arrogance that he uses that makes him even repugnant to the people -(Laughter)- I know here -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. OMADI:  Mr. Chairman, all in all, I am sure hon. Mayanja knows I am his friend and he has taken in what I have said.  Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks, I support the Bill. 

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Before I also comment on the Bill, I want to the submission by that friend which has just finished, that really the weather has been very unkind for us in the East - very unkind that the draught killed all the food and now people are facing a terrible situation really.  Both food and water should be considered and I appeal to government to come to our rescue quickly otherwise, there will be no people to vote during the referendum if any will be held.  It is true.

The way I look at the situation of Uganda today, it is true that we are in this House not divided.  Supposing we had been here divided we would see more problems.  And I would like to question with my brothers and sisters who are in government not to think that we are doing this for the sake of disturbing the government.  We want to examine every law carefully because it will last long.  If the referendum is going to come to solve the problems of Uganda, it must be very clean.  We are appealing to the Attorney General to make us also know what are those regulations, because what is wrong for us to know?  We are the people on the ground to explain to our people if time comes.  So, we need this thing to be brought express if possible.  

For example, should one day, somebody wake up to say that there must be a national language in this country and that kind of referendum will be very dangerous especially of the tribes which are minority.  Some people would rush to think that the solution can be found on referendum because they know they are a majority, what if you are only 20 in your tribe, what will happen?  So, those are the things we should take into account.  That is why I want to support Members who say, before it goes down to the people, these Parliamentarians should examine and see whether people are protected.  Moreso, the minority. (Applause) 

We should not make short-cuts because we know we are so many we shall do this.  This is dangerous.  That is why people of the past got problems.  Me I support the Bill because there is nothing wrong.  It will make government make its work easier.  I am also happy that people might think this Bill will now solve the current situation.  But this is what is entitled; this Bill came very early, except I do not know why it was not tabled in time. What is worrying Ugandans today is that how shall we continue after the CA business?  This worrying every Ugandan, because people now have peace, they want to go to school although there is poverty, but people are asking what will be there?  So as peace lovers, let us make sure that although some people outside this House blame us, but let us do our work properly because we have the records.  

It is unfortunate that since we entered this Parliament up to now our Hansards have not been published, and people think we have not been speaking.  If those books were available, those who are being accused of not talking here would just speak for themselves.  So, I ask Government, to make sure that those Hansards from 1989 are published quickly because there is a lot of information there.  

I am also accepting with the belief of the Members that civic education did not arrive earlier in my county. Unfortunately, the same week we started registration is when these people also started to do civic education.  Some of them were picked, and instead of civic education, they were doing campaigns themselves, obviously out of control.  So, I think education is a very important thing, so that a member of the family or a member without family understands the role she or he plays in this country.  There must be enough information and enough time to make people of Uganda move together.  We are very unfortunate that we have more than fifty tribes if we do not mind.  So, this is a very big gap if you want to narrow them to think in one way like the Japanese may be, so it is difficult to run this country.  I congratulate this government for having tamed all the boiling routes into one camp.  People here are differently set, but they live like brothers.  I have enjoyed this Parliament for the last two and a half years including you, and I feel I am a citizen -(Laughter)- I have enjoyed your action really because I have been able to tell this country what I felt was true.  

I also concur with people who say that Article 3 be considered. It is very unfortunate to give one person the responsibility of this nation.  Parliament must also try to help the Government to make sure that we are together.  The moment Government comes to do things without Parliament, is when we shall have problems again.  I hate going together and then we fail when we are about to arrive now.  Because our journey is coming to a close.  What we have done here will be examined by our children to come.  Whether we have done it properly or not, and we shall not run away over responsibility.  

So, I thank Government for having kept us together, although poverty is there as my brother Omadi was saying.  You see, this is a very important House in this country but our answer, we are not put in any priority financially in this country.  That is why Members go out even without allowances at time.  You find us begging around in cities.  This is not good.  You see, we are like your visitors.  If you are hosting visitors, make sure there is enough food, if not do not call them.  Yes.

With those few remarks, I appeal that the Attorney General bring his required regulation to enable us understand the full part which people are thinking is hidden.  What is that agenda which is hidden?  There is nothing wrong, thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER (Hon. Eriya Kategaya):  Thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this Bill that is politically important.  I will be short and relevant, and I will not meander.  There are some Members who have raised a question why we are tabling the Bill now, the time is not yet but if anything the time is proper.  We are in the process of putting in place a provision in the law to guarantee the democratic rights people have gained so far.  We are going to do it in the Constitution, and in my submission, this referendum Bill is also tamed, is part of the exercise or the process of guaranteeing the rights of our people.  A referendum is an ultimate and direct way of consulting the people.  I know Parliament is important and supreme but I am sure the people who elect that Parliament are better off in terms of wanting to know what it feels and seeks.  

So, the referendum is merely or the Bill is merely trying to put a framework of how this right of the people to be consulted directly is put in place.  I do not see any hidden agenda.  In any case, when I was looking at the Bill, it was published way back on 23rd July 1993, and ebyaffe and the rest had not come up as such.  People are saying the Bill is being put in place to solve the question of Toro, Ankole and the rest.  May I say that if people could leave the people of Ankole alone, we may find a solution to this problem quietly?  I think there are some wise heads in that area that can find the solution without being incited by specialists from outside the district.

The second question that has been raised and which was, should Parliament have a say in holding a referendum?  I have given it some consideration, and I think it is right that Parliament should have a say on deciding on the referendum or not and on other issues.  To me, I do not see any harm if Parliament has a say.  Of course, the Minister can initiate as usual though through the Cabinet but allow Parliament to give its endorsement.  So, to me I do not see that it will be a disaster if we allowed Parliament to do so.  I think it will be in line with the emphasis we are putting on the people participating. (Laughter)  

Yesterday and today, I was feeling comfortable that we are now getting concerned about democracy.  That people are talking about the voice of the people through the Parliament and some who have been converted to be allowed to continue and should assist us to strengthen the constitution through the referendum Bill so that we can have instruments which will be used to consolidate supremacy rights of our people.  Having said that in this Bill, that means Section 3(i), I think the Minister could add on something to say that Parliament could be consulted or pass a resolution.

However, there is one thing that Members should be aware of that under the CA Statute they said there should be a referendum in such an issue.  And more or less Parliament said the power to make the Constitution was surrendered to CA.  I imagine by saying Parliament should decide whether to have a referendum or not is not going to interfere with the decision we took.  I think will be very clear.  What is passed here should remain because Parliament has always discussed it and we passed it, so it had a say logically, although we should have a referendum on the CA issues.  This is my position.  Because if you are going back, that means you are saying what we passed was not correct.  

So, I am saying that Section 3(2) should remain.  Because I have also seen some propose amendments from my teacher, hon. Tiberondwa saying that we should have Clause 7, that the provision of this Statute is to supersede provision of any other enactment relating to referendum.  I want Members to be very careful with the principle, yes!  Parliament says so.  Because even by that principle, that is what we did in the question of calling for a referendum on this issue because Parliament had a say, it passed a law.  We came here and debated and passed a law about it.  So, I think that point should be made very clear in as far as it is concerned.

Another issue that I found a bit academic, some people are objecting to the funds of the channel being charged on the consolidated fund.  As if the consolidated fund is not controlled by Parliament because the consolidated fund I think, emoluments are charged from the consolidated fund, and the judges and Auditor General benefit from the consolidated fund.  It means the first budget here - I think the idea in having certain offices being charged from consolidated fund is that they should not be subject to pressure.  We want you to defend it.  And to me the right of a referendum to consult the people should be independent of political value.  Because of our history, those who abused the referendum were cited, and my friend Mayengo is always cynical, and he was citing Hitler.  I would like to seek the right to consult the people, but it should not be subject to the manoeuvre of our people.  Because in many cases, Parliament will have to control it.  Number one is that now they are going to have to say whether there is a referendum or not.  That is a control number one.  When the budget is being passed, put money to the consolidated fund, the budget comes here and is approved by Parliament.  

So, personally I believe that whether it is charged to the consolidated fund or to a specific vote is really academic, it does not add very much in terms of control, if Members are worried about that.  Because already I concluded that the Parliament has a say, so I do not see why we should be worried about being tied to the consolidated funds and to an allocation from Parliament.  To me, I do not see much that we were achieving by that maneouvering.  

Lastly a simple majority again.  To me, the referendum is involving the whole country, we make the exercise as short as possible and come to the conclusion; which way to go, that is number one.  As hon. Kavuma was saying, it is not good to have a stalemate in the country, we must move.  Secondly, we have been talking about expenses.  If we insist on two-thirds majority, how many times are we going to have referendum?  Because those who are saying two thirds majority, objectively, are going to defeat the idea of a referendum because you are saying if it is so expensive, why have it?  But if it is simple majority, then we go and then we make it even cheaper by voting once.  So, I think the simple majority is still practical, it may not be terribly democratic but it is practical in terms of running the country in terms of making sure the majority of the people exercise their rights to decide national issues.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I support the Motion.  Thank you very much.

DR. MATOVU BYATIKE (Entebbe Municipality, Mpigi):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members.  First, I think I should also say Happy New Year to all of you.  I personally think that a referendum should be regarded as something very important except for issues that are really of a national importance directly or indirectly via a certain area.  I think the crucial factors in a referendum are three.

Firstly, the issues themselves or the subject and then the timing and then thirdly, the expenses involved.  I think the first two are the most important because some issues may be of such importance that they cannot be valuated in monetary terms of the nation.  The timing is crucial in the sense that, important issues must be decided without playing on the peoples’ emotions or sentiments prevailing at that time.

My second point, concerns Section 3, sub-Section (iv).  This is the question of ‘yes’ or ‘no’.  Hon. Wapakabulo, I think as a draftsman, explained this very well that the set of questions can be more than two, but still the answer can be yes or no.  My worry is that a big percentage of us in the country is illiterate and that is where we may land into a problem and this calls for an intensive education over a long period - a long enough period for the people to know what exactly is coming.  Probably. We may have to consider something like symbols for the less fortunate of our members of the community who cannot read the set of questions.  

My next point, the third one, regards fixing a fraction of a percentage to determine the results.  If we talk of two-thirds, two-thirds of what?  Of the Resistance Members of the votes cast or eligible voters?  Now, two-thirds of what?  This is where we run into problems - two thirds.  This would, therefore, either necessitate qualifying a fraction, for instance two thirds of the votes cast - something like that, then we know exactly what we are talking about two thirds of a percentage; or else, let us leave the Bill as it is and just decide by simple majority, just by saying simple majority, I think that would solve a lot of problems.  

I support hon. Prof. Kagonyera in that, a wrong question can lead to a wrong answer.  Scientifically, therefore, a proper hypothesis must be formulated to be followed by the right and fair or sensible question for the people to decide on a referendum.  

I, therefore conclude by saying that the issues to be decided by the referendum, must be decided by a bigger body; than an individual Minister or even a Cabinet.  In other words, the legislative body should decide the issues and the formulation of the questions to be answered by the population.  With those few remarks, I thank you, Mr. Chairman and I support the Bill.  

MRS. MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion.  I think it is right that way to put up machinery through which we shall be able to decide if a referendum is necessary.  

Some people have been afraid that the populace will not know exactly what to do.  I would like to re-assure them that Ugandans today, are so well-educated and they are so sensitive where their own power is concerned.  You read through the Commission Report and you see one thing, they are definitely sure about one thing that they would like to retain the power to make decisions over their own lives and I think a referendum is one way of asking the people who possesses this power we are exercising here, exactly what they want.  I think we should not be afraid that a referendum will be misused because, if we make the right decision, we place this power in the hands of the people who are responsible, we will definitely get the right thing.  I would like to say, Sir, that those people - the population own this power and once you have put the question to them, you cannot say, okay, let us calculate it - is that two thirds majority of those who cast the votes or is it the two thirds majority of the votes that are valid or two thirds majority of the eligible voters.  I think we should be content that a simple majority will make a decision.  

But I have one reservation and it has been echoed by many people.  I would not like to leave this decision for a referendum to a small cabinet or a Minister alone; that is Section 3.  I think we have to amend it and bring in Parliament to make a decision.  We are enacting a law that is not going to be sued only for today.  If somebody who is in a position to decide may not be just as well balanced as the laws we have today, or he may not use it properly.  But if we widen the choice to Parliament, then we know that more people will have taken the decision.  Some people have brought in the ‘obugabe’ of Ankole, I do not think it is an issue today.  We have the Statute of the ebyaffe which is already amendment of the Constitution and this is a test - it is a test to us, whether we are going to respect the rights of the minority, it is a test whether we are going a respect the Constitution which we are going to put in place, it is a Constitutional Amendment and once we have passed the law, and I agree with hon. Kategaya, let us leave the Banyankore to find a solution to their own thing.  But we trust that they will respect the law.  Thank you very much.

MR. EKWARU (Amuria County, Soroti):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I would like to add my concern over the sorry state in Teso because of food shortage.  I would like to sound a bell to the Minister for Labour and Social Welfare plus the Minister for Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, so that they may look for ways to rescue us.  The problem has even been aggravated by the influx of our uncles the Karimojong and the little food that we are having is being shared up.  The situation is becoming a bit alarming.  Mr. Chairman, turning to the Bill -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. EKWARU:  I support the Bill in principle and I think the motive of the Bill is actually genuine and it is well intentioned.  But when the Bill is going to be passed by the august House, you will find that the population is the one that will be asked to decide.  

So, there are two sides.  First of all, the population that we have is an ignorant population; a population that is poor; a population that can easily be manipulated; and the second group is we the politicians.  You will find that amongst us, we are divided.  There are those for multi-party, there are those for the Movement, there are opportunists and then there are those who are self-seekers.  This is where the problem always arises.  You will find that the multi-parties will go and spoil and the ignorant population may be the Movement, who may be well intentioned may go and talk to the people, then the ‘kavuyo’ group the opportunists, also go and talk to the people and then -using money definitely and then the population gets confused.  

My concern here is that the politicians, especially us, who are the Parliamentarians and those whom we use, should be used correctly and then also, those people who advise the government or the leaders must also advise the leaders correctly.  

Hence, what I am appealing to you or to the House is honestly we should be honest with people whom we are leading.  We should not deceive people and then tomorrow we are fighting and then the people begin suffering.  This is my concern.  I have looked into the politics of Uganda since 1962 when I was still a schoolboy and you find that the only thing that spoils us is dishonesty and not being faithful.  You find a person derailing another person in broad day light, even now, I can see when people are campaigning for CA, people are deceiving people.  You find people spending a lot of money.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. EKWERU:  But if you go faithfully, you are not a good politician -(Laughter).  When you go honestly without money, they say, he is there urinating - this kind of thing, which is actually not good for us.   So, in principle, the idea of the referendum was born when we were debating the Constituent Assembly Bill and some of us complained that it was installed in by one of the Members.  I remember some people complaining that this amendment was stolen in by hon. Mrs. Njuba - that it was sneaked in and it became an issue up to today, it is an issue.  

So, I would like us to try to look at the idea and make sure that we are not derailed.  The purpose of the Bill is very, very honest and the principles are very genuine except hon. Members most of what I would have said, has already been said, but I would like to appeal to you Members, right from the least up to the top, that we should be honest in our political affairs so that our people are not taken and then made a playing ground with so many holes.  With these few remarks, I support the Bill.  

MR. RWAKAKOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara):  Mr. Chairman

THE CHAIRMAN:  Try to be very brief.

MR. RWAKAKOKO:  Mr. Chairman, aware of your guidance, I am going to be very brief. I support this Motion very strongly as a strong advocate of public fearing concept.  I support this Motion as the epitome of the fundamental change of the National Resistance Movement.  I do not think that anybody here in this Chamber should speak in doubt about the essence of the sovereignty of this nation being exercised by the millions of Ugandans.  I think we have a skeleton here and we have made a fundamental beginning.  I do believe because I also assume, that even if there were mistakes in this Bill, later on at the stage of implementation, I think the wisdom of Government would prevail over it to bring this Bill which would then be a Statute for Amendments to be made.  I also believe that the rights of Parliamentarians are not lost by passing this Bill, so that any Member who feels aggrieved has got the liberty of coming here to move a private Members Amendment to whatever is provided for.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, that two months ago, I proposed an amendment - very simple amendment to the CA Statute and up to now, the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs has not responded despite the fact that His Excellency the President has also alluded to the amendment I was proposing.

MR. RWAKAKOKO:  Mr. Chairman, I thank the Member for drawing my attention to that, but I think we should not blame our weaknesses on the third party.  I believe we have a right in this Chamber and I believe we should not surrender this right - for us to call the tune.  This House is a supreme organ in this country.  I would like to suggest that with that statement made by hon. Tiberondwa, that the Government yields on demand to the democratic rights of the Members of this Chamber. (Applause)  

I think we are all here to build democracy, and we are all here to try and ensure that the quality of service in Government and in this House goes to the maximum benefit of this nation.  That is why I was saying that with this fundamental piece of legislation introduced, it should be allowed an opportunity to operate.  

I now want to go to the real point.  I concur with those who have subscribed to the idea of the approval being given by this House.  I think it is important that this is done, it is also important that the entire methodology of conducting that referendum when the presentation is made here, is decided here. In our language, we have got a saying, that if you hide meat from the fire, where are you going to roast it?  If you hide away the sovereign - the final authority from the people, where are you going to get it? 

So, I have always obeyed your instructions, and I would like to say that in situations where there is a dispute, we must study carefully whether disputes deserve a referendum to be called or be just public hearing in the normal process of government implementation of policies.  I am just recalling a situation where the City Council Housing Scheme at Kawala has on many occasions attracted rebuffs by the residents there.  I do not think that one can say that, that should occasion a referendum, but if the Government ever thought and endorsed the idea of East African Federation for example, that is a matter that should be a subject of a referendum.  With those few remarks, I thank you very much to have allowed me.

(The Council rose at 5.15 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 6th January, 1994 at 2.30 p.m).

