Wednesday, 04 January 2006

Parliament met at 2.40 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you very much for being so diligent and coming back to handle business, which is pending, and I want to welcome you back from the Christmas and the New Year’s recess. I hope you have had time to irrigate your constituents on important issues. I wish you fruitful deliberations.  

2.42
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to raise an issue of public importance and it is regarding the declining waters of Lake Victoria. When you travel along the shores of Lake Victoria, especially in the islands of Buvuma, you realize that the lake is actually drying up. 

To make matters worse, during this Seventh Parliament the Minister of Works, Housing and Communications constructed the piers at Kiyindi main land and at Kilongo, Buvuma to enable the ferry to move properly. But as we talk, the ferry cannot access the piers. It stops in the middle of the water and we have to put timber across. Now the ferry cannot transport vehicles. I am just urging government to have interest –(Interruption)- the minister from Kalangala is just joking; I hope the voters can realize that. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, my colleague knows that even the shift they are constructing - I heard him saying that the piers also have risen up and even the ship cannot access it. I am just urging government to take up a study such that they can tell us the cause because from the experience, people are actually assuming that maybe it is the second outlet at the Kiira Dam, which has caused this. The Government should come up and tell the whole country the cause. It is not only the ferry but even the boats cannot land as they used to; they stop at 100 meters from the shore and people have to pay -(Interruption)

2.44
THE MINISTER OF STATE, WATER (Mrs Mary Mutagamba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the honourable member for bringing up the issue of water levels, especially in Lake Victoria and the drought. I want to assure this House that tomorrow - I have just been conducting a meeting and we have agreed with all stakeholders that we address the nation at a press briefing. So, tomorrow we will make a press briefing and thereafter we shall circulate the information. I would not like to talk about it now because we are still working on it but it is coming out tomorrow at 11 O’clock.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for the assurance, but it is not only the ministry -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: It is normal practice that if there is a major issue, the statement is first made in Parliament. Why does the honourable minister want us to wait until the press statement is made tomorrow when in fact we can have the information today? This in my view is not correct procedure.

DR EPETAIT: Thank you, Madam Speaker and I thank my colleague for giving way. The issue of the declining water levels in Lake Victoria is not just a Ugandan problem, but it is a regional problem. We moved – the Committee on Agriculture moved to Kenya and Tanzania late last year when we were monitoring the performance of Lake Victoria Environment Programme, and we noted with concern the same problems that my colleague has just brought up of piers, which are hanging, and the ships in the countries of Kenya and Tanzania. The boat cannot dock on the piers, which have been constructed at such exorbitant costs. 

There is growing concern even in those countries to what could be remedied, but I have to bring it to your attention that even the problem or the challenge of a second outlet could become a factor. Therefore, I would ask the minister that in issuing her statement to this House, she should take into consideration the feeling, or we should network with the colleagues because this is really a regional problem; it is not localized to Uganda. We would not appear to be moving alone when the same problem is affecting other countries and the statement may not augur well with the others. So, honourable minister, take it that it is a serious international problem and your statement would go a long way in supporting our regional integration. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, at which stage do you intend to brief this House about that problem?

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Of course looking at the tight programme that Parliament had, I did not know whether we could fix in today and if you still have another sitting, I could bring it in here. Otherwise we have been requested to make a statement to the media to cover national, regional and international concerns. 

Of course at least this House knows I am the Minister or the President of the African Ministers responsible for Water in Africa and as such, I cover that regional aspect of it. On top of that, you should also remember that Uganda is hosting the Nile Basin Secretariat and we are now in the process of negotiating how to share and utilize the water resources of the Nile which originate from Lake Victoria. It is an international issue and that is why I thought we should address it at the international level. But if it is a wish of this House, we could have a session and we discuss it.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think, honourable minister, that before you pass your briefing in the media, it would be appropriate for you to brief the House. So, we shall make room for it.

MRS MUTAGAMBA: Okay, thank you. 

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. As I wind up, since the minister has promised to make a statement, I want to urge the Ministry of Works, Housing and Communications, as a short-term measure, to redesign the piers. Otherwise, the statement will not do much really. What we need, let the Ministry of Works pick interest in this matter, they redesign the pier such that the ferry can dock. Otherwise, if they do not address that problem as we talk, Buvuma will be cut off. I thank you.

2.48
MR ODONGA OTTO (Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to raise two issues of national concern. 

Firstly, a couple of days ago, on the 31st of December last year, one prominent Pastor Kayanja, in his 31st December summon, prophesized two issues. One, he was showing knowledge of the election results; that the winner will get 61.8 percent and of course as a mobiliser in FDC, I have special interest in that percentage. But most alarmingly he said that one of the presidential aspirants would die. Madam Speaker, with all due respect to the Minister of Ethics and Integrity, who also happens to be a saved person, he prophesized that one of the six presidential aspirants, now five, will die. 

I am well aware that we have President Museveni standing; we have retired Col. Kizza Besigye; we have Bwanika; we have Sebaana Kizito and we have Maria Obote. I would want to find out from the Minister of Information and the Minister of Ethics, later on the Attorney-General, if you have made any efforts to draw a charge sheet on such pastors who have openly said one of the persons will die before the 23rd of February, because he may have to help Police to tell us when at which spot so that the Police can avert such a kind of catastrophe. 

Madam Speaker, this is a very serious matter and people all over the country are saying, “Which one will die”? For us in FDC we do not want anyone to die; we do not want President Museveni to die because we just want to defeat him when he is still alive. So, can the Minister of Ethics and Integrity tell us if these are the kind of Churches we are having in Uganda, giving such dangerous statements?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is the honorable member in order to popularize not only speculation, but probably madness by bringing it in this House as an issue for debate, when this Parliament has no capacity to control the phantasmal of the imagination of some people? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honorable members, hon. Otto says he heard the prophecy and wants to know whether the Government is taking an interest in that prophecy.  I think that is what he is asking.

2.53
THE MINISTER OF STATE, ETHICS AND INTEGRITY (Mr Tim Lwanga): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In this world where we live, we have got a “natural us” and a “spiritual us”, and I remember in the year 2004 in December that is when Pastor Robert Kayanja made his predictions about the five presidential candidates; he made the predictions with the fact that probably one of them would not make it through, and so many other predictions. So really what happened recently was a repeat of what he had said previously. What we have got to do is to pray that if the predictions are right, whoever my candidate is, they are not going to die. Otherwise, I do not think this is an issue –(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the issue raised by hon. Odonga Otto is a very serious issue because of the status of Kayanja. I hear that sometime back he prophesized that we were going to have an earthquake and we had a small earthquake and, therefore, the matter is worrying a lot of Ugandans and is brought to this House. Is it in order for the hon. Tim Lwanga, the Minister responsible for Ethics and Integrity, to joke about it? Can he simply joke about a matter, which is concerning citizens of this country?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honorable members, you can only ask the Government really to be concerned. I do not know how any of us can control what Pastor Kayanja says, what he predicts, and what he prophesizes. It is very hard.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, INFORMATION (Dr Nsaba Buturo): Madam Speaker, it is not true that matters of prophecy are the business of the Government of the day. I want to say to honorable members that those of us who are versed with the Bible, we have an option. If the prophet says something and you believe it is true, there is a very important option that I would want members who are concerned to take advantage of, and that is prayer. (Laughter)

Madam Speaker, I just want to assure honorable members that prayer does work and if anyone, hon. Otto included, is concerned about his candidate and every other candidate I should add, we should pray so that God does the opposite of what had been predicted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay honorable members, let us pray for all the candidates.

MR ODONGA OTTO: Madam Speaker, thank you for the minister’s response and I hope it has not set a precedence where if hon. Otto opens up his church tomorrow and says the President will die and then you come to Parliament and say, we should pray. Because I see some criminal elements but I respect the minister’s response. Thank you very much.

BILLS
FIRST READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

2.58
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read for the first time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Is it seconded?

DR MAKUBUYA: By the Grace of God I lay on the Table the Certificate of Financial Implications for the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006. Dr E. Suruma, Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development issued this certificate.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the Bill has complied with Section 10 of the Budget Act, it can be read for the first time.

3.00
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006” be read for the first time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Honourable minister, do you have a certificate?

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Speaker, the certificate from the Ministry of Finance is available but because of the hurried way we are doing this, we do not have it here, but we shall bring it. I am happy to report that I do have the Certificate of Financial Implications.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, if the Bill has complied with Section 10 of the Budget Act, it can be read for the first time.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

3.02
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, GENERAL DUTIES (Mr Patrick Okumu-Ringa): Madam Speaker, the Presidential Elections Act, No. 16 of 2005 under Section 27(1) bars the use of government resources by any candidate for the purpose of campaigning for elections.  

Section 27(2) of the Act provides that a serving President may continue to use government facilities during the campaigns, but shall use only government facilities, which are ordinarily attached to and utilised by the holder of that office. It is, therefore, for this purpose that Section 27(3) of the Act requires the Minister responsible for Public Service to lay before Parliament a statement of the Government facilities, which are attached to and utilised by the President.  

The document, which was circulated to members, has an error in dating but it reads: “Utilization of Government facilities attached to His Excellency, the President, during the presidential elections, 2006.” The copies, which have been circulated, read 2001. I beg members to make that correction.  

Pursuant to the provisions of Section 27(3) of the Presidential Elections Act, No.16 of 2005, I hereby lay before Parliament the under-listed resources that are ordinarily attached to and utilised by His Excellency, the President:
1.	Fully facilitated State House and State Lodges.
2.	The use of transport facilities provided to the President.
3.	The usual security detail facilities provided to the President.
4.	The usual personal staff and other facilities attached to the President.
5.	The usual information and communication facilities attached to the President.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to lay these on the Table. Thank you.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 9 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO SUSPEND THE APPLICATION OF RULE 104 SECTIONS TWO (2) AND FIVE (5) AND RULE 103 SECTION FIVE (5) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

3.06
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move in accordance with rules 91 and 40(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament that rules 103(5) and 104(5) be suspended in order to enable the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006 to be dealt with by this Parliament expeditiously.  

Madam Speaker, Rule 9(1) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament reads as follows: “Any member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule may be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended.” Madam Speaker, I seek your consent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You may proceed.

DR MAKUBUYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Rule 40 provides that the following motions be moved without notice: (d) “Any motion for the suspension of the Rules of procedure.” 

Madam Speaker, I move that Rule 103(5) and Rule 104(5) be suspended. The text of Rule 103(5) reads: “Whenever a Bill is read the first time in the House, it shall be referred to the appropriate committee appointed under the provisions of Article 90 of the Constitution.” 

Rule 104(5) says: “Subject to these rules, the second reading of a Bill shall not be taken earlier than the fourteenth day after the publication of the Bill in the Gazette unless this sub rule is formally suspended for the purpose.” 

Madam Speaker, there is some justification for my motion because in the first place, if you refer the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006 to the appropriate committee, there will be delay when the subject matter of the Bill is terribly urgent.  

In the second place, we have tried to operate under the provision, which we now seek to amend and we have found operating under those provisions impracticable. 

In the third place, Madam speaker, if you are to comply with the provisions of Rule 104(5), which prescribed fourteen days waiting period before you do the second reading, this would mean that you cannot do the second reading earlier that the 18th of January this year. Yet we all know that the programme of the Electoral Commission puts nominations for elections under this Act on the 12 and 13 of January 2006. 

Fourthly, the suspension of these rules is necessary to enable Parliament to carryout its mandate under 78(2), of reviewing a representation of special interest groups in this Parliament. 

Finally, it is a positive value of internal governance of Parliament to comply with the Rules of Procedure, but Parliament envisaged that there would be circumstances warranting the suspension of these rules. I submit that such circumstances have arisen in the present case. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded so you are free to debate.

3.15
MR PATRICK MWONDHA (Bukooli County North, Bugiri): I understand the problem of the Attorney General, but please the shabbiness in government should not be brought into this House.  We do not have to make this House look shabby.  Only the other day, all of us were shouting “aye” –(Interjections)- and this is the government that prides in itself for having a lot of vision. What has happened to these visions? 

This really cannot be a good example of legislation with vision. We should have been able to force this matter in good time and brought remedial –(Interruption)

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Parliament is governed by our Rules of Procedure, which the Attorney General has ably quoted; the Rules of Procedure, which anticipated circumstances like these, which have arisen now. (Applause) Is hon. Patrick Mwondha, therefore, in order to start imagining that Parliament should not invoke its own rules, hence derailing Parliament from debating and passing this important Bill?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is out of order. (Laughter)

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, accepting your ruling, I would still have to say, does it not beg a constitutional interpretation because we are dealing with matters of the Constitution? Here we are saying that those matters should be reviewed on the basis of a simple majority. Are we going to keep amending this Constitution on a daily basis because of simple majority?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, hon. Mwondha, the provision of the Constitution is clear. What this House is doing is to actually comply with the provision of Article 78 as directed by the Constitution.

MR MWONDHA: I do not intend to draw any wrath from the ladies in the House. (Laughter) After all, I fully support their presence here –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order Members.

MR MWONDHA: I fully support the presence of the ladies in this House and the other special interest groups apart from the listening posts in this House. I only have a problem with the listening posts. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Mwondha, I do not want to keep on interrupting you but you see, this motion is just about suspension. We have not gone into the substance yet. Remain within the motion, please. I do not want to interrupt you again.

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, you are the one who drew me to Article 78. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes.

MR MWONDHA: And I was trying to handle that aspect of Article 78 of the Constitution.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I think hon. Mwondha is also trying to get shabby. I would like to move a motion under Rule 59 that hon. Mwondha be heard no more. (Laughter) I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any further contributions?

MR MWONDHA: Yes, Madam Speaker. I think we all agree that the programme of the Electoral Commission is already in place, and that it is unfortunate that we are in a situation where our hands are tied. I would like to appeal to this government and future governments to be more conscious than this government has been. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Any further contributions?

3.19
MS BETTY AMONGI (Woman Representative, Apac): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to support the motion for the suspension of the application. (Applause) By the time Parliament under its own rules put the provision that with the consent of the Speaker we can suspend any particular issue that is of urgency, I think in its wisdom it had understood that there are circumstances under which an issue can be very urgent. There are indeed circumstances under which you cannot do more than you already have and you have to use this motion. 

In this present context we have tried very much - I think last week we tried to raise the 196 Members but you know that because we moved that presidential, parliamentary and LC V elections are going to be conducted concurrently, most of us have LC V and presidential candidates that we are supporting and we are also campaigning for ourselves. Because of this, even if we tried to push this matter any further, it would have been very difficult to raise the required quorum. [Members: “Hear, hear!”] 

There are many people who I have tried to call but are moving with their presidential candidates. There are also many others who are mobilising to contest and get nominated on the 12th and 13th. Last week, there were many people who were mobilising to get their LC V and LC III councillors nominated, because these are people who are going to be our campaign agents. Therefore, it is going to be very difficult to get people to come here. 

There are also people who unfortunately lost in the primaries who might not be very willing to come here. With all these cases, Madam Speaker, I think it is only proper that we support this motion to suspend this provision. I beg to support it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

3.21
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I am about five years old in this Parliament and a regular attendant. I am very sure that even the Hansard will agree with me that this kind of suspension of the rules has happened only two or three times. Therefore, this Parliament has been consistent and we have adhered to our rules. Moreover these rules were drafted and scrutinized by a competent committee headed by hon. Wacha. They envisaged that such situation may one day happen and indeed today it has happened. 

I have been in my constituency and the women and youth who intend to stand were questioning me about what will happen to them if this Article is not reviewed. This is an opportunity for all of us to support this motion so that our women, youth, workers and the disabled can get a chance to be elected. 

When I see somebody opposing this motion, I think it is for his or her own selfish ends. You are not being patriotic. I urge all Members who are here to support it fully and on that note, Madam Speaker, I want to move that the question should be put. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you seconding the motion that the question be put?

3.23
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern Region): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I know that we are in a hurry but it would be right for people to say a few more things. I would like to take this opportunity to say something on this particular motion. As an interested party, I support the motion, and I would like to thank the minister for going an extra mile to try and make sure that interest groups are taken care of in the forth-coming elections. 

If he had not done this, some of us were going to go to court to seek an injunction on the nominations until this motion is passed. I believe the minister has saved himself the agony of having to go to court by supporting the position, which of course has been very difficult.

However, last week I mentioned in this House that the Attorney General knew from day one that we were supposed to have this motion passed. Therefore, to have waited this long only to try and get everybody from his or her campaigns in order to do this is I think lack of planning on his part. Nevertheless, I support the motion and I think that honourable members should also support it so that the women, the disabled, workers and the youth are retained in Parliament. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, it seems the motion is acceptable to everybody in this House. I have not heard any serious opposition other than satire. So, I would now like to put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that this House approves the motion of the Attorney General for the suspension of the Rules of Procedure.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.26
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Prof. Khiddu Makubuya):  Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the second time. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
 COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

Clause 1, agreed to.

Title agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.28
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume so that the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of the Whole House do report thereto.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.29
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” and has passed it without amendment. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.30
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the Whole House, which I have just given be adopted by this Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING 

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2006

3.31
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS /ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled, “The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006” be read the third time and do pass. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED, “THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2006”

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause) Honourable members, I want to thank you for the work we have just completed. This process will be concluded tomorrow in the afternoon. The House is adjourned to tomorrow afternoon. Please come back tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.33 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 5 January 2006 at 2.30 p.m.)



