Wednesday, 5 January 2011 

Parliament met at 11.39 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala. 

PRAYERS 

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.) 

The House was called to order. 

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I welcome you and once again thank you for giving this time to parliamentary business. Thank you very much. 

11.42
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Rt Hon. Speaker. I rise on a matter of public importance and I would like this matter to be responded to by the Leader of Government Business now that the Minister of Defence is not here. 

I have received information to the effect that the UPDF has projected units in respective polling stations which they want to refer to as “battle groups.” The case in point is that a number of constituencies are going to receive these so called battle groups and some of them include the following constituencies: Kyadondo County, Kasambya County, Masaka Municipality, Aswa County, Nywa County, Chua County, Busiro North, Lira Municipality, Arua County, Aringa County, Otuke, Gulu Municipality, Koboko County, Kampala Central Division, Nakawa Division and of selfish interests in this case, Mr Speaker, Makindye West. 

Makindye West has three groupings, one is STS 339 individuals are going to be brought in area called Mubaraka Zone; another one is RTS(KWT) where they are going to bring 2364 voters in that battle group. Another one is also to be staged in Mubaraka Zone, contains 414 voters in that category. There is also another cell in Kampala Central. 

The question I would like to raise is that nature of battle groups that is going to necessitate the ferrying of soldiers into constituencies of the choice of the UPDF to connive with the Electoral Commission. I have the commitment, Mr Speaker, in the spirit of serving my country to make sure that these elections are free and fair. But I have the fear that this type of arrangement is going to clearly sabotage that hope, not only in me as an individual, but in very many others. 

In a separate case, Mr Speaker, I have reported here time and again that the former RDC of Makindye, Kayondo Mulowoza created new cells in the Division of Makindye called villages. He forged Electoral Commission letter heads purporting that it was the Electoral Commission creating these villages. 

I wrote informing the Electoral Commission that this was happening and the Commission disassociated themselves from the exercise. But I was in the end surprised that the villages which were created by the RDC had been included in the data bank of the Electoral Commission. And as we talk now, Mr Speaker, these new villages have been selected as elective areas in Makindye. I don’t know what is happening elsewhere but specifically in Makindye. 

At an appropriate time, if there is any way, I will produce the evidence of lists of individuals who have been put into the data bank of the Electoral Commission and these are “ghost” names. In my constituency alone, there are 8,000m plus. I have all the evidence of the people who are collecting these names; I have their photos; I have a record of their handwritten names, which they want to take to the Electoral Commission and enter into their data bank. And I am sure that it is already there as I talk now because I have got evidence to that effect.   

My Conclusion is that for those who would like to investigate this case should go and look at the middle section of the Electoral Commission. The executives in the Electoral Commission are not aware of what is going on in the middle section. Some of the technocrats in the Electoral Commission don’t know what is going on. But the middle section has individuals who have done a lot of forgery in this election. I can assure you, Mr Speaker, that if this is discovered it will save this country and if it is not, God knows. I thank you, Sir. 

Mr Speaker, allow me to lay on the Table a copy of this piece of information which could be of help to any interested party in investigating this case. The heading is: “UPDF projected units and restrictive polling stations (Battle Groups)”. I am a whistleblower. It is upon those interested in the peace of this country to discover the details. Thank you, Sir. 

11.48
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on behalf of Government to make, first of all, as someone who is knowledgeable about military matters but also as someone who is in built with some common sense. This document I have looked at could be a document made on the street because it simply has no heading; it is not signed. I don’t want to say that he had it, of course, because I know he couldn’t possibly do this but it is something that could have been made by anybody for any reason and I therefore don’t give any credence to it whatsoever.

You know for me to go to investigate something there must be some clue. You can’t have a clue, which is clueless. It has no link or anything that can link it especially with security forces. Certainly I can say that this is some forgery from somewhere -(Interruptions)- Now can I continue since you can hear me? It is not true that the UPDF would be engaging in preparations aimed at sabotaging the electoral process, certainly not. And if the UPDF is -(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Misery has already befallen us, we are in darkness and as I am talking, as a student of marketing, I attach great importance to the words and expressions to get the meaning of what a person is saying. I seek your guidance if we can proceed in such darkness rather than wait when the situation is rectified and we proceed because I cannot read the expressions and link the words with the body language, which is also part of communication and which I am not able to see. Therefore, I am seeking your guidance so that if possible we can adjourn. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: So are you suggesting that we suspend the proceedings for some ten minutes? Proceedings suspended for ten minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 11.53 a.m.)

(On resumption at 2.51 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the information I have received about what happened this morning is that the Parliament building has been in darkness due to a burnt switch in the control panel. The switch has been isolated and a bypass was made to restore the supply to the building. Inconveniences caused are highly regretted.

2.52
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. As I said earlier on in the morning, I questioned the authenticity of the document that was tabled, which purportedly was a deployment order by the UPDF, of battle groups disguised as the Police. The break has given me the opportunity to consult with all the relevant authorities and I can now make a categorical statement that indeed there is no such deployment and that presentation is based on a falsehood. 

Let me use this opportunity to state the obvious. That everyone in Police uniform is a Police officer and if they are deployed as the Police, they carry out Police duties. 

Secondly, under the constitution and laws of Uganda, and under our national security framework, where the Police needs help from other security agencies, they can request for that help from the Army or other security agencies but when it does so, this is done transparently; and it is known and in the specific case of elections, even the national Electoral Commission is actually formally informed that the Police has determined that a situation arising in some place is beyond control and therefore, it has asked for help from other security agencies including the UPDF; and to the best of our knowledge, this has not yet been done. 

Finally, I wish to inform you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members, that the UPDF is a non-partisan Army in this election. It is a national Army and they have standing instructions that they must desist from engaging in acts that depict partisanship in any form either for the Opposition or for the Government. That is a clear and standing instruction that the UPDF has and therefore, I dismiss those falsehoods. 

I do not know where my bother hon. Kyanjo got them from but I just want to assure him and the country that the security of this nation, the question of sabotaging the elections or anything for that matter is not something that will be tolerated and we have the capacity to protect the election and the security of the ordinary people in electioneering and on election day as well. Thank you. 

2.55
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker and thank you, hon. Minister. I would have wished to hear from the minister of a commitment that if there was such a thing happening, that it would be stopped. 

Secondly, I do not know why he brought in the element of the Police. I got lost when he talked about the Police. I have specifically been talking about the proposal to take Army men to vote in gazetted polling stations around barracks. I did not at all talk about the Police but I did not hear the commitment from the minister. Dismissal would be the obvious thing to do but I insist that this is happening and so, I would like to get specific guarantees from the honourable minister, rather than simply dismissing it without making sufficient investigations. 

MR AMAMA MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, ordinarily, I should have required hon. Kyanjo to present better evidence than he did for me to give any credibility to what he said but whatever level of credibility or lack of it there was, I decided to respond fully and I had the opportunity, as I said before, to inquire from the relevant authorities and what I have stated is the fact and certainly, he talked about the Police this morning but I am happy to hear that he did not mean that.

In terms of deployment of soldiers to vote, I did not really get that because he was talking of battle groups in the morning, deployment, RPCs and giving numbers. He presented what purportedly is actually a deployment order. He did not present what he is saying now and I think he has chosen to change it a bit. But even then, I want to assure you, Mr Speaker, that the Army or the security agencies which are required to be deployed anytime where there are situations that require their deployments is fully covered by the law. 

You will recall that when debating the election law here, we actually took that into account that should there be a situation for instance where the military has to move from Kanungu to Makindye, of course they can do so in response to the situation that would have arisen in Makindye and if it comes to voting time, the law adequately covers how they would exercise their right to vote. So, you should have no worry about that kind of thing because it is fully covered by the law. Thank you. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT ON THE OUTBREAK OF YELLOW FEVER IN NORTHERN UGANDA

2.59
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to report to the honourable House about the outbreak of Yellow Fever in Northern Uganda.

Fist of all, I would like to give a little background to the honourable members regarding Yellow Fever. The last time we had an outbreak of Yellow Fever in Uganda was 1942. So, for most of the doctors we have, our diagnosis depends on observation. We are not very familiar with Yellow Fever but Yellow Fever is one of those they call haemorrhagic fevers like Ebola and Marburg. In case of Ebola and Marburg, we don’t know what the reservoir is and the transmission is, we think, through contact. There is Lacer Fever in West Africa, which is transmitted by mosquitoes; Rift Valley fever, which is also a hemorrhagic fever that is transmitted by mosquitoes; and Crania Congo fever. This fever was a problem during the First World War in the trenches. We also had an outbreak in the Congo recently. This one is transmitted by pigs.

Yellow Fever is divided into two: the Bush Epidemic and the Urban Epidemic. The Bush Epidemic occurs when monkeys transmit the disease from one monkey to another, usually at the canopy of forests. The mosquito involved there is called Aedes Africana. But those monkeys usually come down to look for food. And when they come down, there is another mosquito called Aedes Stegomyia that will bite that monkey and also bite man who may be harvesting his crops. Once man has been bitten by that mosquito and Yellow Fever is transmitted to him, then it can be picked from that human being to another by – (power interruptions)– Should I stick to this (microphone)? Okay.

That was just the background. On Urban Epidemic, the Ministry of Health together with the World Health Organisation, Centre for Disease Control (CDC) and other partners has been investigating an outbreak of a disease of unknown cause in Northern Uganda since early November last year.

Laboratory tests conducted by the Uganda Virus Research Institute and CDC based in Atlanta confirmed five cases of Yellow Fever from the districts of Abim, Agago, Kitgum, and Lamwo on 23 December 2010. These laboratory results confirmed that there is an outbreak of Yellow Fever in Northern Uganda with cases being reported from the districts of Abim, Agago, Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader, Kaabong, Kotido, Lira, Gulu and Arua.

Yellow Fever is a disease caused by a virus and it is transmitted by infected mosquitoes. A yellow fever patient will have fever, the yellowing of the eyes and palms and may bleed from the nose, mouth and any other body opening.  Vaccination is the single most important preventive measure against Yellow Fever. The vaccine is safe, affordable and highly effective. In fact, protection is almost 100 percent and appears to provide protection for 10 years.

The current situation of Yellow Fever in the country:

The outbreak of Yellow Fever was first reported in the district of Abim in the Karamoja sub-region, on 16 November 2010. Since then, investigations mounted by the Ministry of Health together with World Health Organisation and Centre for Disease Control in the United States and other partners, have identified additional cases from nine other districts in Northern Uganda - there is an attachment at the end, which lists those districts and the number of cases.
 
The affected districts include: Abim, Agago, Kitgum, Lamwo, Pader, Arua, Lira, Gulu, Kotido and Kaabong. As of 4 January this year, a total of 196 cases and 50 deaths have been reported. That gives a case stativity rate of 25.5 percent. In normal range in this kind of outbreak all over the world is usually between 30 to 50 percent of people dying. So, I think our supportive management has been fairly impressive.

Of these, five cases have been confirmed from the districts of Abim, Agago, Kitgum and Lamwo. Additional specimens are being analysed to obtain laboratory confirmation for the rest of the other six affected districts. The peculiar thing about this disease is that the positive results are obtained, in most cases, when samples are taken at the peak of the fever. Otherwise, when the fever has subsidized, the results tend to be ambiguous.

Response by the Ministry of Health:
The Ministry of Health together with World Health Organisation, CDC and partners mounted investigations in the affected districts that eventually led to the confirmation of the current outbreak of Yellow Fever. That was on 23 December, 2010.

Following that confirmation, the measures so far instituted include: 

a)	A national task force, with representation from the Ministry of Health, the Office of the Prime Minister, Uganda Police Force, Uganda People’s Defence Forces, Uganda Prisons and development partners, was established to coordinate the development of a national response plan and mobilisation of resources from Government and partners. The national task force meets twice a week to review the situation and plan the national response to the outbreak.

b)	A national Yellow Fever response plan with a total budget of US $5,609,000 has been developed. The plan focuses on phase vaccination in the affected districts, public education on Yellow Fever, treatment of patients, vector control and continued vigilance to identify additional cases at health facilities and community levels.

c)	A supplementary budgetary request has been submitted to the Ministry of Finance to facilitate the response. An appeal has also been made to the partners to support the response to the Yellow Fever outbreak in Uganda.

d)	Due to the global shortage of Yellow Fever vaccines, the vaccination exercise will be undertaken in three phases, to cover all the 26 districts of Northern Uganda that are regarded to be on high risks for Yellow Fever. 

The initial phase of vaccination will be implemented at the end of January 2011 targeting the five districts of Abim, Agago, Kitgum, Lamwo and Pader where Yellow Fever cases have been confirmed through laboratory testing. The rest of the districts will thereafter be prioritised for emergency vaccination if yellow fever cases are confirmed there. Or for preventive vaccination basing on a risk assessment for Yellow Fever that is underway in the country.

e)	Request of one million doses of Yellow Fever vaccines for the five districts, in the first phase of immunisation, has already been submitted to the International Coordinating Group for Yellow Fever vaccine and a confirmation on when the vaccine will arrive in the country is expected today.

f)	Additional vaccines have been sourced by the Ministry of Health with support from the Belgian Technical Cooperation for immunisation of the field teams before the vaccination exercise starts. The Ministry of Health organised a meeting involving the RDCs, LC V Chairpersons and District Health Officers from the affected districts to brief them on the current Yellow Fever situation in the country and update them on a national Yellow Fever response plan.

g)	The Ministry of Health is currently issuing regular press statements on the Yellow Fever situation in the country. Additionally, radio programmes and messages, newspaper inserts as well as community sensitisation meetings have been organised to improve public awareness on Yellow Fever.

h)	All the affected districts in the Northern Region have been alerted to detect and report all new cases of Yellow Fever so that Ministry of Health teams can rapidly investigate and respond to new outbreaks in the region. We are emphasising that any yellowness of eyes and palms should be at once taken to hospitals and appropriate management and testing initiated.

Challenges:
1.	The Ministry of Health has limited resources to respond to this emergency hence a justification for a supplementary budget request to the Ministry of Finance.
 
2.	National capacity for Yellow Fever laboratory testing is still low, therefore, there is need to strengthen the capacity of the Uganda Virus Research Institute to conduct the necessary tests in the country.

3.	 The current nationwide fever risk is not well-known. Therefore, a countrywide risk assessment for Yellow Fever needs to be undertaken to facilitate prioritisation of districts at risk for preventive Yellow Fever vaccination.

4.	Public awareness on Yellow Fever is still low. A public awareness campaign therefore is needed and should be mounted soon. 

Mr Speaker, our public appeal is the following:
The Ministry of Health, therefore, calls upon all leaders, especially Members of Parliament, to sensitise and mobilise the public on the need for prevention and control of Yellow Fever. 

The general public is urged to cover all water containers in and around homes so that mosquitoes do not breed in them. 

As I emphasised, when it reaches the stage of Urban Epidemic, the mosquito, which is Aedes (Stegomyia) Aegypti, behaves like the anopheles. It breeds in stagnant water. Therefore, we have to make all the efforts to reduce or eliminate stagnant water. We should look for places around buildings where mosquitoes can breed, for example, tins, tyres, broken pots and bottles that contain standing water and remove them.

People who are ill with fever should always use a mosquito bed net. Using a mosquito bed net will help to prevent disease like Yellow Fever and Malaria from spreading to others. 

A person who has had fever and yellowing eyes is seriously ill and should be taken to the nearest health facility immediately for further investigation and treatment. 

There is a list which shows the districts – I think it is at the back of your handout. All the districts are listed and the number of cases reported. The case fatality rate is about 25.5, which is below the average international results in outbreaks of this nature. 

As I said before, the international rate is usually between 30 and 50 cfr, that is, case fatality rate. About 30 to 50 percent of the people who get the disease die. Thank you very much. 

3.17 
MRS BEATRICE ANYWAR (FDC, Woman Representative, Kitgum): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for the opportunity. I would like to thank my brother, the Minister of Health, for bringing to Parliament this statement. 

As I stand before you, I am not sure whether I am not a victim of Yellow Fever because -(Interjections)- this morning before I came to the House, I was feeling feverish and I had to go get treatment. I was on drip for some few minutes. But because of this issue -(Interjection)- Mr Speaker, can you protect me from my sisters and brothers who are so scared? Why should you be scared of a victim whom you have not saved before?

As I was saying, I came back from Kitgum about three days ago. This issue has been on since last November. It is two months down the road that we are now having a statement to the House; better late than never. 

I would like to give this information that as we talk, we have a record of 178 infected people in Kitgum District/Lamwo. So far they have a record of 48 people who have died in both Kitgum and Lamwo, where I represent in this House. 

My concern is that it took so long for us to come to a conclusion that it is Yellow Fever. Some people were thinking that it was dysentery or plague. The term that was used was “unknown sickness” until towards Christmas that tests confirmed it was Yellow Fever. I will also pose a question to that effect to the minister – of course he has given his challenges but as a country and as a region where we have been experiencing these outbreaks, it looks as if we are not really alert because year in and year out, we are either with Ebola, plague or jiggers. 

As much as we say the effort of the ministry is there, a lot more needs to be done. It took long for them to come to this conclusion. So many people have not even been tested. You have just said that at the peak of the fever is when you are able to test and confirm.

We have a challenge in my constituency; first of all, people have already gone back to their homes; they are far away from the health centres which are not even functioning. Leave that alone, people have actually lost hope of going to a health centre where they find an askari just keeping guard. There is no hope of getting drugs and they take long with their diseases before they can come out.

As a ministry, I am sure there are a lot of people who have not yet been identified and even tested to confirm hence the spread of this disease is still at its best. You have not yet been able to capture that because of the two reasons: people are far away, people have lost faith in the health centres where there are no drugs and you have only tested a few.

Two, about this response which we ask when we come to Parliament; the Ministry of Health has not been able to put in place a response fund; you are lamenting here that the ministry lacks money and hence the justification that you are about to come for supplementary. We have been having various outbreaks of diseases in the country, you have left your ministry and your technocrats-even if they have the technical know-how, they do not have the facilities and you do not have the funds.

Where is your ministry getting money to be on standby for responses to the numerous outbreaks of disease? Haven’t you learnt that as a country and as your ministry, we have outbreaks of diseases which are challenging our country?

What have you planned all this time? We started with Ebola; you rushed here to get money. I reported Hepatitis E, you took so long to come to our rescue, I reported the nodding diseases; you took so long to respond. Jiggers; you have responded to part of the country. Ours, you have not yet come and now this one is on. I am sure you are smiling but I am seriously asking you: what do you have in plan to have yourself ready for the continuous outbreaks in this country of various diseases? 

I am in constant touch with your health staff in my district; they do not even have the basic drugs and fluid to administer to those who are already identified. Over Christmas, we went around Kitgum Hospital with Dr Kiiza Besigye and we went to the isolation unit - he is a doctor like you but they do not have the basic supplies to help them administer or manage the situation. This is a reality, it is not politics here.

So, my dear minister, you make your staff look useless. It is like when you are going to dig and you do not have a hoe, why should you pretend to be going to the garden, you rather sleep. They walk to the hospital and yet they cannot have anything to use to help the sick apart from looking at them and sympathizing.

Mr Speaker, I already have a report that even the laboratory which the minister has agreed on here, they are not there to test the suspected cases. To confirm this, we have to fly to our centre in Entebbe; imagine one centre in the whole country. So, what are we doing about this?

The human resource - we have only one person in a health centre. I have just talked to the medical superintendent there and therefore, my challenge and my question to you honourable minister is, we had a national mosquito spraying exercise in my area including my home. I am wondering, was this spraying selective of killing one type of mosquito and left the other? Please explain that.

Three, Hepatitis E took so long, the nodding disease took so long and the others, what assurance are you giving to our people that this time around, you will respond before this disease gets out of hand? It always starts with Kitgum; by the time you wake up to act it has already gone in the surrounding districts. What assurance are you giving us?

Lastly, yesterday we were full board asking for supplementary for State House. Where were you, my brother, to look at the lives of northerners and to address the situation rather than be here to say “aye” on State House supplementary rather than the supplementary for health? This is a shame!

I would want the minister to quickly be in charge of this. Otherwise, it is a total shame that we can approve money for photocopying while our people are dying and the threat of the spread of the disease will soon reach Pallisa. Shame! Thank you.

3.26
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr speaker. I would like to thank the honourable minister of Health for his statement on the Yellow Fever outbreaks in Northern Uganda. I think it is now in Uganda not only in Northern Uganda.

Hon. Minister, I wanted to appreciate your report but I would like to inform you that Lira District, which you have mentioned here, has suffered most because Lira which is my constituency is bordering Oyam District, bordering Gulu District, Pader District and Otuke District. This one happened when there was a lot of rain. If you recall, I reported here in October and then November. Thereafter, we had this attack and in one sub-county called Aromo sub-county, we lost six people and four of them were women who died because they were just bathing throughout.

The biggest challenge was that the health centre IV of Gulu has no transport up to date. It has been running so for one year now. So, when you make this appeal that we should report, I do not know how we are going to handle cases which are already of emergency. A health centre IV without transport and also health centre III of Aromo which is bordering Gulu and Pader received five cases and there was equally no transport to help these people in this situation. Actually, I did not enjoy my Christmas because I had to use my vehicle as an ambulance. I carried four patients. 

It is really painful to analyse your public appeal because in the second place, we have four health centre IIs which are just white elephants in my constituency and bordering Gulu and Pader and they are not in operation. I do not know what kind of appeal I can make to you and nobody has ever bothered -(Interjections)- in Lira District, of course. You remember I reported in this House when there were seven health centre IIs and IIIs which had not been operating throughout the last financial year and nothing has been done about it except people facing death. Not to mention, hon. Minister, I attended to a case at Ogure Health Centre IV where nurses refused to attend to that patient and I had to hire a vehicle to take the woman to Lira Referral Hospital at night. Good enough, the life was saved because they did not understand what kind of disease this was. 

Therefore, I wonder how long it takes for the ministry and Government to come and tell us that the disease was not known. What about the primary cases that are not even treated because once somebody is attacked you ought to know that Malaria or fever is already there. So there was no treatment given to some of these patients and it has been recorded. I took the trouble to report to the office of the District Health Officer and the Medical Superintendent of Lira Referral Hospital. They told me that three cases were reported there and all of them were safe. They said that they were going to call the ministry but I do not know if you are informed about this disease you are talking about, which you call yellow fever.

So I want to appeal to you because even health centres III and IV do not have drugs. I went there during Christmas and there were too many people without drugs. I do not know what system is being used to avail drugs in health centres III and IV because when you go there, you find no drugs. The few drugs that might have been received can hardly be found there. So, mind about transport and the drugs.

Those white elephants, which are kept there, I think you better give me directives to use them for other purposes because they are not serving the purpose for which they were built. Staff houses were built but nothing is happening. You are the parents so you have to ask the district what is happening. I have already done my part and now I am informing you. This is a very serious matter. When you ask us to go and educate the people on how to handle yellow fever, where to you expect this training to start and end? At the moment it is mixed up with campaigns. Once you call some leaders, they will say you are mixing it up with politics. So you should send in your ministry staff on the ground. If you do not do that, we will be wasting time.

Note that in Lira it has been reported that drugs are not available and the ambulances meant for transport are dead; they are on the ground there. Do research to find this out. Otherwise we have done our best as far as this case is concern. You know River Aswa, on the upper part - is it called River Moroto - the rains were consistent throughout October and November and when I reported it, people shifted away from sub-counties to come to Lira Town. Still, nothing was done to at least give them mosquito nets. No foodstuffs were given to these people who run away from their homes. 

Animals died and the Ministry of Health was informed, but nothing was done to address the situation. Even cows and goats have been dying and I do not know if that is not yellow fever as well. So you better liaise with the minister to find out what is happening. I have written to their office but I received no reply. In fact, some cows in my farm also died - ten of them. It is recorded by the District Veterinary Officer. The ambulances are there and cannot be used anymore. 

In our place, the worst scenario on the ground is the kaveera. I do not know what is happening in this country; I see kaveera increase everyday even in urban centres but nothing is being done to address this. You have not even mentioned it here yet that is the best place to harbour mosquitoes. Otherwise, we are going to try our best. I do not know whether the amount of you have put here is enough. You cannot just tell us, “Go and educate them” without means of transport and other logistics. Thank you very much.

3.36
MR JIMMY AKENA (UPC, Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Thank you, honourable minister, for raising this matter and bringing this statement to this House. Firstly, I have a simple question; I am vaccinated against Yellow Fever, will it be a problem to go for a second vaccination especially in this climate where there is a lot of yellow going around -(Laughter)– to be doubly sure not to contract this yellow fever?

Secondly, since my time is short, I wish to inform the honourable minister that his appeals may not tackle the problem. If you look at Lira Municipality, we are completely surrounded by swamps. You cannot sit outside your home in the evening because the mosquitoes would completely cover you. I do not know the pattern of this mosquito which transmits Yellow Fever but with the anopheles, its activities are normally late at night when people have gone to bed. In this particular case you may be sitting outside and you are bitten by mosquitoes long before you enter your bed.

On the issue of vector control, a programme was started to deal with vector control. We got into the issue of ICON verses DDT but the programme seems to have stopped in the middle. We need to find a way of reviving the issue of vector control. Yes, I agree we need to look at the tins and broken pots, but we live in an environment where there are swamps and there is constant stagnant water which is a perfect breeding ground for mosquitoes, and we have such a high number of mosquitoes. 

I wonder whether the ministry has looked at the possibility of insect repellents in form of body lotions and oils. I remember in my school days, Vaseline had an insect repellent which was relatively cheap and it was something we all used. While you are looking at this long term programme of spraying, is there a possibility of a product which is easy to apply which can prevent mosquitoes from biting people at whatever time? That is something I think you should look at especially for the child but also the adults because now you can be bitten by a mosquito long before you enter your mosquito net. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, in the public gallery we have pupils and teachers of Nyaka AIDS Orphans Primary School in Kambuga, Kanungu District; and Kutamba Primary School in Nyakishenyi, Rukungiri District. They have come to witness how Parliament conducts business. Please, join me to welcome them. (Applause) Thank you. 

I think let us have two contributions and then we wind up because according to our rules we debate for 30 minutes but now we have used an hour. 

3.41
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkiizi County East, Kanungu): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the minister for the statement and also welcome my children from my constituency in the gallery -(Interjection)- Yes, from our district with hon. Amama Mbabazi. (Laughter) 

I thank the minister for the statement and also say, like he said, that Yellow Fever was last diagnosed in Uganda many years back. Therefore, it was not very easy for the health experts to easily identify and diagnose yellow fever. One, it has a confusing presentation, and two you diagnose it using antibodies which develop days and months after the infection. Therefore, it was not really out of negligence or mistake that the diagnosis was made after some time. Technically, it can be explained. I just wanted to make that clarification for our colleagues from Northern Uganda. That is how yellow fever is.

I just had some few clarifications or questions to ask the minister. One is that if you look at the epidemiology of viral illnesses in this country, there seems to be an axis or a corridor where these viral epidemics arise. Look at Ebola, Hepatitis E, Marburg Fever, Meningitis and so forth. It is mainly Northern Uganda and part of West Nile, then Sudan and Congo. I do not know whether the ministry is aware and whether you have any contingency plan. You can now predict when there will be a Meningitis outbreak, for instance, in West Nile because there is a pattern we have seen. So, in your planning as a ministry, have you catered for this and do you have that disaster preparedness plan within the ministry to contain that? 

Having said that, you seem to be saying that the resources you are using are entirely from donors. I wanted to question your planning. Don’t you have any contingency funds for when this kind of epidemic breaks out? You did not have any funds as Government. 

This relates to the question which was raised when we passed a supplementary budget yesterday. I want to know whether the funds which we passed include your request. You indicated that you submitted a supplementary request but I do not recall any specific allocation to the containment of the yellow fever epidemic in the North. If so, why haven’t you pressed for prioritisation of that fund so that we support you? You have indicated what is required to be done and definitely, it requires a lot of financial support -(Interruption)

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, and I thank my honourable colleague for giving way. This clarification could be given by the minister but because the honourable colleague is a medical professional, I thought he could help the House and the minister. 

If you look at what has been happening of recent, you can see that there is a resurgence of diseases that the Government had controlled in the past. There is Kipumpuni Fever in West Nile, which surfaced recently. Now there is Yellow Fever, something which had been controlled so many years ago and now there is resurgence. If you go to the history, you will also find that there are a number of diseases which Government had controlled so many years ago but are coming afresh now. The clarification I am seeking is: is there a failure in the public health campaign? Is there a failure in the ministry’s prioritisation and planning or is this a medical pattern that usually comes after some time – that diseases re-emerge? What is the problem? I thank you. 

DR BARYOMUNSI: I do not have time but I would have given you a lecture on disease epidemiology. (Laughter) I will leave it to the Minister to respond. He will have more time. 

Definitely, I agree with your observation that there seems to be a resurgence of some of the illnesses. I hope the ministry has studied this and integrated it into the planning and programming process to address this issue. There are reasons but because of time, I will not go into this.

Finally, I just wanted to ask the Minister - he says he is expecting one million doses of the vaccine today. The reason he is giving is that there is a shortage of the yellow fever vaccine globally. If we gave you sufficient resources, would you be able to have enough vaccines for this country starting with the region which is affected and then the rest of the country?  

You are saying the vaccination exercise will start at the end of January. If you are receiving the vaccine today, 5th of January, why are you pushing the exercise to the end of January? We know vaccination is the only measure that we can use to prevent more infections and more deaths. If you could clarify some of those questions, I would be happy. Otherwise, I thank you for the statement and request you to put in more effort as a ministry to contain the epidemic. Thank you.

3.47
MS AURU ANNE (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker. I would like to thank the minister for his report on yellow fever in Northern Uganda. I have a few questions and also information to give to the hon. Minister. 

In the background, the Minister said the vaccination for Yellow Fever is affordable. I would like to know how much a dose costs so that those who may be able to afford can go ahead and buy and have their people vaccinated instead of waiting for the ministry -(Interruption)

MR BAKKA MUGABI: Recently, I was vaccinated against yellow fever at a cost of Shs 40,000 a dose. I do not know if that is what the Minister is calling affordable. 

MS AURU: Thank you for that information but I do not think it is all that affordable. Members of Parliament may be able to afford it but not our local people in the village.

Secondly, I would like to know whether the Uganda Government has ever done mass vaccination against Yellow Fever. In the report, you say that it can provide protection of up to ten years or more. I am thinking that if Government could take on that, it will be a way of eradicating yellow fever in Uganda. 

My third question is - it could go to the Ministry of Finance - why has the ministry delayed to bring the supplementary budget for the Ministry of Health to help it tackle Yellow Fever? This is a matter of life and death; I thought it is more urgent than any other thing. 

The fourth question is: where did the DDT project end? We were sensitised and there were pilot districts in which it was started. Now we do not know where it ended, and this could also be a way of controlling this epidemic.

Hon. Minister, I would also like to inform you, if you are not yet informed, that although Moyo District has not been mentioned in this report we have epidemics of Hepatitis B. It started in February and was still scanty then but by July, the cases had become more acute. So far, 13 people have died and there are 63 cases. Out of this, four are health workers. This information has been given to the epidemic surveillance department by the district surveillance officer and we have received no response. I am appealing to the ministry, especially to the minister, to take urgent steps to come to the aid of the people of Moyo District. This could be done maybe through mobilisation and sensitisation and also screening of everybody if possible, so that those who are sick can be vaccinated or treated. That is my appeal. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Lastly, the Leader of the Opposition and also a resident of the area, and then the Minister will finally wind up.

3.51
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): I thank you very much. I thank the minister for his report and also thank all my colleagues who have contributed and expressed various concerns.

As the Speaker has mentioned, this disease initially started in Abim District which neighbours Agago. It came to Agago at the time when we were active in our consultations. I saw this disease come, expand and reach the stage where it has reached. I would therefore like in my contribution to try and fill in the science that may help in addressing some of the things that are of concern to our people.

Before I do so, I would like to express my condolences to the families that lost their loved ones on account of the disease. At the same time, I would like to thank the medical workers of Dr Ambrosoli Memorial Hospital in Kalongo and of Abim Hospital and the various health centres that have been tackling this disease. 

In the beginning, because of the nature of the illness the big fear amongst the health workers in those places was that we were once again confronted with an Ebola type of illness. The first reaction was safety of the medical workers to an extent that when these health centres run out of protective wear, it became almost impossible to get them to handle the patients. That really aggravated fear among the population and delayed the process of medical intervention. I would like to thank the Ministry of Health and the health NGOs like AMREF, UNICEF and Médecins Sans Frontières that intervened and physically sent in people. The Ministry of Health also sent in staff. Dr Makumbi and his team went to Kalongo and Abim. 

When I was there, I talked with Dr Mallinga over this. As Dr Mallinga said, Yellow Fever is a disease that was last reported in Uganda in 1942 in Bundibugyo, so nobody has even thought of it in the North or in Uganda generally. So it took some time for the medical people to respond precisely. But now that we know, I think the important thing is to first of all allay the fears of the population. 

In Kalongo because of this thing, you see these medical workers dressed like astronauts in white fully covered, and then the ambulances with all their sirens wailing. This is not a common thing in the community and there is so much fear. If somebody is sick and you suspect this disease, people even fear handling them thinking that you could actually catch the disease if you handled the patient and yet you cannot catch the disease when handling the patient. So, I think the ministry should emphasise this point. Touching or helping the patient is not going to lead to you contracting the disease because the path of contraction is different.

Secondly, in advising on the behaviour of people, the mosquito that transmits this disease, Aedes Aegypti, is not like – as hon. Akena asked – the ordinary mosquito that transmits Malaria. If you sit at a corner where there are shades or flowers, sometimes you find a mosquito actually biting you – a black mosquito with white marks – that is the Aedes Aegypti. It is active during the day in shady humid places where it shelters. So ordinary people in the villages should again be cautioned about hunting in areas where there are thickets that are humid. If they rest there, then the mosquitoes will bite them.

In the North during the dry season, water does not remain long because it is too dry and it will dry out. The most risky place and the most common resting place of this mosquito will therefore be the pit latrines. The last time we had a mosquito spraying programme, for some very strange reason I talked to the people who were spraying in Kalongo and they left out the latrines. 

I can assure you that if you go and ask the people whether the spraying that was being done about four weeks ago was effective, they will say the first one was effective but this one is completely useless. This is because the first one covered latrines which are the resting places of all these mosquitoes during the day – humid dark places where they rest. I appeal to you that for any mosquito spraying programme that you undertake in urban centres in the North make sure that the pit latrines are sprayed as a priority to minimise this.

There is obviously a change in the pattern of disease outbreaks, which is probably related to climate change. Therefore, these are the breeding patterns that now the ministry and the Government of Uganda have to be discerning so that we prepare. Once it comes to the dry season, there will be outbreaks and we should be prepared for these situations until we bring them down through vaccination and any other measures. 

I believe that this disease was most prevalent in the drier parts of West Africa. For a long time, it was in your interest to actually vaccinate yourself when you are travelling to those places.

In the recommendations for advocacy that you are going to send out, please include some of these elements and particularly remove the fear that helping these patients will lead to transmission of the disease. Our people, the grass cutters, like to enjoy giant rats. The initial speculation was that this was coming out of rats and people stopped eating this delicacy. (Laughter) Others eat worse things than rats so you should not worry about that.

Otherwise, I thank you for this report but please let the urgency of the response that you have suggested be effected. Let the vaccination take place because it will drastically reduce the spread of this disease. I thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, may I please suggest that you be brief and wind up.

4.00
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): I thank you very much. I will start by thanking the Leader of the Opposition who has given very good advice.

By today at the ministry, they know when we should be receiving the vaccine. We are not going to wait until the end of this month before we start the vaccination. As soon as we get the vaccine, we shall adjust ourselves to start vaccination in the affected areas immediately.

Secondly, we received good advice from the Leader of the Opposition who is one of the leading entomologists in the country. It is true that when we trained our people to spray, we overlooked the latrines but we shall take your advice into account and we shall also increase the awareness information to the public and also to the health workers to assure them that this is Yellow Fever and it cannot be transmitted by touching a patient.

Mr Speaker, the hon. Anywar thought it took too long for us to arrive at the diagnosis. I have already apologised for that, in that our doctors and nurses here diagnose by what they call the empirical method - because of what they have seen before. Laboratories in our country are not very well established to handle a complicated disease like this one. So, we eventually made our diagnosis and actually our supportive measures have been quite effective in that our case fatality rates are not above those recognised internationally. We are below those recognised internationally. So, we are doing quite well in the management of these cases -(Interruption) 

MR OLENY: Mr Speaker, just a clarification on the point of supportive management of the cases. On the point of the supportive treatment that is given to the patient, the honourable minister will note that in his statement, that is totally downplayed. The emphasis is on the vaccine which we are aware is the single and most effective measure.

The clarification I would like to seek from the minister is, doesn’t he see it important to have assured the House on the package of medicines that are required to manage those who may be either suspected or may have already been affected so that this would work very well to reduce on the tension that would probably be among the population? Because it is as if once Yellow Fever is diagnosed, then you are sure of dying. But given the fact that he is saying that the CFR is low, can he, therefore, assure the country on the package of the medicines and their availability in those areas? Thank you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Minister. There is this one element that I forgot. Once the medical staff draped in protective gear and started to respond to reported cases, the report we got from the medical staff was that all the cases that were recognised early and were taken for early intervention survived. This is really for the record so that we do not create unnecessary fear about this illness.

DR MALLINGA: I think that allays the fears of the honourable Member, that in supportive care, that is IV fluids and other tender care from the nurses, dehydration is the major aim so that electrolyte imbalance does not occur and the patients do not get unnecessarily dehydrated. That is what I meant by supportive care. And as he has said, once patients were handled, this greatly improved. 

I would like to say, in addition to what the Leader of the Opposition has said, that now the number of cases is subsiding. They are not as many as they were at the beginning. So, that is a good improvement as we embark on massive vaccination. 

We have been appealing for money set aside to handle epidemics and we are continuously in the process of negotiation with the Ministry of Finance. It is ongoing and I hope eventually we are going to succeed in getting these funds set aside. 

Spraying kills all mosquitoes and maybe other insects - (Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Minister. You are saying that you are in the process of negotiating for some emergency response to epidemics. We want to find out whether you do not qualify to benefit from some funds in the Ministry of Disaster Preparedness which we have as a country. Doesn’t your ministry, with outbreaks, benefit from the Disaster Preparedness ministry or from the Prime Minister’s fund for disaster?

Secondly, as we are about to undertake the vaccination, you are quite aware that we Members of Parliament as we sit here are in constant touch with our electorate. That is one - like some of us in affected areas, probably as you go for vaccination, others are elsewhere. 

And, as Members of Parliament we travel a lot and some embassies make it a requirement for Yellow Fever vaccination. One time I failed to make it here and when I reached South Africa I had to pay US $150. I was detained. Wouldn’t it be prudent for you also to make some arrangements for Members of Parliament to benefit from this? Thank you.

DR MALLINGA: To start with, we do not qualify for the disaster money from the Prime Minister’s Office. We are negotiating for money to be set aside specifically for epidemics, which occur almost annually in this country. 

Regarding vaccination, I think it is wise from now on before you travel - as we have had this outbreak in Uganda, anybody who is going out of Uganda will be required to have Yellow Fever vaccination. We have it available in the City Council but if Members of Parliament want vaccination to be carried out I think that can be arranged; so, we can come here and vaccinate you -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Hon. Minister -

THE SPEAKER: We are really extending this debate. It is taking too long.

MR OKUPA: Mr Speaker, just briefly. I do not want it to be looked at as if we only care about ourselves. We have named the districts that are affected. People travel to do business. I think we should advise all Ugandans, even when they move internally, if they are going to these districts which are affected, they should get vaccinated before they go there. Otherwise, when they get there they will come back and the whole country is affected. So, you should advise all Ugandans who are travelling within the country to those districts.

And lastly, you talked about the issue of Malaria and mosquitoes. Before we broke off for Christmas, I asked hon. Kakooza why anti-malarials, especially Coartem, have become very expensive. The price has doubled to Shs 25,000 a dose. With the poverty in this country, how are people going to afford this? Hon. Kakooza promised to come back and give a statement on why the price has more than doubled from Shs 10,000 to Shs 25,000 but we have not received a report up to today. Now with the outbreak of Yellow Fever, I think there is going to be a very big problem.

DR MALLINGA: If the honourable member was listening, we said that initially we were going to protect those districts that were affected but we want to spread out this vaccination to the whole country.

About the price of anti-malarials, since hon. Kakooza was given the assignment, I think he is going to present a detailed paper to Parliament on this. But I would say it is a trend in the world that the price of this particular medicine is increasing. However, in this country we are subsidising the availability of anti-malarials through the hospitals. They are free in health centres and hospitals and subsidised in selected drug shops. It is Shs 10,000 for a child under five and maximum Shs 20,000. 

We build health centre II, III, and IV but equipping them is the business of the district. I have talked with several Members of Parliament urging them that we should centralise health workers so that they are posted from the centre but that has received a lot of opposition from the districts. 

There has been a great improvement in the distribution of drugs in this country and it is ongoing. There is a special body from State House who are dealing with the situation of theft of drugs. Give us time and this will be solved. If you have travelled and you have been vaccinated against Yellow Fever, then you are still fine until 10 years elapse. Not everybody can afford insect repellents, may be a son of a former President.

MR AKENA: The product I was talking about was made by Vaseline and was available at any kiosk in Kenya. Is the hon. Minister, therefore, in order to allude that something that is available in large quantities can be afforded by only a son of a President?

PRESENTATION CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS CODE OF CONDUCT REGULATIONS 2010

4.15
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Yesterday, this House adjourned and requested the various political parties represented in Parliament to hold a meeting and consult over the matter. This meeting was duly held this morning and it was attended by the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy Attorney General, representatives of the Democratic Party, a representative of UPC and a representative of the NRM.

Although the NRM was happy with the draft code, the Opposition raised a number of serious arguments, the main one being that the draft code mainly covers regulation of conduct of political parties during elections.

However, Section 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act envisages a code that is broader, so they said that having a code that is only partial may not be appropriate at this time.

They also felt that at this stage of the current election season the code may not be very helpful because it would come at the tail end of this process.

The NRM believes that the question of regulating the conduct of political parties should enjoy broad support of the political spectrum in Uganda. Therefore we all agreed that consideration of the draft code be differed in order to broaden its scope to be in conformity with section 19 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act and to broaden the consultations in order for us to achieve that desired consensus.

4.18
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): I thank the Secretary General of the NRM who chaired our meeting for reporting what transpired. I rise on behalf of the opposition to confirm the position that has been presented to the House by the Secretary General. I would like to thank him and the colleagues on our side who participated in this discussion. We look forward to examining this code of conduct after the elections and ensuring that it will be in conformity with Section 19 and 20 of the Political Parties and Organisations Act.
 
THE SPEAKER: You have heard the report from the committee we set up to resolve the problem we had yesterday. The consensus from them is that we stay considerations of the item we have on the order paper until an appropriate time when they will be able to comprehensively deal with the law.

4.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): The chairperson of the committee that you put in place has put the position very succinctly and has been supported by the Leader of the Opposition. My only prayer is that as we engage in those further consultations, the House urges the relevant stakeholders and players to rise to challenge, come up when they are called for discussions and consultations so that we can get the useful input for us to move forward without excuses.

THE SPEAKER: In view of those comments, should we adopt the report of the chairman of that committee? 

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

THE SPEAKER: I put the question to it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: We have come to the end of this session but before we adjourn, I know you are rushing to your constituencies for campaigns - I wish you very successful and dignified campaigns so that we show the world that Uganda can conduct elections in a dignified manner. I wish you the best! The House is adjourned sine die. (Applause)

(The House rose at 4.21 p.m. and adjourned sine die.) 

