Tuesday, 6 January 2004

Parliament met at 11.00 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, on Friday, 2 January 2004 a calamity befell this Parliament.  At dawn of that day, Mr Tarsis Mutagamba, husband to the Minister of State for Water, died. In the evening of the same day, our colleague, the hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, passed away at Mbarara University Teaching Hospital after a brief illness.  

Honourable members, the bereaved family made a passionate request to the Speaker and myself. The request was to the effect that although Parliament was on recess, the body of the departed member be brought to Parliament to enable her colleagues who may not be in a position to travel to Bushenyi for the burial to pay their last respects to her.  

The Speaker made extensive consultations regarding the request with Members of Parliament, who were here, and the administration of Parliament who were at that time available. It was agreed that the body of the deceased be brought to Parliament for the above mentioned purpose. 

It was further agreed that an extra-ordinary sitting of Parliament be convened in order for the House to give the late Bernadette Bigirwa a befitting send-off. Hence we have this sitting, which I have called under the general powers given to me under Rules 11 and 13 (3) of the Rules of Procedure.  

I wish to thank all those members who put in a lot of time preparing for this occasion here in Kampala and those who are handling the burial arrangements both in Mbarara and in Bushenyi. From here, we shall proceed to the requiem mass at Christ the King Church before the body of the late Bigirwa leaves for her home in Bushenyi for the last night.  The burial is tomorrow, Wednesday, 7 January 2004 and the proceedings start at 12.00 noon.  

The administration of Parliament has arranged for a bus to take the members who wish to travel to Bushenyi to attend the burial. A form has been available since Sunday at both receptions for those members to register, in case they want to travel with the bus. The bus will leave our parking yard tomorrow at 7.00 O’clock in the morning.  

We shall now proceed according to the Order Paper, which I have already circulated. But before we do so, and since this session is dedicated to the hon. Bigirwa, let me ask the House to stand up for a minute of silence in memory of Mr Tarsis Mutagamba who was buried yesterday.  

(The Members stood and observed a moment of silence)
(Entrance of the late Bernadette Bigirwa)
National Anthem (One Verse)
Laying of Wreaths.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we begin the debate, we have received a number of messages of condolence to the Parliament of Uganda and I would like to briefly read them. The first is from the Apostolic Nuncio to Uganda. It reads as follows:

“The Apostolic Nunciature has learnt with sorrow of the untimely demise of hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, Woman Member of Parliament for Bushenyi District, which happened last Friday, 2 January 2004.  

His Excellency the Apostolic Nuncio, Archbishop Pierre, currently in Burundi following the killing of the Papal Nuncio there, has been duly informed of the sad news. Whereupon he has asked me to convey to Your Excellency, and through you the honourable Members of Parliament, the deceased family and all who mourn her loss, his sincere condolences and spiritual closeness.  

May the risen Lord in whom she was baptized and in whom she believed grant her the reward of eternal happiness, and to those she leaves behind solace and serenity. 

These prayerful sentiments I am privileged to make my own, as I too associate myself with the expressions of sympathy on this mournful occasion.  

Please, accept your Excellency the assurance of my highest consideration.
Rev. Antione Kamaryel.”

We have also received the following message from Ambassador Mull Katende of the Uganda Embassy in Khartoum:

“Hon. Speaker, we have learnt with great sorrow of the sudden passing away of hon. Mrs Bernadette Bigirwa, Woman Representative for Bushenyi.  

The late will be remembered for her tireless contributions in the service of our country, which she served as Resident District Commissioner and Member of Parliament. Her abrupt departure will no doubt be a blow to Uganda’s Legislative Assembly and her constituents.  

Please accept our heartfelt condolences to you, Mr Speaker, her colleagues in the Seventh Parliament and members of her family. May the soul of the hon. Bigirwa rest in eternal peace.  

Ambassador Mull Katende.”

We have also received the following message from the Chairman of the Electoral Commission:

“The Electoral Commission has learnt with profound shock of the death of hon. Bigirwa who has been the Woman Representative for Bushenyi District.  

The Electoral Commission shares with you the grief of this tragedy and the resulting loss to the Parliament and the nation. We pray that the Almighty will guide and strengthen you and the entire House during this trying moment.

Eng. Dr Badru M. Kiggundu,Chairman Electoral Commission”

The last message is from the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association:

“Dear Sir,
On behalf of the Uganda Parliamentary Press Association and on our own behalf, we are deeply saddened by the demise of hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, Woman MP Bushenyi District, whom we have closely been associated with since the 6th Parliament.  

Sir, we hope you agree with us that the fallen hon. Bigirwa has been an effective legislator, good debater, regular at Parliament and committed to the cause of promoting democracy in this country.  

Members of our association, who have been covering the committee she has been chairing, say she has been an outstanding chairperson who gave all her members of the committee a chance to contribute to issues under consideration without bias. Members will miss her approachable character and her willingness to explain complicated matters arising from those debates in the House. 

We beseech God to give her family and friends strength and courage to carry on their duties in her absence. We cannot change God’s decision but pray that her soul rest in eternal peace. 

Henry Mukasa, Chairperson. Michael Wambi, General Secretary.”

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HON. BERNADETTE BIGIRWA, WOMAN REPRESENTATIVE, BUSHENYI DISTRICT.

11.24
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Lira Municipality, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I rise to move a motion under Rule 40(1)(k). This is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, Woman Representative Bushenyi District: 

“Whereas Parliament notes with deep sorrow the untimely demise of the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa which occurred on the 2 January 2004; 

Whereas the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, between 1988 and 1995 served in various districts as Resident District Commissioner, where as a strong and versatile leader she contributed to the development of the districts thereof;

Aware that the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa has been a dedicated and articulate Member of Parliament, frank politician and distinguished leader of this country;  

Conscious that the late Bernadette Bigirwa was an able, well-motivated and hardworking representative of the people of Bushenyi District in this august House; 

Recognising that the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa was an able member and representative of the House on the Committees of Appointments, on Government Assurances which she chaired, and that of Natural Resources;

Recognising further that the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa has been a dedicated legislator of the House and a representative of the women of Bushenyi District in particular and Uganda as a whole, and a good stateswoman;  
Noting that the late Bernadette Bigirwa has served her motherland in different capacities and locations as a leader and an administrator; 

Now therefore, I move that this Parliament resolves as follows:

1. That it collectively conveys its deep condolences to the family, relatives, friends and the nation as a whole upon the loss of this gallant and industrious legislator of Uganda.

2. That it takes cognisance of the distinguished services rendered and contributions made by her in this august House and to the nation not only as a Woman Representative of Bushenyi District but of the people of Uganda.”  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: It has been seconded. Continue.

MRS OGWAL: Madam Speaker, death has its bitter and sweet side. It is bitter because it robs us of our loved ones and leaves a deep hole, which can never be filled. That is an experience we have all gone through in our own homes, in our community and in this august House. It is sweet in the sense that it brings people together.  

You are aware, Madam Speaker, that since October last year, Members of Lango Parliamentary Group have not been in this House. They have not yet resolved to continue active participation in the Parliamentary duties, but are focusing more on the security situation in Northern Uganda. But today, because of the sweetness of death, we have all come together and we are debating together in honour of our dear sister, Bernadette Bigirwa.  

I want to thank you, Madam Speaker, and this august House for allowing an oration to honour those who have sacrificed their lives, comfort, money and time in order to serve this country. It is very rare that people who have done so well are recognised, or even their good works remembered.   I want to thank you because you have accorded us that opportunity, so that those who have served this nation should be recognised and should be praised. I want to thank you for that. 


Today our sister lies speechless, lifeless and defenceless. But one thing I observed as I viewed the body is the glow of love, the glow of victory radiating from her face. I want to thank God for that.  

Today I want the people whose views I represent - I just want to say, thank you Bernadette, thank you for your selfless service. That is all I can say.  It is, therefore, right and fitting that we honour her because in the last 15 years or so of her service to this nation, she has proved her virtues and achievements. It is a manifestation of what a nationalist can do and what a woman can do if she is focused and determined.  

I want to remember Bernadette in three ways: First, as a housewife and as a mother. Many of you, particularly men, do not know the difficult situation women go through to balance the time between politics and home. 

I can only say that Bernadette has done extremely well. I had seen her side by side with her husband –(Applause)– and I had seen her standing side by side with her family members and with the children. This is a very commendable achievement by Bernadette and it is an example we the legislators and politicians must follow. We should not let it die with Bernadette.  

I would also like to remember Bernadette because of her outstanding service in the arena of administration. I am saying this with good feelings. Some of you who have been on the opposition side from 1986 will certainly say Bernadette has been a nationalist right from the beginning. In her administration, she rose above ideological entanglement. (Applause) 

In many districts that she served, members of the opposition did not suffer intimidation and harassment as in other districts. Those of us who remember the first generation of the RDCs, they were extremely brutal and intolerant, but not Bernadette Bigirwa. She behaved like a true nationalist and above all a mother to all that she served.  

Those of us who were in the Sixth Parliament will remember that the Sixth Parliament focused primarily on security in Northern Uganda. One of the resolutions that we passed was how to bring an end to that war in Northern Uganda. I want to remember Bernadette today because she was the chairperson of that Committee on Defence and Internal Affairs. They toured the whole country, came back to the House and made a report on how to handle the Northern insurgency. I want to thank particularly that committee and Bernadette in absentia. She did a commendable job.  

It was only at that time that I came to realize that although Bernadette was a Movement RDC, she had a heart for Uganda. I loved her for that, and from that day forward I remained close to her. I knew that although she had a face bearing the word “Movement”, she was a true Ugandan. I want to remember her for that.  

I know it will make some of you uncomfortable, but it is at a time like that we say all these things. If we do not say them now, they will never be said because she is gone. She will never come back in the flesh until Jesus Christ comes back.

Bernadette was a warrior. Indeed she was dependable, and once she understood an issue she would stand for it and fight for it until the end.  That is why Bernadette was involved in anything that united Ugandans, anything that went beyond our ideological prejudices. 

Bernadette has been at the pinnacle of PAFO; she has been at the pinnacle of all non-governmental organisations that service all parties, whether religious, political parties or whatever. I think these are virtues that cannot escape our ears and eyes.  

I would also like to mention that apart from being a uniting factor, Bernadette was a true Christian.  She was an innovator. She is the one who initiated the Catholic prayer group in the 7th Parliament. (Applause) That clearly demonstrates her spiritual standing.  

Whatever Bernadette did on this earth, we can only judge her by that strength that she put into the mobilisation of Members of Parliament, who are Christians but had to be mobilised in order to come together and praise God for what they are and for the service they are giving the country. I think Bernadette became the “chaplainess” of that group up to the time of her death. We want to remember her for that.  
Madam Speaker, I want to end by saying this. The husband, the children and the relatives, I can only comfort you by these words - Bernadette is not dead because her good works will continue to follow her.  Even Jesus said those who die in Christ will not die, and I believe that even in the world we say, those who have done well will never die. 

The name of Bernadette Bigirwa will remain on our lips for some years to come and that is what I can comfort my dear brother-in-law with. If the husband of Bernadette is here, I want to comfort you with these words. 

To the children, your mother exerted discipline on you and, therefore, disciplined shall you be, not only in your home but also in the nation. I wait to see Bigirwa’s children coming to Lango sub-region or anywhere in Uganda and telling the people of Uganda about how their mother did so well in uniting the country.

To the women of Uganda, I want to say, be not weary. You have indeed lost a fighter. You have lost a strong woman, you have lost a leader in the struggle, but I can only say, aluta continua.   

Finally, Madam Speaker, I want to say that every time that we lose our loved ones in this House, we lavish praises and we say many good things. However, at the end of the day we do not follow up what has been said concerning the welfare, which is necessary for a Member of Parliament. I am heart-broken when Parliament begins to ask, “How shall we do this? How shall we accord her the honour, how shall we transport the body?” 

Some of us felt that the body of Bernadette Bigirwa should not have suffered the potholes in Bushenyi. It should have been flown to Kampala and flown back. Why not! She has been a dynamic leader, but we are told that because of financial constraints, the body of this poor honourable lady had to go jumping the potholes. It is not right. 

I think we should record how a Member of Parliament should be accorded honour when that Member of Parliament departs from us. It is the only message I would like to leave with Parliament, particularly the Parliamentary Commission. Please make sure that our welfare is properly put in shape because we do not want to keep lamenting every time we lose our loved ones. May God bless you all!

11.42
MR AUGUSTINE RUZINDANA (Ruhama County, Ntungamo):  Madam Speaker and my colleagues, death is something we do not get used to. I saw Bernadette last Sunday, when I passed through the hospital. We talked and I could see that she was going to recover. I went home. 

Two days later, when I saw other members who had seen her, they said that she was in a bad shape. Bernadette was special to all of us in different ways. She was special to me, and I did not believe that Bernadette would die. She was under good medical care. In the hospital, I saw a Professor of Medicine at the Medical School in Mbarara permanently with her. She would only come out to smoke a cigarette and go back in, and there were other doctors.  

However, when I was there I noted worrying things.  Power was continuously getting off when she was on life support machines. They tried to get stand-by generators and they did not work.  Hon. Jim Muhwezi passed there, asked for everything to be done, and indeed everything was done that could be done but it was not enough. 

If a Member of Parliament suffers with that type of care, how are the ordinary people being cared for? So, that is the lesson I learnt. We should not just care for Members of Parliament. I think we should improve our medical care. (Applause)  

Let me turn to thanks. Madam Speaker, I wish to thank you and the Speaker for deciding to have this special session. (Applause). It is the first time this is being done. In the 6th Parliament we lost 14 members but it was not done for any of them. In this Parliament, this is the fourth member we have lost. It has not been done for the other three unless they died when we are in session. 

Why has this been done? Why have the Speaker and Members of Parliament gone out of their way to give her a special tribute? It is because Bernadette was special to each of us in a different way. 
Hon. Cecilia has talked of her membership in the Catholic group. She was a member of YPA, she was a member of PAFO, a member of UWOPA, a member of very many things, and in each of them she was special there. She was the moving spirit in each of them. (Applause). Because of that, we could arrive at a consensus to have this special session for which, Madam Speaker, I thank you. 

Madam Speaker, I also thank you for having agreed to be the chairperson of the organising committee. You chaired us here on Saturday and Sunday. All this being done is mainly because of the Speaker and her staff.  

I wish to thank hon. Jim Muwhezi. One of the children of our colleague has arrived and others will arrive later, mainly through the help of hon. Jim Muhwezi (Applause). He convinced Government and Government paid for their coming. I wish to thank Government for that (Applause). 

Hon. Bernadette Bigirwa was a Movement person, thorough in the ideology of the Movement. That is why when deviations started of late, she stated her position clearly that she would not support deviations from the principles and practice of the Movement. (Applause) She was a principled person. Whenever she was convinced in anything, she stood by it. She has died, still standing for her principles. 

I knew Bernadette when she was Resident District Commissioner (RDC) in Kasese. From that time I heard she was a mobiliser, and I have seen that she was a mobilizer. 

She was an organizer. Whenever there was a function, she would remind everybody, “Where are you? Where have you reached? What is being done?” and so on. So, all of us are going to miss her. The family is going to miss her, and this country is going to miss her. We who have been working with her in our various groups will miss her. 

I would like to stop here and urge all of you to speak as briefly as possible so that as many people can speak about Bernadette. May her soul rest in eternal peace.

11.49
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Madam Speaker and honourable Members of Parliament, I beg to support the motion. As already noted, the late Bernadette Bigirwa served Uganda faithfully and effectively in different capacities as RDC, Member of Parliament, Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Government Assurances and a member of the Council of Makerere University Business School. 

In my interaction with her, I discovered that she had the following commendable qualities: First, she had a developed sense of procedure, a scarce resource in the country, which we must cultivate assiduously. 

In her capacity as chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Government Assurances, before meeting her committee, she would indicate to us in writing the issues to be addressed. This enabled us to give the committee researched answers to the questions raised. 

Second, she was an effective timekeeper. For example, she was able to be on time for committee work and guide her committee with a developed sense of procedure. Consequently, the deliberations would be completed on time.  

Third, she was a patient lady. She would accord every member of the committee and others in attendance an opportunity to talk, to argue and then she would professionally conclude the discussions. 

You must be a good listener in order to capture different nuances and dimensions of what is articulated and then you summarise and come to a conclusion. That is a good chairperson. She would firmly but gently disallow interruptions and acts of indiscipline.  

Fourth, she was a regular attendant of Parliament and an effective contributor to parliamentary debates. From time to time we have been grappling with the problem of realising quorum. But when we have these people who are actively attending Parliament and staying in Parliament, then the problem of lack of quorum is largely solved.  

Finally, she played an active role in fundraising for the religious cause. In doing so, she also cherished accountability. I do remember one day she wanted to raise some money. She really ambushed me, but I was financially naked. I did mention to her that I would make a reasonable contribution and indeed, I made the contribution. She wrote a nice letter to me acknowledging receipt of the money.  She cherished accountability. May the Almighty sustain the bereaved!

11.54
MRS DORA BYAMUKAMA (Mwenge County South, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to support the motion. I stand here on behalf of Uganda Women Parliamentary Association (UWOPA) to convey our heartfelt sympathies to the family of hon. Bernadette Bigirwa.

In the women’s political participation, hon. Bernadette Bigirwa will be remembered for many things. Amongst this were her frankness, intellect, courage, determination, humour and zeal for life. 

To most of us, hon. Bernadette was a mentor. She helped many of us fit in this new environment. I am one of those new Members of Parliament who found her very approachable and I learnt a lot of things from her.  

Bernadette has been to many of us also a very good dependable friend, a mentor, a sister, a mother, and a great mobilizer. Once you are on Bernadette’s side, you are sure of, if not wining, having a very smart case to put across.

On a personal note, I met hon. Bernadette Bigirwa in the early 90s in Kanungu. She was working in that region and she invited us to her house. I was part of the Uganda Women Lawyer’s Association, otherwise known as FIDA. She was very warm to us and from there I knew that this was one person that we could depend on for the women’s cause. 

Indeed, she has been exemplary in whatever she has done. She has clearly shown that women are capable leaders. Some of us would not have been able to make it to Parliament but for the kind of person that she was. Therefore, this is a virtue that we shall remember her for.
If you knew Bernadette you knew Jack, her husband. If you knew Jack, you knew Bernadette. I cannot conclude without thanking hon. Bernadette Bigirwa for being a good wife and a good mother. Many a time you would find her in the library sending e-mails to the children.

The last point I would like to make is that of Bernadette’s fear and love for God. It was exemplary. I went to two consecrations last year, one in the Catholic Church in Kabale and one in Fort Portal, as well as for the fundraising. Bernadette was very visible on both occasions. She even went a day before to have early morning Mass on time. 

It is very difficult for most of us who have known Bernadette to accept her death, but I pray that God, whom she has served and loved so well, will rest her soul in peace.

11.58
MR WILLIAM SITENDA-SEBALU (Kyadondo County East, Wakiso): I thank you Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, Members of Parliament. I rise to support the motion and I would like to pay tribute to the fallen daughter of this land, the late Bigirwa. 

First and foremost, I would like to thank the office of the Speaker, the office of the Commission of Parliament, and the Uganda Government for making it possible to bring the remains of the late Bigirwa here for us all to pay tribute.  

The people of Kyadondo East Constituency, Wakiso District, whom I represent in this Parliament, do convey their most sincere condolences to the bereaved family, friends, relatives and the entire nation upon this loss of a distinguished daughter of this land, the late Bigirwa.

I got the information of the death of the late Bigirwa from one lady called Angel. Angel is a cousin to the late Bigirwa whom I got to know when I visited the Bigirwa’s family late last year. It was very unbelievable. I told her that this is life, full of contradictions - the undesirables happening and desirables not happening.

Madam Speaker, the late Bigirwa Bernadette has been a member of the B14. For documentation purposes, I would like to inform this House that B14 is an informal group in the Parliament of Uganda. These are the catholic Members of Parliament who made a pilgrimage to Israel last year. 

While in Israel, I learnt that the late Bigirwa was a good listener. Her lifestyle was an embodiment of a true Christian. She followed the Christian norms and values and she loved her God. (Applause). 

The group of the B14 by that time included the Minister in Charge of the Presidency who is now the Vice President of this country, Dr Balibaseka, Bigirwa, Salaamu Musumba, myself and the like. We mourn Madam Bigirwa as the B14 because we initiated a bond of friendship while in Israel.  

While in Israel, I learnt that the Bigirwas were good farmers. She told me that I should visit them and when I came here I took my freight of lorries to Bushenyi. That is where my people of Kyadondo East Constituency have been enjoying affordable bananas, from the Bigirwas.

Madam Speaker, when I reached Bushenyi, whom did I meet, Jack Bigirwa. I had not thought that I would be well received by Jack Bigirwa because Jack Bigirwa had not known me. I want to thank Jack Bigirwa, while you are still alive. It was not very easy for a man to live happily with a woman Member of Parliament. 

At times people fear to live with women Members of Parliament because they think they are highly placed in society and above them. But this was not the case with the Bigirwas. (Applause). They were living happily and a fulfilling life. I thank you very much, Bigirwa.

Madam Speaker, as I conclude my submission, I would like you to forgive me for mentioning what I would not have mentioned now. I want to mention the character of warmth and a heart of feeling for others, which Bigirwa had. 

Last year I lost my three weeks old child. I do not know how Madam Bigirwa got the information, but she mobilized all the Members of Parliament and all the clergy, and all of these people came to my place to grace the occasion. I mourn you Bigirwa for that. 
I would like to end by thanking the Almighty Father for giving us a person in the name of Bigirwa. May the Almighty Father rest her in peace and may perpetual light shine on her soul. I thank you.

12.04
MR EMMANUEL DOMBO (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank Parliament and Government for the efforts to bring the body of the late so that the Parliament of Uganda can pay befitting last respects to a fallen colleague. I want to thank you very much.

Madam Speaker, we stand here to bid farewell to one of our colleagues. Like hon. Ruzindana said, death is something that we have failed to get used to as human beings, yet it is something that is inevitable and has to come. 

If I asked any Member of Parliament here whether they would wish to reach heaven, I am sure everybody would put up his or her hand. But if I asked, “who would wish to die?” nobody would, and yet death is the assured way of the members of this world to reach heaven. (Applause).

Madam Speaker, because a fallen colleague has died we mourn, and may her soul rest in eternal peace.  But while she is on her way, let us reflect on the good deeds and principles that she stood for. To us who are living, what did she do that we would wish to emulate? 

I first met hon. Bernadette Bigirwa in the 6th Parliament and in the formative stages of the YPA. Many people did not understand it, thinking that it was a political organisation in the making. Even when the Vice President was our candidate by then for the Chairman of the Movement Caucus, many people did not understand. But all along, it is hon. Bernadette Bigirwa as senior RDC, like we used to call her at times, who interceded on behalf of those of us who were not very close to the powers that be. We want to remember her for that.

I also want to remember hon. Bernadette Bigirwa for another thing. There is a strong syndrome coming up in this country, especially in the political circles. Politicians are failing to say the truth until they have heard what President Museveni thinks about an issue. (Applause).  
Madam Speaker, for the time we interacted with the hon. Bernadette Bigirwa, she played wise counsel. Where she had an opportunity to advise the President, she never shied away in doing so, even when the times became so difficult. 

At the time we were here debating the Political Organisations Bill, for example, for the first time in the history of Uganda, members of a committee and their chairperson chose to disown their report. Even when we pleaded, because of the consequences that we would have as a government if we passed that bill in the way it was, many people chose not to listen. 

Hon. Bernadette Bigirwa was a strong Movement supporter, but she did not shy away from moving out to demonstrate that fact. (Applause). Many people misunderstood her action. But after we had gone out, she said that she would rather demonstrate so that history may judge this country right. 

Madam Speaker, I want to tell you that a week later, when the President decided that Uganda should go into multipartism, many people swallowed their own words, which they had been saying on the Floor of the House. What if she had not persisted on that and the President picked it up as an example? This was an act of mature leadership that we must emulate as leaders of this country. We want to remember hon. Bernadette Bigirwa for this.  (Applause).

Madam Speaker and my colleagues, Bernadette is not here to hear what we are saying about her. But how many would wish to be condemned in their last days? It is not usual in African tradition for us to do it. 

Let what we hear about our fallen colleague remind us, as we perform our duties of leadership, that some people fear death and because of that they do not want to say the truth. But I have always asked, and I wish to ask now, what will you say when death finally comes and you have not spoken the truth? 

So, honourable members, it is important for us to be good leaders and to speak the truth, irrespective of whether death comes or not. Because whether you fear it or not, death will finally come. 

To the children, I wish the bereaved family gets the comfort that they desire. But I want to tell them to emulate the good works that the hon. Bernadette Bigirwa lived for.

On the issue of medical facilities in this country, Madam Speaker, I want to thank the NRM Government.  If you moved throughout the country, there are so many facilities that litter this country, new health centres that have been constructed. In Bunyole they are so many. I have just arrived from Bunyole and I was touring a number of them. 

However, these health centres are empty. They lack facilities, they lack the staff, and the only thing the Government tells you is that there is a ban. People are dying; we are training medical workers and they tell you there is a ban! When shall we lift the ban so that we can have enough medical staff? 

If hon. Bernadette Bigirwa at her level can suffer because power runs out, how much more are the local people suffering on the ground without facilities, without enough staff and without the medicine? May I use this opportunity to call upon Government, now that we have built the structures, let us look for facilities and make further investment in the provision of drugs and services that the people of Uganda deserve. May her soul rest in eternal peace. Thank you.

12.09
MR MOSES KIZIGE (Bugabula County North, Kamuli): Madam Speaker, one time I visited a graveyard in Manzini, Swaziland with a friend to see where the remains of his father had been laid. As we were moving around, I saw a grave of one Charles Charlton and on it these words were inscribed, and they touched my heart: “Where you are I was, where I am you will be.” 

As we gather today, I remembered those words. Certainly, one day or another we shall all be what hon. Bigirwa is today. It is, therefore, not surprising that Members of Parliament have turned up in large numbers, to the extent that I have involuntarily surrendered my usual seat to cross to this side of the House, and I have displaced hon. Hyuha involuntarily.

Madam Speaker, I am the deputy chairperson of the Movement Caucus in Parliament. As we all know, we all belong to the Movement by law, but the existence of various groupings is an indication that we have political differences. 

Hon. Bigirwa was an active member of the Movement Caucus. I was not in the 6th Parliament, but I read about her participation in the Movement Caucus business in the 6th Parliament from the press reports. In the 7th Parliament, she has attended all the Movement Caucus meetings that we have called, and most of the time we agreed and took a common position.  

The emergence of other caucuses in Parliament is an indication of further political differences. There is PAFO, among others. But I want us to look at some of the qualities of a good leader as identified by Peter Drucker, the self-proclaimed father of scientific management. Peter Drucker said that a good leader must have the patience to listen. 

Madam Speaker, as Bernadette leaves us, we are going through a process, through a transition, through a period when big-time political decisions have to be made. Bernadette has been patient. She could listen, she could understand. There is no way you can understand unless you seek to understand. Patience calls for debate without emotions. We shall need this in this crucial stage of our political history.

Madam Speaker, Peter Drucker further says, “a good leader must have the courage to speak.” The late Bigirwa spoke her mind. I first met her when she was the Resident District Commissioner for Jinja. We worked with her to mobilise the leaders in Busoga to form what has eventually turned out to be the Busoga People’s Forum, under the charter of co-operation. She could speak her mind with ease. So, let us speak our minds but in the right fora.

Madam Speaker, Peter Drucker says further, “a leader must have the discipline to follow.” In following, you follow the people you lead but you also follow the people who lead you. I, therefore, see no problem in following our leaders and following people that we lead. So as leaders, we should follow. 

Most important of all, the late Bernadette had the wisdom to lead. Those qualities made her what she was and enabled her to win a second term in Parliament. 

We shall miss Bernadette in the Movement Caucus. To the children, I want to say, her weaknesses you should ignore, her strengths you should uphold.  May her soul rest in eternal peace.

12.15
MRS MIRIA MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I want to say that Bernadette has not passed away. Bernadette has passed on to the other life and we shall one day meet her there, if only we manage to serve our Lord like we have been testifying about her here.

I want to thank God for the privilege he has given us here in this House to enable us pay tribute to Bernadette. At least, this is one good thing among the many that has come out of her sudden death. Because all of you would have heard that Bernadette died, maybe you would not even have gone there. I thank God for that. This privilege is enabling us to take stock by relating to the qualities Bernadette demonstrated, which we ourselves are now testifying to.  

Madam Speaker, I had the privilege to see Bernadette throughout these days. Of course, my sister Winnie, I am sure she will get the privilege to talk, used to stay there every night. For me I used to go away and leave by mid-night. I want to tell you, and I am a believer in God, I never believed Bernadette was dying. I knew she would live and, therefore, we really prayed for Bernadette. 

She died one and a half hours after I had left her. We had gathered there and made the final prayer, which I made with the people - I think hon. Jim Muhwezi was there. I told God, “God, even as Ezekiel asked for more years and you gave him, please give us Bernadette back.” 

This time I did not behave like I usually do by saying, “Let your will be done”. I was very reluctant to let God’s will be done because I thought, “what if his will is to take her away and yet for me I still want her back”. So, I never said that and I took off. One and a half hours after, I rang and Jack told me that she was gone.  

I want to say that God received her because we talked to God and when he chooses to take, he takes. We shall die, but how we die, the legacy we leave and the legacy we find over there, is very crucial to us, Madam Speaker.

Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am mindful of time; for Bernadette, I could speak on and on. She had all these amiable qualities and talents, which everybody has mentioned. Let me tell you, women have problems of chuku chuku here and there. But ever since I met Bernadette in our political life, we had never exchanged any bad word or any bad face. We were always laughing and smiling. 

By the way, she went out of her way when somewhere somehow some people who do not know integrity of others were trying to fight between us. She said, “How dare! Miria is my sister, Winnie is my sister, we shall move together according to God’s wishes”.  (Applause) 

What is the challenge to us in this and from the qualities we are mentioning? Bernadette used her God-given talents and qualities to serve God’s people. She rendered such a service that has given God glory, and that is the glory we are seeing here. 

Now are we prepared to put God at the centre of our lives rather than self? For many of us, it is self at the centre of our lives but she put God at the centre of her life. As we go through difficult times, the challenge to us is, what is at the centre of our lives. Is it God or self?  

In conclusion, Bernadette’s sudden death should teach us that life is just a walking shadow. We who amass wealth, we who love power as if it can never end, we who hate each other for just a difference in opinion, let us love each other. 

Who knows why Bernadette has died at this particular time? Honourable members, who knows? This is a time of uncertainty, and a symbol of unity is going on. What is it teaching us from now? You people, leave the forum, leave whatever, look at each other. Let us love each other, let us unite, let us love God so that we can move ahead and join Bernadette. (Applause). 
Bernadette my sister, go. I will pick some of your qualities. I will try, with God’s mercy and grace, to emulate them so that I will join you later. God bless you my friend.

12.21
MR JOHN NASASIRA (Kazo County, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. I rise to join my colleagues in paying tribute to Bernadette. But first of all, I express my condolences to Jack and the family and to this Parliament. Condolences also to our own region, Ankole, where Bernadette was an active Member of Parliament and I am sure my colleague, the chairperson, will also say something, and indeed condolences go to our country. 

It is difficult to say different things about a person who has been consistent. If you are consistent and you die, then people who talk about you will talk the same things. So, I hope honourable members will bear with us who have been chosen because we will be expressing more or less the same things about Bernadette. This is because her work and her deeds were consistent.

On a day like this when we are paying tribute, I think it is also a big message to us all that, please, while you are still alive do something good for society so that when you die you do not give us problems when we find nothing to talk about you.  (Laughter). Madam Speaker –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Order, honourable members!

MR NASASIRA: Madam Speaker, I therefore do not find it difficult at all to talk about Bernadette as a friend, a colleague, a Member of Parliament, a leader in our country and someone who was able to do this at a very early age. She became an RDC at the age of 31. 

By virtue of my work of supervising roads in the country, there is no station where I did not find Bernadette, whether it was in Rukungiri, Kasese or Jinja. Every time we went to that district, you would find Bernadette, despite being a woman of 31, in charge of the district. 

Whether you are talking about security or you are talking about government programmes, or relationships of district leaders - (Applause)- Sometimes we get problems; you find there are clashes between the RDC and the Chairman LC V, purely out of ego. They try to decide who is big and who is most important, and then it is the country and the district that suffers. But Bernadette knew how to work with people.  

I think one of her biggest challenges in that job was when she was an RDC in Kasese. There was banditry, which she had to deal with. Rebels were coming across from Congo and I think there was a reasonable political impasse within the district between the local leaders. I want to state here that Bernadette did a fantastic job in handling Kasese matters. Those who come from Kasese know this. (Applause).

Turning to Bernadette as a Member of Parliament, we who come from Ankole region have had a tremendous working relationship with her. If you wanted any function or assignment to succeed, as soon a committee was proposed the first name would be Bernadette’s. This is because she would do it diligently and she would do it with a hands-on method. It was not a question of being elected on a committee so that you just sit and ring, she would chase and look for everybody. 

If you wanted a treasurer or a secretary or somebody to mobilise, Bernadette would be one of the first names. This is because she was a very hard working modest person in doing her work. Therefore, I am standing here to pay tribute to all that she contributed together with us as Parliament and even as Members of Parliament from that region. I am sure my colleague will add on.

We will all die, as colleagues have said, because we never sign a contract on how long we are going to live when we were born. So, with no contract, you die when the time comes. But when you die and you find you have not made any contribution to society, some people feel as if you should not have ever been on earth. 

For those who have been to their home, I think the Bigirwas have got one of the biggest coffee farms in our region, built acre by acre. I am not saying this to appease honourable ladies, but you will not easily find a successful home unless there is a very hardworking wife in that home. (Applause). Whether it is the children growing, the economy within the home, or the order, if the woman is hopeless, then that home is hopeless. (Laughter). It is true. I thought honourable members are cheering the truth; let the truth come out.  

I know Bigirwa is a hardworking person, but without the support of Bernadette they would not have built that home. They are now contributing to our economy, which is the last point I want to mention. 

People are mourning about the services in hospitals - every poor service, every shortage. This is mainly because of the economy of Uganda. So, as we pay tribute and as we realise the shortcomings in our health services, I want to use this opportunity to appeal to honourable members, let us all work together. 

We might have our own political differences and everything, but where the economy of Uganda is concerned, let us all work together so that we reduce these problems that we are talking about.

Finally, since we are short of time, I will also take this opportunity to thank my friend, Jack Bigirwa, for supporting Bernadette so that Bernadette could work for Uganda. If a husband is difficult, a wife will not be able to work. Bernadette has gone, but I am sure her deeds will continue to serve Uganda well. 

Irrespective of our political differences and opinions, there is no problem. I heard people saying there is uncertainly; I do not think there is uncertainty, personally. If we are debating in the country about our future, we should not see this as uncertainty but a healthy political debate. 

We should not take our political differences in opinion as political conflict. Bernadette was a Movement Person, through and through. She worked for the Movement and the Movement has been working for Uganda. Her deeds will serve Uganda well. I hope and pray that her soul rests in eternal peace.

12.29
DR FRANK NABWISO (Kagoma County, Jinja):  Madam Speaker, honourable members of Parliament, it is true that Bernadette was not just the Woman Member of Parliament for Bushenyi District, she has been a genuine and a visionary Ugandan nationalist.  
Madam Speaker, it is not too difficult to distinguish between pseudo and genuine nationalists. Pseudo nationalists have a tendency to preach long summons to others on the virtues of patriotism, but they place their personal family or ethnic interests above the interests of the nations they are supposed to advance. 

Genuine nationalists, on the other hand, get concerned with other people’s problems and always fight on the side of the oppressed and their oppressors. 

One piece of evidence, which proves that Bernadette Bigirwa was concerned with other people’s problems, was narrated to me last Saturday by residents of Mawoito village in Kagoma County. 

One day when she was the RDC of Jinja, she went to Mawoito on a tour and found a lot of children who were roaming about on a school day. She immediately ordered the arrest of the parents of those children and only released them after they had promised to send their children back to school. Another type of RDC would have just gone away to the headquarters and sent good reports on mobilizing people in his district. 

Hon. Bernadette Bigirwa’s contribution to Parliament since 1996 proves that she has been a fearless fighter against undemocratic, oppressive and corruptive tendencies in our system of government today. The Hansard is there to tell this story, and the story will be told to generations for many years to come.  

As one of the Members of the Parliamentary Sessional Committee on Government Assurances, which she has been chairing, I have learnt a lot from her. She has been a humble but thorough and conciliatory leader. 

She always handled ministers, including the Prime Minister, firmly but with respect. She always urged us members of the committee to monitor government assurances and promises in Parliament with great vigour, because governments all over the world make a lot of promises to poor people without fulfilling them.  

Finally, I want to openly thank her for encouraging me when I first came to Parliament. She advised me to always obey my conscious and to articulate our people’s problems, but not speak for the purpose of pleasing those who wield more power in this country. May the Almighty God rest her in eternal peace.

12.37
BRIG. JIM MUHWEZI (Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I too would like to support the motion and would like to thank you for this opportunity to pay tribute to the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa. 

I got to know the late Bernadette Bigirwa in 1986 and I know her as a great Movement mobiliser. She worked in Rukungiri as an RDC and then as the District Administrator. She bridged gaps that were very difficult for us in the district to bridge because she was a good Catholic but also a patriot. She brought religions together in our district, which has not changed because of her strong foundations. 

I knew her as a strong willed person, as a principled person and a politician with great conscious. You often get politicians sway along the way and lose conscious, not hon. Bernadette Bigirwa. (Applause). She was candid and very truthful. Even when she did not agree with you, she would say so and tell you why. I liked her very much for that. 

I visited her twice at Mbarara Teaching Hospital and I too thought she was going to pull through. On the day she passed away, I had been there about two hours before, only to be told that she had passed away. 

I was asked by her husband, Mr Jack Bigirwa, to communicate to the President and to request him to help the children travel from abroad to come and bury their mother. That is what hon. Ruzindana was talking about, but it was not me that did it. The President did not need convincing. When I informed him, he agreed and all the three children, one from Canada, another from Australia and one from the UK, received tickets from the President to travel back here. 

One is already here, the others are coming – (Applause) - and the President yesterday called me to ask whether his directive was done and whether the children would be coming. We are grateful to the President for that gesture.  
The question was raised about power at the teaching hospital in Mbarara. I arrived there when there was a power cut at the hospital and there had been panic. They had brought a small generator because the standby generator of the hospital was not available. I understood it was out of order. However, the hospital got another generator from the library and used it because the small generator they had borrowed was too weak to run the machines. 

What I would like to tell members here is that there was no problem at all. Power was there and the death of hon. Bigirwa had nothing to do with power shortage. In fact, I did ask the lady German professor who was looking after the late Bernadette whether there was any problem in the delivery of treatment to the late and she told me, “no”. They had what she would have used if she were in Germany or France where she worked before. 

Whereas I agree that we need to improve the medical services as we have always discussed, at least in this case I would like to assure members that hon. Bernadette Bigirwa received what was necessary until she passed away. We were around and I had told everyone that they should let us know in case there was any more that was necessary, we would do it. But as hon. Matembe said, I think it was God’s will that she passed away.  

So, we join the family in mourning our friend. Bernadette was a colleague but also a friend to me and to many of you. And we know that what we do here reflects what you will get in heaven, so I do not want to pray that her soul rests in eternal peace; I know it is in peace. 

For our friend, Jack Bigirwa, we shall stand by you in this difficult time and afterwards. On behalf of the people of Rujumbura and Rukungiri, myself and my family, we really wish the deceased comrade a good rest. Thank you.

12.44
COL. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE (Ruhinda County, Bushenyi): Madam Speaker, it is difficult to talk about people who have distinguished themselves in life. But ladies and gentlemen, allow me to pay a glowing tribute to Bernadette Kyomugisha Mbyemire Bigirwa Ruhanga. 
Here lies a great woman; here lies a very industrious person, a workhorse. Here lies a very pleasant person; here lies a great tactician. To give you an insight into the character of Bernadette Bigirwa, you can imagine somebody who managed to keep together Members of Parliament of Bushenyi in the Sixth Parliament: the likes of Kahinda, Amanya, Kaijuka, Katureebe, Bitahwa; incredibly difficult persons! Yet our small sister here managed to dribble between us, to pass difference from difference, word to word, make people who used to disagree at every comma and sentence to work together. That is why you hear of the great Bushenyi Parliamentary group.

Then, as you know, the Bushenyi Parliamentary Group was not easy. Take the Twarebirehos, Prof. Kamuntu, Prof. Kabwegyere, big fellows, myself -(Laughter)- and yet Bernadette here has kept us together. She has been the motor of the Bushenyi Parliamentary Group tactically, by force of argument or by persuasion. When everything else failed, Bernadette would start wailing in advance. She would wail and play the woman and then everybody would melt and give in to her way. Then a triumphant Bernadette would just walk away having got her way with us. 

Bernadette played the sister and mother for the Bushenyi Parliamentary Group. She was our treasurer. I remember her fondly by her stern countenance. Whenever we asked for money her melancholic look would herald the bad news that there was no money and yet Bernadette was generous enough to get balm to soothe every afflicted soul. Even when we had no money, Bernadette would put her own in. (Applause).  

I, personally, would like to thank Bernadette. I am sorry, Kyomugisha, I never told you when you were alive. She was Ruhinda’s Member of Parliament when I was in the Congo. She effectively took over the constituency and filled in for me so much so that when I came back, I believe the people of Ruhinda voted for Bernadette in my name. I thank you very much. (Applause). 

Madam speaker, I would like to concur with hon. Nasasira that we are going through a time of discussion. In this big movement, there are tendencies, and tendencies are not necessarily animosities. We are maturing in the political process of development in Uganda and in the process of maturing we are developing tendencies: liberal, right wing, and conservative. Yet, we belong to the same family tree. 

Tendencies and disagreements are inevitable. You cannot have 300 heads sitting in this Parliament and expect that they will all, all the time, at every turning point, think alike. Yet we must not live asunder in order for us to lead this country. There will be tendencies and we should learn to respect the views of every tendency in our body politic and yet stay together. (Applause).

We belong to Uganda. (Applause). We cannot expand it or cut it into pieces and push each piece into its corner. We are here together, and we are here to stay together. Disagreement is not only akin to this Parliament, even in heaven –(Laughter)- Yes, indeed, why not? For instance, why can I not ask why Bernadette should go and a rogue like Kony lives? Kony is living and okay and Bernadette is lying here! The useful are dead and the useless are living. The deadly are living! These are things we do not understand. So, disagreement is not particularly akin to this Parliament.  

I beg you ladies and gentlemen that the death of this wonderful lady, for whom everybody in this House has had a kind word, should bring us together. It should make us look at where we have come from, observe where we are, and lift our eyes and look at where we are going, all of us. That is when we can all carry out the duties of this country and leave a legacy for those who are coming after us.  

Bernadette, let me apologize belatedly for the inconvenience you suffered at our hands. Bigirwa, wish us well wherever you are. Thank you, ladies and gentlemen.

12.53
CAPT. GUMA GUMISIRIZA (Ibanda County North, Mbarara): Madam Speaker, I can see you have a problem of nearly everybody in the House wanting to speak because of the character and person of this woman, hon. Bigirwa. So, I will not take more time than I should. 

I want to thank you and the entire leadership of Parliament for agreeing to bring the body here because from Mbarara we would have gone to Bushenyi and buried. Members of Parliament, especially that we are in recess, who would not have been able to travel to Sheema can see her body.

Seriousness, punctuality and regularity; all these words have been used over there - I think where hon. Ofwono Yeri from Tororo is seated. All these words have been used and as hon. Otafiire said, someone who has distinguished herself or himself is very difficult really – it is not even necessary to take a lot of time but I want to say two things and I sit down.

One, while accusations in the country are rife about Members of Parliament being Kampala-based, for not fighting poverty and for being useless; while those accusations are rife in the country, this woman lying in a coffin cannot be one of those. (Applause). 

When you go to Bushenyi - I do not come from Bushenyi, I come from Mbarara but we are neighbours. You cannot go to Bushenyi and find her in that classification because she has done her political work. She has been traveling to Bushenyi, she has been doing her work. People of Bushenyi, masses of Bushenyi, Members of the Bushenyi Parliamentary Group, know this very well. So while she has died and we are being accused of not fighting poverty, for being Kampala-based and for betraying our voters, Bernadette Bigirwa has not died as one in that category.  

Second, in politics just like in war, courage is one of the principles of warfare. This simple word “courage” is one of the ten principles of warfare. They are ten and courage is one of them. To be an effective military commander you must be a courageous man, not this kwara kwaras who command from a hill or from where -(Laughter).

Mrs Bigirwa has been one of the most courageous, determined and firm field political commanders, with indomitable willpower to realize results. She has been extremely courageous, because hon. Dombo said that she moved out from Parliament when the Political Organizations Bill (POB) was being discussed. She did move out, yes, that is true, because I want to believe that she was very determined and firmly convinced that there were certain clauses we were putting in the Act, which were wrong. She said so. So, this business of saying multiparty, Movement; we are all Ugandans.  
We are all Ugandans and it is extremely important that – I am even happy by the way that this woman is lying in the coffin and people are making testimonies that she has died a Movement supporter. A little while ago when she was alive she was being called a Reform Agenda member. She was being called a Reform person. (Interjection) I do not know whether by the same people, please, I do not know.  

But of course the other point about hon. Bigirwa is that she has been a Movement person but very firm on certain positions. Some people would say, “We do not want multiparties and so on”, and say that multiparties would rather come when they are in a coffin; they are still here in the House. Some of them are here in the House; I can see some of them.  

You see life is interesting. Like in the dying days of the 1980s and indeed at the beginning of the 1990s when traditional leadership institutions were being discussed by the Government, I remember one prominent historical Movement supporter, a lady, was moving around in Buganda telling people that, “Look, the Kabakaship will not come”. A decision was later made by the same leadership, of which she is a member, and the traditional institutions are here.

Finally, let us pray for Mr Jack Bigirwa, who is seated over there, because we men are cowards. We are cowards, Madam Speaker. Widower-hood is a very difficult phenomenon. You and I, men, are cowards. Women are stronger in this situation. So, it is important that we pray for Mr Jack Bigirwa, and his children, so that they can persevere, bury the person and carry on with life. I thank you very much.

1.00
PROF. OGENGA LATIGO (Agago County, Pader): Thank you, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity to also say something at this very difficult time, to the family of our late colleague. 

I am a politician; the late Bigirwa was a political colleague of mine. I first knew her when as a senior lecturer at Makerere University I came to testify before her committee on the war in the North. At that time Bernadette was chairing a committee of a Parliament whose perception of the war in the North was very difficult. So many people were dismissive of the reality that constituted the suffering of the people of the North and most people’s solution to that conflict was “let them die.” 

It was out of the work of her committee that Parliament found the framework to recognize the conflict as a national conflict and to allow for even the creation of the amnesty law as one of the processes of bringing that conflict to an end. I am glad to stand here today to eulogize Bernadette at the time when the entire Parliament, and I dare say the entire nation, recognizes the conflict in the North as a national problem that we can only solve by joining hands. Her life contributed to us reaching that stage.  

Bernadette was a regular colleague. At the end of sessions we would sit together. Quite a few times she would come with her husband, Jack, and occasionally I would come with my wife. Jack and my wife, not being Members of Parliament, shared their table while we talked our things. I saw Jack and Bernadette when Bernadette was unconscious in Mbarara Hospital. On Tuesday morning when we went to see Bernadette, her condition the night before had been very bad. Jack was crying when we came in. He was not crying for himself, but he was saying, “Mummy is suffering.” 

For me as a husband, I was terribly moved because I then recognized the very exemplary nature of the marriage between Bernadette and Jack. I think I learnt something from the suffering of Bernadette then, and her death now. 

Bernadette has left at a time, which is exciting and probably difficult, but we cannot pretend about certain levels of uncertainties. People have pronounced themselves; Bernadette has pronounced herself on certain issues; she is not there to carry on the fight for which she stood, and it is a challenge. It is a challenge to all of us. Some see her absence as shifting the mathematical equation or fail to realize that it was not in her as a number, but in her as a principle that her voice was heard in this country.

I think it is very important because for me - my colleague says that in the army courage is a virtue. I come from the academic world where principles are a key virtue and recognizing facts as facts is extremely important. Bernadette looked at our Constitution as the key vision that must propel this country forward. In her stand I do not think she was against any individual or any group. We shall go into the constitutional amendment process. I urge all of us, when we debate at that time, to remember this day and to remember how a woman of courage stood up to speak her mind regardless of the transitory consequence, but more for the purpose of God and to do what is best for everybody.  

Jack, Bernadette is no longer here, but when all is done and we have seen her to her final resting place, remember that you had become part of us. Occasionally find time, and I hope we shall find time to invite you, to sit as we used to sit and share drinks together. I know you are man enough; you will go through this. May the good Lord rest her soul in eternal peace.

1.05
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join my colleagues in seconding the motion. It is a very difficult moment that we are faced with today. I have been asking myself, “Why now? Why Bernadette at this time?” 

To me the late has been a counsellor. When we came to this Parliament she was one of those who counselled us, who directed us. I found that very comforting in this House. More to that, I had known her much earlier because I used to work under her husband, Mr Bigirwa, and I knew her as a trusted person. I confirmed that further when I got to this House. 

Trust is like virginity.  Once broken, it cannot be restored.  She has never broken that trust between her and her husband, that is why you could see the late sit with us in the canteen after the plenary up to 1 o’clock without any problem.  If it was any other spouse, the husband would be complaining, the marriage would have broken and I think this is something that we must learn - to trust one another like the late did.  As a family, if there is no trust between husband and wife, that is no family.  I learnt that from the late and it is my prayer that we do emulate that trust in economic, social and political affairs if we are to have a prosperous nation in this country.  I know it is going to be a very difficult situation for Mr Bigirwa, but may the Lord Almighty God give him comfort and rest her soul in eternal peace.  Thank you.

1.08
MRS LYDIA BALEMEZI (Woman Representative, Mukono): I thank you, Madam Speaker.  I would like also to thank you for having recalled Parliament so that those of us who were not around or who did not have the chance of seeing our colleague through those difficult times, you have made it possible for us to come and pay our last respects to our colleague, hon. Bernadette Bigirwa.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, a lot has been said about hon. Bigirwa: Her political life, her administrative carrier and as a loving wife.  I came to know hon. Bigirwa in the early 1990s when Mr Jack Bigirwa was my boss in the Ministry of Finance and at the same time hon. Bigirwa was an RDC in the area I was residing.  So, all that time I looked at her as one of those very respected people in the country because the husband was my boss and she too was my boss in my area of residence.  So, all this time, I had a lot of respect for her.  But hon. Bigirwa used to humble herself in such a way that used to defeat my understanding. Because with all the respect I had for her, she would calm down and even seek for some guidance from me, which I had never expected.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, as you might recall in the sixth Parliament, the Women Members of Parliament were very active within the young communities, the youth.  Most of us who had undergone some girl-guiding training had an advantage of meeting the youth and having some interaction and even working among the youth.  But hon. Bigirwa came to me and requested that she should be allowed to be trained as a girl guide, something which I found very queer to somebody of such a calibre.  But together with some other ladies, when Bigirwa requested that we should conduct some training for some of the ladies who did not have the capacity and the skills of handling the youngsters, hon. Bigirwa gave up her time for the whole month to have an intensive training in girl guiding so that she could ably handle the youths in her district.  
This to me looked very peculiar, or something very unique in someone who has been in administration all along and had never worked among the youth.  But hon. Bigirwa humbled herself and accepted to be trained as a girl guide who qualified and was enrolled.  And as girl guide, in the sixth Parliament, hon. Bigirwa moved along with us in the western region and we met the young girls and boys. She was a real role model to the youth and to the women. We learnt a lot from her, having been an administrator. She imparted a lot of her skills into us which helped us to develop both career wise and in our legislative career.

Madam Speaker, of late there has been a lot of talk over the radios about how people could be brought together, with all this talk of the multi-parties, the Movement, the Reform, the PAFO, all that.  So, there was a group of people around Kampala who felt that there should be a way in which all these people with different ideologies could come together so that we could find peace.  Hon. Bigirwa was approached and in the same note, she approached me and told me that, “I have never seen your sort of fighting in the political arena, or openly, say, having these hot words raised.  But the way you manage to move around Mukono and get your votes throughout the district, I think we can work together and see how we can unite people under a new system which we can build up and bring people together with all their different ideologies but find a way of making them believe to work together”.  

It is such a sad moment to see that Bigirwa is lying here before us without having accomplished that mission in which she, together with others have been thinking of coming up with a third way of governance where all different theories and ideologies could be brought together so that we do away with all these fights amongst people about who should lead and who should be led.

Madam Speaker, yes I am very aware of time, but I just wanted to bring up that issue on our fallen colleague about the way she used to humble herself and even look for all those who could not come out in the open, or come out to show that they are ready to fight openly, but sought to see that she wanted to involve everybody and be a friend to all of us.  I wish to bid our colleague a farewell and wish her a peaceful eternal rest.  Thank you, Madam Speaker.
1.16
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Bakoko Bakoru): Madam Speaker and honourable members, for us in the women’s movement, we have lost a heroine.  We have lost a heroine in hon. Bernadette because she is one person who stood for politics of development.  Hon. Bernadette last year travelled with me to Addis Ababa, and when we came back we started a women’s movement called UWOPA, which represents the women politicians. We have women researchers; we have women in business; we have women from the rural area, and we have all categories of women represented, coming together to think a way forward for the governance of this country.  We shall miss hon. Bernadette, because she was an active member.

Madam Speaker, in the Sixth Parliament, the Forum for Food, Security and Population Development was formed; Bernadette was our treasurer.  Many people here have demonstrated today that Bernadette has been a treasurer of very many organisations and for somebody to take up that position, that person must have honesty and integrity.  It is very rare to find people having honesty and integrity together as a trait and I believe that Bernadette’s departure today is going to teach us a lot.  Bernadette always put service before herself, and I believe that many of us here were able to interact with Bernadette freely because Bernadette was accommodative and she would allow you to reach out to her.  

Madam Speaker and honourable members, Philly Lutaya once sung that, “Today it is you and tomorrow it will be me or today it is me and tomorrow it will be you.”  Nobody has come from heaven to tell us how wonderful it is but we believe that when you depart and you go to heaven, heaven must be wonderful.  That is also why people never come back.  

Madam Speaker, if all the tribute that has been paid to Bernadette today could bring Bernadette back, I believe that Bernadette would have understood what type of person she has been and what contributions she had made in her political career, her personal career and in her administrative career.  But everything that has been said here today is being said for those of us who are alive.  
It is being said to the family for them to know that they had a mother; there was Bernadette who lived with so many people from different parts of this country and was able to interact in a very healthy manner.  

I want to re-echo that God gives and he takes and we can never stop somebody from dying, but we must remember that we were created for a purpose.  If we were created for a purpose, we should live the type of life, which Bernadette lived, so that we will be remembered for the good things that we have done in this world, but not for the bad things that we have done, because the people who preach to us also say that when we depart we will give accountability to God.  If there are so many things that you have done, which are good, then you will go to heaven; and if there are not then you will go to hell.

Finally, I want on behalf of the people of Ayivu and on the behalf of the Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development to extend our sincere condolences to the bereaved family and to my colleagues, and to Bernadette’s constituency.  They have been left like chicks when a fox has taken their mother away.  I hope the departure of Bernadette is going to bring unity and respect in Bushenyi, and that it is not going to bring confusion and division.  Bernadette, fair thee well and may your soul rest in eternal peace.

1.22
MAJ. BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  Honourable members, it is sometimes very difficult to talk at this time about a colleague you have known for a long time.  But let me take this opportunity to thank the Movement Government for the support of this fallen Comrade.  I do not remember when I saw a full frontbench in this House like today –(Applause)- it was only during the Political Organisations Bill and other contentious issues.  

Honourable members, I want to thank the institution of Parliament.  When we heard the sudden death of our colleague, we were very few who first came here, but I want to thank, particularly the Deputy Speaker, who organized the Busoga Parliamentary Group as early as that evening and we were able to meet that evening to fix a meeting for the following day.  I want also to thank the staff of Parliament.  
Honourable members, the way people live is the way they are buried.  I think Bernadette was so good that she deserved every sympathy from all people who knew her.  I want to also thank the Catholic Chaplaincy of Parliament, not only on the death of hon. Bigirwa, but you remember we got Christmas blessings and New Year’s blessing by the same Chaplaincy before we went for recess and organized by Bernadette, who was the Chairperson of the Committee. (Applause)

Madam Speaker, I do not want to repeat what has been said, but I want to say a few things on the personality of Bernadette. Bernadette lived an honourable life. It is one thing to be an hon. Member of Parliament and another thing to live as an hon. Member of Parliament and I want to tell you that she did live as an hon. Member of Parliament; she was principled. 

I can tell you in the 7th Parliament but I also want to draw critical incidents of 6th Parliament. At one time, they were censuring a colleague in this Parliament and Bernadette stood her ground and refused. She was not the type to be involved in mob decision unless she was convinced. You will bear with me and remember that Bernadette would never go on the Floor of Parliament and waft. If she did not understand something, she was known for pulling her colleague’s arms and asking, “please tell me before we go to debate. Let me understand what is at stake. Where is the problem?” She was not the kind of person to come here on the Floor of Parliament and say something without an informed position.  

Hon. Bernadette was a religious person. She was a Catholic and I am a Protestant but I want to tell you, she visited all the churches in my constituency. After elections I had problems in my constituency. She came and camped there. We went there with my colleague and she went there and everything was put to order. She really put her God before everything and I want to tell you that she was selfless.  Bernadette was a nationalist. What else can I tell you?  

We are in recess. Normally when we are called back in recess, we are given mileage to come and attend to national issues. Honourable members, the House is full! The North is here, East is here, South is here and Central is here! What is the magnet? The magnet is that we are returning her kindness, her quality of non-ism.  
Honourable members, I was a member of the Army Council for quite some time and the President was trying to discipline senior officers so that we can have harmony during burial periods and he was saying sometimes when somebody dies, you have so many officers on the burial and sometimes you have very few officers. I put up my arm and I told him that the way a person lives is the way he is buried because if you are hopeless - if you heard some people making speeches here and saying that people who are evil are living and those whom we want are going. If you have lived a very bad life, do not expect the whole House here. If you have been boxing your friends, if you have been cheating, if you have been doing what, do not expect your colleagues to pay tribute the way we have done today. (Applause).

Madam Speaker, this is a learning experience and it should send signals to all Members of Parliament and the public.  What do we learn from our fallen comrades? They say experience is not what happens to a man. Experience is what you do with what has happened to you - I am just warned that we do not have time, but I want to tell you, honourable members – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, actually the Church people are waiting for us right now.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: We must prepare ourselves now and live a decent life.

Finally, honourable members, we had a committee chaired by the Deputy Speaker, Rt. Hon. Kadaga, who is our Speaker today, and we tried to raise funds for the burial arrangement of our colleague. I want to thank and inform you that by 14.00 hours yesterday, we had received contributions of Shs 500,000 from Busoga Parliamentary Association. We had also received Shs 3.06 million from Members of Parliament generally, Shs 2.3 million from PAFO, Shs 2.4 million from Ankole Parliamentary Association, Shs 1.5 million from the Catholic Chaplaincy and we were able to remit Shs 9,250,000 to Mbarara for the Bushenyi arrangements.  

Honourable members, we received pledges, which we agreed yesterday that any other pledges and contributions should be made by cheque, because I want to tell you that most of the preliminary arrangements were covered. So, we got a pledge of Shs 500,000 from the Teso Parliamentary Association, Shs 200,000 from Lango Parliamentary Association and this one has been honoured. Toro Parliamentary Association - Shs 500,000, Bushenyi Parliamentary Association – Shs 2 million, hon. Brig. Jim Muhwezi - Shs 500,000, the Chairpersons of Sessional Committees and Standing Committees of Parliament and their Deputies - Shs 1 million, People with Disability – Shs 300,000, and it has been honoured, the Works Committee – Shs 500,000, Buganda Caucas – Shs 1 million and members of AWOPA are organising something but they will communicate it through the Speaker tomorrow.  

Honourable members, from the list that I have received now, we are likely to collect slightly above Shs 20,000,000 in pledges and cash. 

I once again thank you very much and I want to thank you, Madam Speaker. My colleagues are very challenged. You were very quick to address the situation and I think it is through your effort and staff that we have managed to contribute and manage the burial of our fallen colleague.  

There are some announcements that I would like to make clear. We have a small minibus, which has been provided by Parliament. It will take Members who want to go today and stay in Bushenyi. It will leave between 4.30 and 5.00 p.m. at Parliamentary Parking Yard. Tomorrow, there will be a bus to take Members to Bushenyi and back. Honourable members, tomorrow the bus will leave at 7.30 a.m. from Parliament because the service starts at 12.00 noon and we need Members of Parliament to be there by 12.00 noon.  

Honourable members, finally, I want to pray to the Almighty God to give the Bigirwa family courage, wisdom and the blessing of our colleagues so that they can manage without hon. Late Bernadette Bigirwa. May God rest her soul in eternal peace! I thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rwamirama, I think we also received Shs 320,000 from the East African Legislative Assembly. I do not know whether it has reached you yet.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: It has not reached, but we informed them yesterday that they translate their cash into cheques payable to the family and we believe that should be done by every caucus and individuals who have not handed in their contributions so that we can channel them through the Speaker. I thank you very much.

1.35
MS WINNIE BYANYIMA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support the motion and to pay tribute to a great woman, whom I had a privilege to know from my earliest childhood. 

Hon. Bernadette Bigirwa was born in a political family. Her father was a politician who stood for election on a DP ticket in 1962. Strangely enough, he experienced irregularities in his own election that hon. Bernadette came to experience herself in 2001. It is a fact that in 2001, hon. Bernadette woke up on election day to find that the ballot paper had a different picture from herself but had her name and there was chaos and confusion in the district, and she had to fight and take quick decisions to manage that situation. She won the election but still the people who were pursuing her and who seem to have organized this kind of malpractice followed her to the courts and challenged her for rigging an election. Hon. Bernadette fought that battle with dignity, won it, and learnt a lot from it.  

I would like to share with you the spirit of Bernadette because while she could have been bitter that her own colleagues, people she had worked with in the Movement, seemed to be behind this opposition to her that was unprincipled and was manipulative, she took the view that she should just work hard to clean up the electoral process. She left this in her own words, because for the last three years, we worked closely with hon. Bernadette and a group of women writing our political memoirs.  Fortunately for us, she has left a chapter in a book where she tells her own story in her own words and I would like to read for you what she said about this. 

She said, “This experience - meaning the 2001 elections - made me realise the flaws in the electoral process and I feel that we must find a way of making sure that all these irregularities are cleared when the next Parliamentary Elections law comes to Parliament. We need to make sure that there are no loopholes so that whoever wins does so neatly to avoid these numerous petitions again.” 

That is the spirit of Bernadette. No bitterness, but determination to improve things for everybody (Applause).

I would like to also put it on the record of Parliament that actually hon. Bernadette Bigirwa had taken a decision, and she had shared it with myself and several others, that she was going to retire from elective politics. So, she was serving this as her last term - not resignation from politics, but retirement from elective politics. She made it clear that she would always remain committed to improving the politics of this country, but she was not going to seek another term. So, her struggle in this Parliament to improve the electoral process was not for her future benefit but for others to benefit. That was Bernadette.  

Hon. Bernadette and I met in 1964 when we both started Primary One together, and I can say that since I knew her then until now, the qualities that all of you, hon. colleagues have expressed, of calmness, of determination, of being strategic, focused, time conscious, neat, thorough, have been qualities that she has grown up with; and that we have recognised always through school. She took up leadership positions in school and I must tell you that in Catholic schools those days, democracy was not practiced. All her positions were appointed positions because the teachers recognised her leadership qualities.

I want to say something about hon. Bernadette as a family person. The separation of private from public spheres cheats women of their true contributions to society because politics is placed in the public arena; and it is constructed in such a way that the issues of the family, which are placed in the domestic arena, are not usually discussed in this political arena. This makes lives of women difficult when they come into politics, because they have all this that they care for, all this work that they do out there that is not planned for, recognised or addressed in the political world. 


Hon. Bernadette was always a more serious person than the rest of us who are her age-mates. She matured before most of us; she was more focused about what she wanted in life, she married early. She married Mr Jack Bigirwa when we were still freshers at Makerere University in 1978, I believe. This year, hon. Bernadette Bigirwa marked her silver Jubilee, 25 years, in marriage. She had her children as soon as she married and she leaves behind three beautiful brilliant grown up children, one of whom we have here, Jacqueline Bigirwa, 24, the eldest. The other two are on the way. 

So, Bernadette defied the myth, de-exploded the myth that women in public life cannot have stable families. She exploded that myth because Bernadette had a stable family, was a loving mother and a loving wife and a successful politician. In that respect, she is a great role model.  

Bernadette as a public servant - most of what I would want to place on the record has been said and I will not repeat it. Bernadette had a self-confidence and a humility that made her a great listener and a person who could accept and live with difference. I did not always agree with her politically but our relationship as girls hailing from the same area, we grew up together, never changed; and when we differed, we differed in a very civil way. We never exchanged a hot word, we knew where we differed; we knew where we agreed and I believe that is so with all of you, honourable colleagues. She had a self-confidence that gave her that capacity to accept and live with difference.  

Hon. Bernadette had a dedication and a commitment to the causes that she believed in; that was just amazing. I will cite one example. In 1994 when we were campaigning to come to the Constituent Assembly, I bumped into her somewhere in Mbarara and I was busy in my campaigns. She was helpful to me here and there because she was an RDC in Kasese and I am perennially opposed by RDCs. I do not know; it must be something to do with my blood. I was being fought by my own RDC and she promised, she never promises what she could not deliver. She said to me, “Winnie, I am going to find out why this RDC is opposing you and I will come back and give you the facts.” She believed that when you know what motivates someone you cannot fail to find your way around them. So she went and met the RDC; she went around him in conversation and she came back to me and said, Winnie these are the facts. Then I said, “What should I do, Bernadette?”  She said, “No that is not for me, that is for you. I have given you the facts; find your strategy.” She was that honest. She would tell you what she knows and she would allow you your space to take your decisions.  

But to demonstrate her commitment and her dedication to causes I asked her –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I do not really want to interrupt but I think you should be winding up.

MS BYANYIMA: I am about to finish, Madam Speaker. I asked her why she was not standing for the Constituent Assembly post for Bushenyi Woman, because at that time, perhaps next to hon. Col. Otafiire and hon. Amanya Mushega, she was the most feasible Movement politician from Bushenyi, and she clearly had an excellent chance to take the seat. So I asked, “Why have you not stood?” Her answer was surprising.  She said to me. “You know Winnie, in Kasese the Movement is under threat. I have to be there to get this man, hon. Kiyonga to win. If I am not there to mobilise the people for him, he will not make it to the CA. And if he does not come to the CA, the Movement will have lost a big gun,” and to me it did not make any sense, to be honest. I did not see the point but that was hon. Bernadette. (Laughter).

Madam Speaker, I have heard a lot in recent months about “vision, vision”. These days because it is the most favourite word of the President, every politician who wants to show loyalty to him also talks about “vision”. I do not want to show loyalty to him but I want to put it on record that I know that hon. Bernadette Bigirwa had a vision for this country. She had a vision of transforming the politics of this country to make it a stable country. I could give examples, but I will not. But I know that her membership to groups such as PAFO, her earlier membership of YPA was driven by that vision of stabilising the politics of this country and if I can read for you again from her own words what she has said. 
She said, “Another problem that I have realised through these elections is that our politics do not hinge on issues but on personalities”.

Bernadette had a vision to firmly institutionalise the politics of this country and to take away personality cults. She put it down in this book. I will leave that there. 

The Movement has had an ambivalent –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In conclusion, hon. Byanyima, the Bishop is waiting.

MS BYANYIMA: Yes, Madam Speaker. The Movement that Bernadette so loved has had an ambivalent position regarding church and state matters. So much so that sometimes political causes have turned out hostile messages against religion. Sometimes Government programmes have exhibited religious bias in provision of services, like in education. Hon. Bernadette was living proof that you can be faithful to your religion and you can serve the whole country and serve the people of all religions. (Applause).

I would like to say something about hon. Bernadette’s last days in Mbarara hospital. I was fortunate to spend that last week with her and I thank God for giving me that chance. I would like to tell you, hon. Colleagues, that we still have great professionals. The doctors who looked after hon. Bernadette Bigirwa went beyond the call of duty to try and save her life. (Applause). This is a treasure we must preserve.  At every opportunity we must take whatever it takes to preserve this treasure, the medical professionals.  

I would like also to say something about the facilities at Mbarara Hospital and which probably reflect facilities elsewhere in the country. In the Intensive Care Unit where she spent that last week of her life, I would not even describe it as an Intensive Care Unit; I would describe it as a store, because the things that are stored there compete with the patients for the little air in the room.  It is really like a store. It is not insulated from dust.  It is not air-conditioned like other Intensive Care Units.  Mr Jack Bigirwa contributed a fan and fixed it in the ceiling in that Intensive Care Unit in order to keep temperatures down for the patients there. 
You have been told that there was no stand-by power. This is an Intensive Care Unit with many equipments but no backup power. It was painful to see those doctors manually pumping a ventilator when there was a power loss. But like hon. Muhwezi said, I do not want you to go away, honourable members, with a feeling that hon. Bernadette lost her life because of bad equipment; no, I will be honest and tell you that. But certainly, there must be many others whose lives can be saved, but whose lives are not saved because of those appalling conditions in that intensive care unit and -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable Member, please wind up.

MS BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, I am concluding.  This is a painful moment; I really would like to share with colleagues what happened. The lesson for us is that we decide budget priorities. It is we to decide to prioritise health; it is we to decide to improve services for our people.  The challenge is ours.

I could say a lot about my sister lying here, but let me say that as we face the future, as we decide for the future of this country, let us remember the two great values of hon. Bernadette Bigirwa: honesty and courage. She was an honest politician; she was a courageous politician. If we can be that for our country, whether you are a Movement, chakamchaka, NRM-O as they call it or Reform like me or DP or UPC, if you can be an honest and courageous politician, we may be able to save our country. And if we cannot emulate her - honourable colleagues, read the Hansard of the 60s and look for those men of the 60s who sang praises when the country was sinking, look for them. They did not get this respect; they never got this. They died brutally; they faced the turmoil that they caused by being praise singers. They caused the turmoil, and they lost their lives in that turmoil. So, daughter of Bushenyi, daughter of Ankore, the Ugandan girl, you have done your work, you have showed the way, rest in peace!

1.57
THE VICE PRESIDENT (Prof. Gilbert Bukenya): Madam Speaker and honourable colleagues, I have been practicing medicine for about 30 years. I have lived between the living, the dying and the dead, and I have never feared. But on the 30th day of December at 2.30 p.m. I went to see my good friend Bernadette and I looked at her, I put my hand on her and I feared. In fact, I said  “God, do not take her away” and I moved outside and I met the husband.  But I had to show that - you know, I am a very strong man and I am a medical man. But I tell you, I only said to him, “Better be prepared” and when I talked to the medical superintendent and the doctors waiting on her who were doing a marvellous job, we concluded sadly but we could not say it.  

I drove all the way to where I was going and I was pleading, “God, leave her, she has not finished her work.” This has not been so, but we have heard the testimony that indeed hon. Bigirwa was a bit different. She was exemplary but also loved her country. She loved her country and separated between the state called Uganda and Government, and she would criticise but fell short of really damaging her country.  

In the Sixth Parliament, I was one of those who were newly initiated in Parliament, and I joined this very important Young Parliamentary Association.  I tell you at that time some of us almost left, because we were being accused of being anti-system. But this lady found me on that side of the corridor and said, “Be firm because what you are trying to do is not anti-system.” Since then, she continued to guide people and we have heard it. 

But I will never forget the day I travelled with this lady to Jerusalem and we went through about 32 churches and about seven shrines. Madam Speaker, wherever we went we prayed, but most of us were standing up quickly to go to the next bus. But for her she remained and I saw devotion to her faith. In fact, I never thought that anybody would lead in this Parliament a Catholic forum and when she started, I said, “That is it, we now have a person who is going to bring a good link between what is on earth and what is in heaven.”

As a friend, Bernadette was a good political character. It is very difficult to transcend in this country of ours between political divides; either you intend to be in one and stay there or the other. But I was always wondering how she managed to interact between those on either side with such ease and with such quality that I think we should emulate in this country. So, Madam Speaker, honourable members, Government is saddened and Government is shocked by this demise. We, therefore, send our most heartfelt condolences to my good friend the husband, children, relatives, friends and the constituents of Bushenyi because what you have lost is beyond recollection.

Madam Speaker, three weeks earlier to the demise of my good friend Bernadette, we met and had a very early dinner with some other friends and she kept on saying: “You know, we have got to fight for the country; we have got to make sure that our country remains peaceful” and those words are still ringing in my brain. Nationalism and patriotism is not by sweet words; it is by your deeds. (Applause). This lady here was nationalistic by deeds and I would wish that we really ought to follow that example and she will rest happily because of what she struggled for.  

I want to thank very much all of you, starting with Madam Speaker, for this arrangement. She really deserves it and I thank you all for particularly bringing her here because she was an eloquent speaker, debater but calculated, not mere speaking, but speaking because she meant it and I think seeing her here reassures me that we have done a good job.  My good friend Bernadette, bye, bye, we shall meet and may the Almighty God rest your soul in eternal peace! I beg to support the motion.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I put the question that this House do approve the motion as moved by hon. Cecilia Ogwal.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I do regret that I have not been able to give everybody who wanted to speak the opportunity to speak.  There is so much to say about Bernadette that we really could have been here the whole day and that is what I would have wanted to do, to give her the whole day. But because she will be taken back to Bushenyi after the church service, we would like to her body to travel when there is a bit of light.  But also we need to hand her back to the church which she loved, and where they have been waiting for the last 30 minutes. So, regrettably, I would like to bring this session to a close, but before I do so, I would like to announce the contribution of the Acholi Parliamentary Group of Shs 500,000, which will be handed over to hon. Rwamirama. The contribution of Shs 800,000 from Kabale Parliamentary Group will also be handed over to hon. Rwamirama. Thank you.

National Anthem (One Verse)

(Exit of the late hon. Bernadette Bigirwa from the Parliamentary Chamber, as the Police band plays a dirge)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, when we parted on the 19th of December, we had adjourned to the 10 February 2004. So, I am again adjourning the House to the 10th of February, as we had originally planned. Thank you very much for coming and thank you for the contributions.

(The House rose at 2.09 p.m. and adjourned sine die)




