Thursday, 5 January 2005 

Parliament met at 2.51 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I thank you for the work that you did yesterday. I welcome you to this session, which will enable us to complete our outstanding work. Yesterday we completed the Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Bill, 2006. I am happy to inform the House that it has been assented to. It is law. (Applause)

PERSONAL STATEMENT

2.53
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. On 27 December 2005, the Speaker made a statement to the House highlighting that I had been involved in an accident while I was travelling to the North. The circumstances that forced my travel to the North were related to the shooting that had taken place in Alongi IDP camp, which is my birth place.  

Since that day, there have been many conflicting statements, concerning how many people were killed and injured. I take this opportunity to correct the record. I was there. We went to the hospital and saw all the victims. The following is my statement about the event.

Madam Speaker, 26 December 2005 is traditionally supposed to be the day when people open their boxes of gifts sent to them for Christmas. It is supposed to be a day of joy, brought by the Birth of Jesus Christ. For the people of Alongi, it was gunfire instead. UPDF soldiers shot at them, killing three people on the spot. One died later in the hospital.  

It all started with the shooting of one Ojok Ojale, a 17-year-old schoolboy, on the Christmas night. A UPDF soldier chased Ojale Ojok and shot him dead at about 3.00 a.m. Early in the morning, civilians incensed by the death of this innocent boy decided to demand instant justice. They were incensed further because in October, a UPDF soldier shot another woman in the camp and the authorities did not take any action.  

Madam Speaker, sadly, some of the UPDF soldiers have now made it their routine and habit to kill innocent civilians, which is causing a lot of anxiety among the population. We who represent them feel let down by the government we ably serve as Members of Parliament. For instance, on 20 August 2005, I received the following SMS message from somebody in Palena camp, “A man killed tonight by UPDF at Palena and also another one killed on 18 August 2005; same place and circumstances, no arrest.” 

On the 22 September 2005, a UPDF soldier, private Benson Openito shot and killed Johnson Oben aged 25 at another camp. Great anxiety and many things had to be done to calm down the population. 

On the 8 October 2005, a UPDF soldier opened fire in a crowded market, instantly killing 68-year-old Jennifer Alanyo Obol and wounding four others at Apobe IDP camp. On 1 January 2006, a UPDF soldier shot one Okello Odongi four times, at the same camp. Luckily, he did not die and is now groaning in hospital.  

These are a few incidents I know in my constituency. I am sure there are more such events in the whole sub region and this must stop. The attacks are very worrying. I sincerely hope that the President’s recent statement, that the camps in Acholi will be dismantled by March 2006, was a commitment to our people and not just another political campaign gimmick. People are getting very desperate and something must be done. I would like the Hansard to show that the following people were affected:
•	Richard Okello, 16 years old was shot in the armpit
•	Walter Okello was shot in the knee
•	Okech was shot in the head and later beaten
•	Achayi 13 years old was shot two bullets, one on the left elbow and the other one on the leg.
These four people are hospitalised at Gulu independent hospital. 
•	Madam Speaker, 32-year-old Jackson Okello was shot in the leg
•	30-year-old Richard Oponyo was shot in the leg
•	14-year-old Francis Okello was shot in the left leg
•	39-year-old Charles Opile was shot on the left ankle
•	40-year-old Richard Ochen was shot on the left hand
•	17-year-old Tom Okello was shot in the buttocks
•	42-year-old Ayo Santa had her foot completely shattered by a bullet
•	14-year-old Evelyn Ajok was shot in the thigh
•	55-year-old Bosco Okumu was shot in the stomach and his intestines were shattered. He later died on 28 December 2005.  

These are hospitalised at Lacor Hospital. The people who died were five and not forty. Some newspapers alleged that forty people were killed. 

Madam Speaker, I am appalled by this barbaric and senseless shooting, wounding and killing of innocent civilians. The people responsible must be brought to book. Government should take the responsibility of compensating the families that have been affected by the deaths and to look after those who are in hospital. 

I thank the leadership of the Army for the quick response, particularly Brig. Nathan Mugisha of Fourth Division who drove to Alongi that very morning; Lt Gen. Katumba Wamala, Commander of the Land Forces, who immediately came to Gulu and addressed the population, calling for calm as they planned to take action. I also thank Gen. Aronda Nyakairima for instituting on a probe into the incident. I know the truth of the problem will be established. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.01
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank hon. Jacob Oulanyah for his statement. I begin by passing on government’s condolences to the bereaved families.

Hon. Oulanyah stated that all those incidents have taken place and no arrests have been made. He said no arrests have been made, although he concluded by expressing gratitude to what some of our UPDF officers have made. This is why I was prompted to make a correction. We have arrested a good number of those indisciplined soldiers, who are going to face it rough. When the court martial completes the process, you will hear the results. We regret the incidents and the commission of inquiry that has been instituted will show us why such soldiers have started behaving the way they are behaving especially in this period. We are carrying out this investigation in detail. I thank you.

3.04
THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Ms Betty Akech): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The incident at Alongi was very bad. It caught me in Gulu and on 27 December 2005 after the 4th Division, the Chairman LCV, the Police and others had already gone to calm down the situation. I also went there.  The situation was still very tense. I told them I wanted to listen to their probleMs I was not going to preach to them. I asked them to tell me what exactly happened. 

A number of people spoke. From what they said, you could see that they were angered by the death of Ojok Ojale, who was a 17-year-old student. They went to the barracks to ask for that man who shoot Ojok Ojale so that they could treat him to mob justice. While the brigade commander came from Opit and tried to talk to them, they did not think he was answering their request. That is what they told me. 

I advised them that even in our Acholi culture, if a murderer runs away and hides in another house, the owner of that house would not release him to be killed by the mob. We fear what a curse that would result from doing such a thing. I told them that this is what had already happened and the Army could not release him. The law works like that. I advised them to wait for the UPDF to take responsibility and to have a field court martial.  I am glad that this happened and the culprit has already been sentenced. However, I think it does not end at the field court martial. It goes upwards and one is free to appeal in a higher court.  

I promised the people that government would look after the patients in the hospital and consider the element of compensation for the lives of those who died. The commanders, who ordered their soldiers to shoot at people directly instead of shooting in the air to scare the people, would also face the wrath of justice. This is being followed up, and I want to assure my brother and all people in this country that government will not rest until these commanders are brought to book. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.09
MR JAMES MWANDHA (Representative of Persons with Disabilities, Eastern): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also convey condolences to those who lost their people.  

On 20 December 2005, the Minister of Works, in response to my concern regarding Jinja road, informed the House that the process of identifying a main contractor was in place and quoted 10 February 2006 as when the main contractor would be appointed. Today I was very surprised when I read in the press that the minister is appointing somebody else to carry out emergency repairs on that road. I wonder whether this is the best way to use scarce resources, when in fact it is only a month to 10 February. 

I am very concerned, like many other people who use that road, that the minister should again spend money to appoint somebody to carry out emergency repairs. I know that the minister is not here, but this is a matter of concern. I am not sure that the resources of this country are being put to proper use by these so-called emergency repairs. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

3.11
LT GEN. ARONDA NYAKAIRIMA (Army Representative): Madam Speaker, mine is not about the roads. It is on the matter, which has been raised by hon. Oulanyah. I would like to say a few things: The resettling of the people in IDPs back to their own villages is an exercise the government is taking seriously. The Office of the Rt hon. Prime Minister is coordinating this and it has already started in the area of Teso. We will handle district after district. The government will continue to do that as and when the situation continues to improve.

Secondly, those acts of indiscipline, which hon. Oulanyah has outlined are being investigated and action has been taken. The justice in the UPDF is sound and very active. Acts of indiscipline are always promptly dealt with. The culprits are isolated in a way, because every unit from a battalion all the way to division has a court. There, these acts are dealt with very firmly. Historically, we have zero tolerance of such acts of discipline, especially when it comes to harming civilians whom soldiers are supposed to be guarding.

The unfortunate incident of Alongi has been investigated and action has already been taken. Those who were involved have been taken to court and sentence has been passed. However, the civilians who wanted mob justice would not be allowed. They were mobilised and talked to and most of them are now satisfied with the action, which was taken. Most of these crimes are committed by indisciplinados who are at times in a drunken mood. Sometimes, they find these civilians moving at awkward hours in the night, when soldiers are firmly on guard. They end up shooting such people. However, action has been taken and it will continue to be taken. Our relationship with the people should continue. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Alongi incident was not for debate. We have now got commitments from the concerned sectors that action is being taken and that they are going to report back to this House. Therefore, we expect a report on whatever has transpired.

3.14
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (Kasilo County, Soroti): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I pass on my condolences to those who lost their loved ones. There are two issues where I beg your indulgence, Madam Speaker: One minister, who has taken it to himself to be the accounting officer of this Parliament, has gone to radios to tarnish some of our names regarding the Constituency Development Fund (CDF). I remember very well that we got communication from the Clerk that the CDF would be accounted for and the procedures were laid down. I was shocked when hon. Mike Mukula, while on Voice of Teso radio, told people of Kasilo that Elijah Okupa, the area Member of Parliament, stole and ate the Shs 10 million meant for the constituency development.  

It was specified here in the House how this money was going to be accounted for. He is not the accounting officer of Parliament. Why should a minister go to radios and accuse me falsely? I have worked in a number of places and have left clean records. I have never, in any way, eaten money that is not mine. If it is politics, he one time said he wanted to come to Kasilo. I was waiting for him to come and stand but he did not come.
  
If that is the way he wants to get Kasilo, I think that is a wrong forum. Let him come and give his manifesto to the people and they will decide. Taking the responsibility of the Clerk of this House is a bad thing. I think the Prime Minister should bring this to his attention. I do not know whether you, as a Speaker and Leader of this House, have any record that I have not accounted for the money.

I also want the Prime Minister to tell the families of those people who were given amnesty where their people are. Their families have never seen them. The relatives of one Nelson Okiringi approached me and asked me, “We are not seeing Okiringi, where is he?” Since they were given amnesty, their people should access them. Could they be told where these people are? After getting amnesty, they would be free to go back home. (Interruption)

MR KAJEKE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to inform hon. Okupa that the last time I saw those people publicly was at a press conference at state house presided over by the Minister of Information, hon. Nsaba Buturo. Since he was the last person to be seen with those people, may be he could give us some clue where they are.  Thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, that is the concern of the relatives of these people. Once amnesty is given, it is a good signal to those who could still be in the bush to come out. However, if you are given amnesty and you are not seen, then it worries even those who may be intending to come out.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I hope that we shall get information from Government about that second matter. 

Concerning the Constituency Development Fund, this Parliament has got guidelines, which were issued for all the Members of Parliament. Therefore, it is even premature to start talking about it at this stage. There is a time for accounting for that money. I do not even want to encourage debate on the CDF on the Floor of this House.

3.19
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR HEALTH (GENERAL DUTIES) (Capt. Mike Mukula): Madam Speaker, I would not have responded, more so after you have guided, but because my name has been put in the Hansard, to the effect that I went to Voice of Teso and said that one honourable Member of Parliament, hon. Elijah Okupa, has received Shs 10 million which he has not spent properly, I would like to put it on record and to inform hon. Okupa and the whole House that, I have never made any statement on Voice of Teso in regard to the matter so stated. I would also like to put it on record that Voice of Teso and all these radios that have large media advertising linked to them have an international organisation which monitors all transmission on the spectrum on radio.  All statements that were transmitted are on record. I would wish my brother to put the entire transcript on the Floor of this House and if any single statement relates to what hon. Okupa has just said, I will be ready to respond.  

Madam Speaker, on many occasions outrageous statements have been made by my colleagues. I would like to tell you that Teso politics is complex and I would not want to wash dirty linen here. I, therefore, humble myself and say that I am above ordinary debate. If there is any matter that one feels uncomfortable about, we can always discuss this in the corridors rather than in the House. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I am ready to bring the tape to this House if that is what it means. 

3.24
THE PRIME MINISTER/LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker.  I wish to state that there is a sector minister - the Minister of Internal Affairs. I have no hesitation in requesting him to handle that matter.  



MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED UNDER 
ARTICLE 78 OF THE CONSTITUTION ON THE REPRESENTATION OF SPECIAL INTEREST GROUPS

3.25
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/ ATTORNEY GENERAL (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The motion is for a resolution of Parliament moved under Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 for a review of a representation of special interest groups under Article 78(1)(b) and (c) of the Constitution.  

We moved this motion some time back, and we had some difficulties because the old Section 8(3) of the Parliamentary Elections Act required that the resolution had to be supported by not less than two-thirds majority and we tried several times and it did not work. Recently, this Parliament passed the Parliamentary Elections Amendments Act, 2006 which reduced the majority required to pass a review resolution from being not less than two-thirds to simple majority. I am glad to report that today, that Act has received presidential ascent.  May I, therefore, call upon you, Madam Speaker, to proceed with the vote on this resolution.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I recollect that we had a lengthy debate on this matter. Therefore, I agree with the minister’s proposal that we proceed to vote.

MR OULANYAH: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  A particular matter has been disturbing me for a while now. I listened to the presentations that were made to the committee, raising strong objections to the continued representation of members of the UPDF in the House. In the Article under review, I would need some guidance on the phrase: “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the presentation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing, or abolishing any such representation and any other matter incidental to it.”  

Madam Speaker, my submission is on the issue of “…any other matter incidental to” this review. I wanted to know if this “…any other matter incidental to” this review would include redefining roles and assigning conditions to the presence of particular interest groups in this Parliament. For instance, I was very persuaded to think that if the representation of the Army cannot be removed completely, then it should be subject to some conditions. Because as a member of the Uganda People’s Congress (UPC), I will not be able to sponsor a candidate from UPC in the UPDF so the elections there will not have party representation.  

The election of these people must be categorized in a special way so that their presence in Parliament is all encompassing and not tied to the government or opposition side. This will ensure that their presence is meaningful to the process of democratisation.

Therefore, I was wondering whether it is possible to review this particular provision under the incidental clause in this Article. I would be very tempted to move an amendment to the motion to qualify the representation of the Army, if it cannot be removed completely, so that it is subjected to a condition of ex-officio membership and no vote for members of the UPDF. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney General, what is your comment?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I wanted to seek some clarification from hon. Oulanyah in light of Article 208, which spells out the role of UPDF and the manner in which they should function. Would his proposal actually be applicable?  

COL KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, I think we concluded debate on these matters some time last week. I do not know whether we are going to proceed by way of clarification on issues being raised or whether the matter is being opened for debate, which debate we would be very happy to take up. If you will allow me, Madam Speaker, this House remembers very well the hon. Zziwa’s motion on the need for the definition of national interest and common good, which has not been done so far. 

Our primary focus in the UPDF, while remaining political but non-partisan, would be largely to focus on that national interest and common good. I do not know whether the issue being raised by hon. Oulanyah and hon. Mwandha concerning Article 208 of the Constitution, is being raised with the intention of having a UPDF that partly represents Uganda People’s Congress, UPDF, other organisations and parties as we know them today and others that may come up in future. I thought the debate had been concluded and that what was remaining was one issue, which should be handled now.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Although there was one pending issue, he wants a clarification on whether there can be modification on the mode of elections and we are waiting for the Attorney General to give us his response.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank hon. Oulanyah, my brother, for what he has raised. However, I would like clarification from him as to how the Army was represented in Obote II, which was a UPC Government. I thank you.

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Ms Ruth Nankabirwa): Madam Speaker, I also get uncomfortable when we start asking whether, for example, UPC or any other party will have a slot. This is a national force. If Mrs Miria Obote becomes the Commander-in-Chief, she will nominate and the council that is responsible for electing these ten people will elect from what Madam Miria Obote, as a Commander-in-Chief, would have nominated because the president, who is the Commander-in-Chief, will make the nominations. 

Hon. Oulanyah made a background which insinuated that the Commander-in-Chief is President Museveni and will always be President Museveni but –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, hon. Oulanyah raised a point which Members are now contributing to, but I have not seen a motion formally tabled on the Floor to guide the debate. Can I seek guidance as to how we should go about this particular subject?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. Is it in order for a Member to come dressed as if he is going to the market? Hon. Eresu is dressed as if he is going for a rally. Is he in order according to our rules?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Can you stand up? (Mr Eresu rose_). Hon. Eresu, you have even carried a telephone to this House. You are actually carrying a telephone apart from the dress being –(Interruption)

MR ERESU: Madam Speaker, the telephone is duly switched off.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable member, is that a kaunda suit? Okay, I think it is a kaunda shirt. (Laughter)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, in other words, I am trying to remind Members that the institution we are talking about is a national one with a national character. The ten Members, two of whom are going to be women are expected to behave in that manner. The moment we start saying let the other party have two then we are making it partisan. Let us leave it to be as it is. It is the UPDF; one of the national character that is being represented. They are not representing a party. I thought I should give that clarification and information.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank the Attorney General for fast-tracking the business. The clarification I am seeking from the Minister and the Attorney General is whether UPDF representatives have to be necessarily army men?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But this is what is in the Constitution, is it not?

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, for more clarity, do they have to be necessarily active?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney General, please this is your Bill.

MR OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, the spirit with which I raised this is to actually protect the representation of the Army in the Parliament. We know what happened during the last votes, and we do not want that to happen in this Parliament again. We want institutions like the UPDF that have no tribe or party to remain so. Even by virtue of Article 208(2), the UPDF is supposed to be non-partisan. We are going into straight partisan politics. How will they vote? 

I want the representation there but please do not expose the UPDF representation in Parliament to partisan politics. That is my only problem because if an issue comes to the Floor and the opposition and government are fighting over it, do you want the soldiers to vote with the government or with the opposition? That is my only problem. They can be in Parliament but they need protection in their peculiar position. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you had about four days of debate on this matter. You debated this matter several times and now we are here to complete the process by voting. So, today I would like to proceed with the voting.

3.40
DR OKULO EPAK (Oyam County South, Apac): When I contributed to this debate, I raised two issues: One was that at an appropriate moment, I would move an amendment to delete the representation of the Army in the House. After a lot of discussion we should appreciate what the relationship has been rather than focusing on politics by virtue of the presence of the soldiers here.

I thought that hon. Oulanyah’s inquisition and what he intends to propose is an improvement in their representation and that it would represent a consensus where we all meet. I am wondering because he sought a clarification on whether that provision enables him to move that they be presented as ex-officio Members. Does the Attorney General’s silence mean that the position as stated by hon. Oulanyah is okay, and that we should go ahead to support the proposal that the Army may continue being represented but as ex-officio Members in the House? I would support that.  

The second position I had was that at an appropriate moment, which I think is now, I would move an amendment to increase the number of representatives of persons with disabilities from four to eight, and that the demarcation of the districts in each region to be represented by each of the two original Members would be the responsibility of the Electoral Commission. I circulated these amendments previously and I have copies here. 

I am insisting that we go group by group and as we read each group, we pronounce ourselves on it. Also those who would like to move amendments regarding a particular group would do so. I presume that is the approach you are going to adopt other than an omnibus approach so that we have a chance to move amendments to a particular provision under this Article of the Constitution. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, let us move on. We are going to go category by category so that if you have something to raise you can raise it when we reach that category. 

MAJ. KINOBE: Madam Speaker, I have a procedural problem. When you try to analyse the motion by hon. Okulo Epak, that is to delete one category and you refer to Article 78, you will realise that the Constitution allows us to either increase or reduce. However, anything that removes a category amounts to amending Article 78.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, honourable members, there is the word abolishing here. It is in the Constitution so let us move step by step and address each category as we go.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, I have been quiet listening to honourable members and consulting my superiors who are on the front bench. I have some difficulty because hon. Oulanyah did not move an amendment but only sought some clarification. We have moved this motion for retaining the representation, as it has been only to implement the changes that we introduced in this system of representation in the Constitution. In short, retain the representation in principle, as has been the case. 

This is a motion for retaining the representation and, therefore, I advise that we take it as a whole rather than splitting it up because this is a collective resolution. (Laughter)

MRS KASULE LUMUMBA: Madam Speaker, I want to get clarification from the Attorney General. Our Constitution talks of a third being women. Therefore, in whatever we do, a third should be women. Why is he saying that we should have only two women as part of the representatives of UPDF? Why not one-third? I would even suggest that we have four women out of the ten. 

Secondly, Madam Speaker, I intend at an appropriate time to move that when we talk of UPDF, we talk of the defence forces so that we have prisons and Police also represented in this House. Thank you very much.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney General, are you responding to honourable – you are not? (Interjections) Order honourable members! We are now proceeding to vote. 

MR MWONDHA: Madam Speaker, I do not know whether the Attorney General has really dealt with hon. Oulanyah’s issue and given it justice. Hon. Oulanyah was referring to “… matters incidental to….” Could that mean that we have to examine the roles of these interest groups when they come to Parliament? He only restricted himself to retaining which is one of the purposes of the review, but he did not go as far as dealing with the issue of their roles. 

Also I thought hon. Oulanyah was being very reasonable. The President has once told this House that the Army representatives here are listening posts. Therefore, I think it would be fair to make them ex-officio Members so that they can open their ears widely and listen rather than turning them into voting machines.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us proceed. The first category we shall deal with is district or city women representatives. I put the question that this House do approve the existence of the district or city women representatives as proposed in the resolution.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands)

MR MWONDHA: Order! Hon. Mayombo is voting twice.

MR MUTULUUZA: Madam Speaker, I am sorry I have been out; I just wanted to vote “Aye”.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we have no abstentions, none against and those for are 155. The ayes have it.  

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the next category is that of the workers. There shall be five representatives at least one of who shall be a woman.

MRS SSENTONGO:  Two, Madam Speaker.

THE HON. MEMBERS: Amend.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were no abstentions; none against and those for were 162. The ayes have it. (Applause)

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us now deal with the youth. There shall be five representatives for the youth at least one of who shall be a woman.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were no abstentions; none against and those for are 161. The ayes have it. (Applause)  

(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The next category is that of persons with disabilities. There shall be five representatives for persons with disabilities at least one of who shall be a woman.

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I want to propose an amendment that the number of persons with disabilities be increased to eight, and that the Electoral Commission demarcates the districts within the region to be represented by each Member.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from my colleague is whether people with disabilities are a race and whether a person with a disability must produce somebody with a disability. They are from within us and in the actual fact are part of us. They are our women, our children, our fathers and your men for that matter. 

Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is whether the urge to increase the number is hinged on the argument that we do not take care of their interests. Why does he think that people with disabilities are not part of us?

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, I find it very strange that the honourable member should ask such a question because all the groups we have already voted for are also part of us. Why do we have to vote for them at all? Their representation would not be necessary. If he was questioning my justification for increasing the number, I would understand but not the ridiculous question of whether they are part of us or not. If he is seeking clarification -(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the information I want to give my colleague is that, I am only questioning the justification for increasing the number. I am not saying that they should be scrapped. 

DR EPAK: I think if you ask for justification then clarify yourself then that is kind of you. Madam Speaker, what the House should realize is that even among the disability community there are several groups. There are those with physical disabilities who are actually divided into several groups. At the moment some groups are actually not represented, so to increase the number would provide such an opportunity.

Secondly, people with disabilities are given the insurmountable task of covering vast regions yet their movement is already, by definition, encumbered. As members of Parliament representing constituencies we have had to answer questions from members in the community with disabilities some of which we are not able to deal with. I think the question of representation and giving them only four in number is just unfair. 

Likewise, asking a woman to cover an entire district is not good enough. If there were a possibility to increase the number, I would have even supported such an arrangement. I would have expected honourable members to be very supportive of increasing the number of representatives for persons with disabilities.  

PROF. TARSIS KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to move a motion that overlooks Article 93 of the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Explain the Article.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, Article 93 of the Constitution reads as follows: “Parliament shall not, unless a bill or motion is introduced on behalf of the Government- 

(a) 	proceed upon a bill, including an amendment bill, that makes provision for any of the following-

(i)	the imposition of taxation or the alteration of taxation otherwise than by reduction; or
 
(ii)	the imposition of a charge on the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda or the alteration of any such charge otherwise than by reduction; or

(iii)	the payment, issue or withdrawal from the Consolidated Fund or other public fund of Uganda of any moneys not charged on that fund or any increase in the amount of that payment, issue or withdrawal; or 

(iv)	the composition or remission of any debt due to the Government of Uganda; or 

(b) proceed upon a motion, including an amendment to a motion, the effect of which would be to make provision for any of the purposes specified in paragraph (a) of this Article.” 

Is he, therefore, in order to overlook this important provision of the Constitution by moving for an increase in the size of Parliament?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, during the course of the debate this point was raised and it was ruled upon by the Speaker that it was out of order. Therefore, I want to know whether the situation has changed or whether the Member has since secured the consent of the minister to do the needful.

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, the same Constitution states that: “Upon the expiration of a period of ten years after the commencement of this Constitution and thereafter, every five years, Parliament shall review the representation under paragraphs (b) and (c) of clause (1) of this Article for the purposes of retaining, increasing or abolishing….” This same Article, therefore, empowers a Member to review the situation by increasing. So, I am equally empowered to propose an increase.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I have no problem with your proposing an increase. What I am asking is that, since the ruling on this matter during the debate, has the situation changed? Have you secured the consent of the Minister of Finance to increase the numbers?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I do not know where we are because I want to debate in support.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us hear from the mover first.

MR MWANDHA: I expected on this particular issue that the Attorney General would tell the House about the conversation we had and the advice he gave me on this very matter. This is because my colleague, hon. Okulo Epak, rightly points out that the Constitution allows this Parliament to review and part of the review involves increasing. Article 93 notwithstanding, Parliament is commanded to review and if necessary increase during the process of review. 

I discussed this matter with the Attorney General and he appeared to agree with the position. I think he should advise the House with regard to this particular matter because he was not in the House on the occasion when hon. Mwesige raised the matter. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Attorney General, we are waiting to hear from you on the proposal.

DR MAKUBUYA: Madam Speaker, Article 78 (1) says: “Parliament shall consist of-
(a) members directly elected to represent constituencies;
(b) one woman representative for every district;
(c) Such numbers of representatives of the Army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine.”

Now, what has happened is that in the Parliamentary Elections Act of 2005, Section 8(2) says: “There shall be the following representatives of special interest groups in Parliament for purposes of Article 78(1)(c) of the Constitution: UPDF, workers, youth and (d) for persons with disabilities, there shall be five representatives at least one of whom shall be a woman.”

My understanding is that Parliament has exercised its powers under 78(1)(c) by enacting Section 8(2)(d) and I do not think that you can move away from this by a resolution, I think you can only move away by amendment to this section –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This Article the minister is reading was put in place by NRC and it is now our duty –(Interjections)– yes, the issues of numbers was done by the NRC and it is the duty of Parliament to change the number to increase or to decrease them. So, this is the opportunity for us to change the number, Madam Speaker.

MR KAKOOZA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would support hon. Okulo Epak, but I think increasing the number we must know the basis because a committed resource is a cost. When you know that we are facing a budget cut of our resource envelope from the donors and when you do it right now, when they have been complaining of the expansion of the cost, we are adding more cost. Is it a priority now that we should increase the number vis-à-vis other priorities we can do? Why do we not maintain the status quo and then see how we can move from here because our economy can be crippled.

MRS BABA DIRI: Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order to say that we cannot increase persons with disabilities when we have increased the women from 56 to 69 and we have 10 UPDF. Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, you can increase at the right time.

MR KATURAMU: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister of Constitutional Affairs/Attorney General has informed this House that it is not tenable to make a review in increasing the representation of persons with disability, but I am surprised that he could not go further to say that the same thinking he has presented to this House could not be relevant to other special interest groups. 

I seek clarification because in this amendment to review the representation of special interest groups, we were mindful of the financial implication that is why retention, abolition or increments was included and represented in this House.  

Madam Speaker, hon. Bright Rwamirama said that he wants to know the justification as to why there should be an increment and the reasons we have are very many. The last census showed that people with disabilities in this country are 10 percent and that is the minimum number, which we have; that means that slightly above 2.6 million people are disabled persons. 

I represent the western region, and it is absolutely laborious that I have to move in 18 districts to go and seek the views of the people whom I represent –(Interruption)

MS NANKABIRWA: Madam Speaker, we were advised by the Attorney General, who quoted the law yesterday to amend the Parliamentary Elections Act in order for the House to consider what we are considering today. Unfortunately, nobody raised this yesterday so that we amend it as well. The clause that the Attorney General read, which indicates the number of representatives of persons with disability is in the Act of 2005, which we passed here. (Interruptions)

The point of procedure I was raising is whether we can proceed debating as if there are so many people who are opposed to the increment of persons with disability representation? I am not opposing it but we must follow the right procedure and law. Does the law allow us to increase now?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think –(Interruption)

DR EPAK: Madam Speaker, you asked me a question, which I have not answered.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I asked you?

DR EPAK: You did.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Really?

DR EPAK: Yes. You asked whether the situation has changed, whether I had consulted with the minister. First, Madam Speaker, I do not know what the honourable Attorney General was envisaging when he brought this motion? Supposing this House decided that the whole special representation be abolished, would that not have constituted an amendment to that Act? Supposing this House had agreed that we abolish the Army representation, would that have constituted an amendment to the Act?  

So, I do not understand this way of proceeding. Although I am not a lawyer, according to your inquiry and the point of order raised by hon. Kabwegyere, the technical question raised by hon. Kabwegyere relates to a Member moving a motion or an amendment. But this motion is moved by government itself, and I did not see any reason to go back and try to agree with the minister. That is amending the motion already brought in by the Executive and I would imagine that the Executive envisage, as per this Article, that there was going to be a possibility to retain, to increase or abolish. I do not see any need for me to go on consultation when they could have considered all these possibilities in their own opinion. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do appreciate the principle behind the proposals, but I have here the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 which I believe the Electoral Commission is using to conduct elections for which I think they have planned. I think it was a problem of sequencing, in what order it should come; I see that in this proposal.

MR WACHA: Madam Speaker, my understanding is that the numbers being used by the Electoral Commission are lifted from Article 78 of the Constitution.  Now, Article 78 of the Constitution provides that this Parliament can review those numbers. My understanding is that because of Article 2 of the Constitution, which gives the Constitution supremacy over all laws of Uganda, the Parliamentary Act is actually subordinate to this Constitution. If this Constitution, therefore, goes ahead and reviews in whatever way the number of people with disability, then the Parliamentary Act will have to take heed of whatever we have reviewed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Well, honourable members, that is what I said that there is a problem of sequencing in this matter here.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I am very happy with the way things are now developing because it is very clear that the argument originally given by the Attorney General would not even require this House to review as commanded by Article 78 because, if we are going to say that the Parliamentary Elections Act is already in place that means that we cannot change anything; that means that this exercise is futile and if it is only futile, I think this Parliament is in perfect order to review it in accordance with Article 78, and if they want to increase any number of representation and in this case, I think the motion by hon. Okulo Epak still stands. So, at an appropriate time, I would like to rise and debate in his support.
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, we had a lengthy debate on this matter, I think let us vote on it. We vote on hon. Epak’s proposal to increase the numbers. So, I put the question that the resolution be amended as proposed by hon. Epak. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Members abstaining are 16, those against the proposal are 93, and those for the proposal are 24. The proposal has been lost.
 
(Question negatived.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question that there be five representatives of persons with disabilities one of whom shall at least be a woman.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Honourable members, there were no abstentions, none against and 147 for. So, the ayes have it.
  
(Question agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The proposal is that, we have ten Uganda Peoples’ Defence Forces representatives, two of whom shall be women.

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, there were six abstentions, 20 against and 128 in favour, so the ayes have it.

(Question agreed to.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO AUTHORISE THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND  CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS TO MAKE REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 100 OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT, 2005 TO REVOKE THE 
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS DISTRICT WOMEN REPRESENTATIVES REGULATIONS 2001

4.43
THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Dr Khiddu Makubuya): Madam Speaker:

WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections District Women Representative Regulations 2001, statutory instrument 30 of 2001, were made by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs under Section 11 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001, to regulate the election to Parliament of district women representatives;

AND WHEREAS Section 8 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005 Act No.17 of 2005 provides that district and city women representatives shall be elected by universal adult suffrage and in a manner similar to the manner in which Members of Parliament are elected directly to represent constituencies under Article 78(1) of the Constitution; 

AND WHEREAS the Parliamentary Elections District Representatives Regulations, 2001 have consequently become redundant and it is expedient for them to be revoked;

AND WHEREAS Section 101 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005, which repeals the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2001 continues in force, statutory instruments made under the repealed Act until they are revoked or replaced under the Parliamentary Elections Act, 2005;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved by Parliament that Parliament approves that the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs makes the Parliamentary Elections District Women Representatives Revocation Regulations, 2005, attached to this resolution, as an annex to revoke the Parliamentary Elections District Women Representatives Regulations, 2001, statutory instrument 30 of 2001. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the motion is straightforward, it is revoking existing rules. So, I do not know whether we really need to debate.  Honourable members, I put the question that the motion be approved by this House as moved by the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNT (UA) 31.57 MILLION FROM ADB FUNDS FOR FARM INCOME ENHANCEMENT AND FOREST CONSERVATION PROJECT

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance? I do not see him here, where has the minister gone?  Let us move to the next item.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE UGANDA REVENUE AUTHORITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2005

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Minister of Finance, your Bill on Uganda Revenue Authority. [Mr Musumba: “What about item No.5”].  We called the motion and there was nobody to – let us finish the Uganda Revenue Authority Bill. We called the Uganda Revenue Authority Bill, which is also yours; we called item No.5 and item No. 6, which is also yours.  

4.46
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING)(Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I seek the indulgence of this House. I have been in this House since the House began, but I had stepped out for brief consultations. I seek the indulgence of this House, Madam Speaker, that this House calls for item No.5 so that we deal with it first.  

Madam Speaker, the reason is that this is involving foreign financing, which has been outstanding for some time, and if we miss this opportunity, it may as well be long before we have another opportunity like this. So, I want to seek the indulgence that the House calls item No. 5 and we proceed on the motion to borrow this money.

MOTION TO AUTHORIZE GOVERNMENT TO BORROW UNITS OF ACCOUNT (UA) 31.57 MILLION FROM ADB FUNDS FOR FARM INCOME ENHANCEMENT AND FOREST CONSERVATION PROJECT

4.48
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, some time last year, we did present to this House a motion that seeks the authority of this House for government to borrow an amount of money equivalent to Units of Accounts 31,570,000 from the African Development Bank funds for farm income enhancement and forest conservation project.  

Madam Speaker, we have since the presentation of that motion to this House appeared before the Committee on National Economy, in keeping with your directive and in keeping with the provisions of our rules. We did have interactions with the committee and the committee chairperson, whom I am already reliably informed, is ready to present the report.  I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.  

4.51
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Nathan Nandala Mafabi): Madam Speaker and honourable members, this is the report of the Committee on National Economy on the loan request for financing the farm income enhancement and forest conservation project. 

This loan request was committed to the committee in accordance with our Rules of Procedure, Rule 138(2), and Article 159 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. 

It seeks to borrow from African Development Bank (ADB) Units of Accounts (UA) 31,570,000 and from the Nordic Development Bank (NDF) US$6,000,000.
 
This project is supposed to be implemented by the two ministries; that is, Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, and Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries. 

Background

This project is formulated within the framework of the Plan for Modernisation of Agriculture (PMA), the National Forest Plan (NFP) and the Poverty Eradication Action Plan (PEAP).

The project will be implemented within a period of five years, covering 36 districts, which are in Appendix 1. The major aim is to ensure food security and managing natural resources. 

It is a community-based development project with the private sector as the technical service provider. The main issue is to plant trees in degraded areas so that soil fertility and environmental protection is attained. 

Methodology

The committee held meetings with the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and that of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries; also with technical teams from the two ministries, and the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, and the National Planning Authority.  

The committee analysed the following documents:
1.	Draft Credit Agreement
2.	Project Implementation Plan
3.	Project Appraisal Document 
4.	The submission from the National Planning Authority
5.	The National Forestry Act.  

There are issues raised to the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment, which have not been addressed to date and that is in Appendix 2 in our letter. 

The project:

The project has three main components: 
1. 	Forest Support Component 
2.	Agricultural Enterprise Development Component
3.	Project Coordination.

Forestry Support Component

This component covers tree planting and community watershed management. The tree-planting component is aimed at addressing the following:
1.	Re-vegetating 9,900 hectares of degraded watershed
2.	Projecting 9,000 hectares of natural resources.
3.	Establishing 13,500 hectares of plantation.
4.	Training farmers and staff.

The above interventions are expected to result into increased production of poles and fuel wood to 472,500 metric tonnes and 45,900 tonnes respectively. The details are outlined as follows in the appendixes attached. Community watershed management is Appendix III (a), and tree planting is Appendix III (b).

Agricultural Enterprise Development

This sub-component will address the following:
1. 	Small-scale irrigation and crop development covering 560 hectares
2. 	Developing rainwater-harvesting sites
3.	Soil fertility management
4.	Training farmers and staff
5.	Installing treadle pumps by farmers
6.	Developing market access roads
7.	Promotion of apiculture
8.	Agricultural marketing.

The above interventions are expected to lead to increase household incomes since high value crops will be promoted and irrigation will enable farming all year round.

The details of what to be done are as follows:
§	Soil Fertility Management – Appendix III(c)
§	Small Scale Irrigation – Appendix III (d)
§	Apiculture Promotion – Appendix III (e)
§	Agriculture Marketing – Appendix III (f)

Project Coordination

Of course there will be a project coordination office in both ministries. The projects in the ministries will establish implementing units, which will coordinate the activities and monitor the implementation in the concerned districts – Appendix III (g).

Implementation will be decentralised and there will be strong community participation, which is expected to build a strong sense of ownership.  All levels of local government will be involved as per the hierarchy. The policy-making organ will be the steering committee composed of the permanent secretaries of the implementing ministries.

The specialised services, training and extension activities will be provided by NAADS.

Coverage

The project will be for a period of five years and will cover 36 districts.

Funding

The funding is estimated at UA 51,143,800, which is US $74.72 million. The ADF loan is of UA 31.57 million, which forms 61.7 percent of the total costs, with a grant of UA 9.85 million or 19.3 percent.

The NDF loan is of UA 4.119 million, which is eight percent of the total costs, and the Government of Uganda will contribute the equivalent of UA 5.55 million, or 10.6 percent towards salaries and allowances.

It is also envisaged that the beneficiaries will contribute the equivalent of 0.06 percent for financing procurement of treadle pumps for their use.  

The funds will be expended as follows:
Component Allocation (UA):
Community Water Management	19,420,000
Tree Planting	8,477,000
Soil Fertility Management	6,005,200  
Small scale irrigation and
Water harvesting Development   	12,235,500
Apiculture Development           	     862,500
Agriculture Marketing           	2,910,900
Project Coordination            	1,232,700
                                
Grand Total                     	51,143,800 
                          
Loan Distribution: 
Civil works            	7,302,700
Vehicles       	   522,400
Motor Cycles and bicycles         872,700
Equipment             	1,959,700
Agricultural Input  	5,936,400
                              
Grand Total             	16,593,900

Capacity Building and Consultancy:
Technical Assistance/Consultancy    	6,800,200
Studies and Supervision    	1,897,600
Training and Capacity Building      	4,359,800
Specialisation Services and 
Demonstration     	11,614,300
Salaries and Wages    	5,551,600
                                       
Grand Total           	30,223,500
Audit Services      	      98,800

Operation Costs:
Vehicles and Equipment maintenance 713,500
Civil Works      	   578,800
General Expenses  	2,935,600
                                   
Grand Total 	4,227,500

The summary of total costs is in Appendix V.

The loan is concessional and in line with government’s debt strategy.

ADF Loan:
The ADF loan has a maturity of 50 years including a grace period of ten years, at an interest rate of 0.75 percent.

NDF Loan:
The NDF loan has a maturity period of 40 years, including ten years of grace at an interest rate of 0.75 percent per year. 

The Government contribution is to be catered for under the MTEF of 2005 - 2008/2009.

Observations:
1. The loan is more of consumption than production. This is revealed by the fact that UA 24.8 million is for capacity building. The only production resources are:
a) 	Agricultural inputs for UA 5.9 million, and 
b) 	Small scale irrigation gravity water of UA 6.5 million.

2. The National Forest Authority exists and a project is creating another structure to handle the functions of National Forest Authority. 

3. 	If NFA already has structures and equipment that this project intends to procure, which include vehicles and other equipment, the equipment to be bought under the project are basically computers and accessories and so the committee wonders how this relates to production of trees and water among others.

4. The aim of the loan is for tree planting, soil fertility management and watershed management, however, the small scale irrigation is basically gravity water schemes in only 17 districts as opposed to the whole country. There are also rural access roads and Ministry of Works is not in the project document.

5. The ministry will provide money to farmers and yet there is no mechanism for disbursement and collection. This might lead to loss of resources.

6. There are many interventions to handle forests, which is duplication leading to resource wastage. Because this project was not taken care of as we see some appendix from ADF. 

7. Only 36 districts are to be covered by the project, yet the whole country needs increased widened forest cover and water coverage. There was no plan or argument to suggest that these are the only affected districts. Even these districts never specified whether there were some specific sub-counties to be taken care of and they were not even identified.
 
8. The Livestock Productivity Improvement Project for UA 36 million was approved on 19 December 2003 and has a component for water for irrigation, but up to date nothing has been done. And the small- scale holder loan was approved in the Sixth Parliament of UA of 18 million and has a water component, but to date nothing has been done.

Recommendations:
1. This loan should be restructured so that it addresses production rather than consumption. This should take into consideration that:

(i) The tree planting components are implemented by NFA through its existing structures.

(ii) The capacity building of UA 24.8 million is rather on a higher side and needs to be revisited. This money should be put to more productivity than capacity building.

(iii) The tree-planting component should be spread all over the country since the expected benefits are for the entire country.

2. 	Tree planting byelaws are enforced, as this will help quick reforestation of the country.

3. 	The component for income enhancement is converted into a soft funding for farmers through approved financial institutions and not the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment.

4. 	The existing institutions should be used in the implementation of the project to avoid extra resources for paying the project officers.

5. 	Parliament approved a loan for the livestock project of US $34 million and Northern Small Scale Holders Agriculture Project under which was a component for water production. This should be implemented to avoid duplication and wastage of resources for this component. The three should be harmonised first.

6. 	The law to protect the river and lake banks should be enforced to avoid people digging up to the shorelines.

7. 	Government should intensify the rural electrification programme using the alternative sources of power like solar energy to reduce on demand for wood fuel, which is leading to deforestation.

8. 	The effects of forest on rain formation are well known and therefore the more forest cover, the more rains hence more water for human utilisation.

9. 	The National Planning Authority should be urged to draw up long term plans for provision of water countrywide using the available and suitable means.

Conclusion

The committee recommends that this loan request be renegotiated or redesigned to address the above concerns in order to realise the intended benefits. This has been to avoid loss of money on non-productive activities and duplication. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable chairperson, your conclusion is rather diplomatic, but I do not know whether you are not saying that we are withholding approval.

MR MAFABI: Madam Speaker, exactly that because if you approved this loan as it is, it is not addressing the needs it is meant to. So, for now we would request that this loan request be put on halt until this can be re-negotiated and designed.

5.10
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I really want to thank the committee and specifically the chairman for a well-considered report. I wanted this loan because I saw the recommendation of the committee, but I wanted this matter to come before this House for two reasons: 

The first one is that I want this House to appreciate that the essence for which the money is being borrowed is in itself correct. This country needs help in way of afforestation, the consequences of adverse climatic changes in this country are well known especially today. This country needs financing in the area of irrigation; that one goes without debate. 

This country needs financing with regards to farm income because that is where the real wealth and the real Ugandan are. Therefore, the purpose for which this money was designed is there; it is real and existent. 

However, we have had this matter before this House for now coming to a year. And we made a presentation to the African Development Bank who did appreciate the need to finance this kind of activity in our economy. The ADB has been holding this line open for us subject to this approval for some time. We have had discussions with the ADB about the concerns of the committee, which we appreciate and believe is the duty of the committee to report or present this kind of aspects of a loan request or design or a project design the way they have done.  

What I want this House to help me with, Madam Speaker, is that we undertake to continue discussions with the committee on the project implementation. We continue to discuss with the committee on adjustment in the design, but we do not throw out the bath water with the baby.

We have to make a communication about this loan; it is expiring on the 28th of this month. Therefore, Madam Speaker, I want to pray that this House gives us shall we say permissible - but conditional authority to be able to communicate to the African Development Bank so that they can keep this line open as we continue to discuss with the committee the best way forward in ensuring that we re-arrange resources so that we get the maximum product.

Madam Speaker, I want you to recall that the role of a Member of Parliament in the countryside – one’s role in development cannot be underestimated.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, I have no doubt that the minister interacted with the committee and the committee has reported to us. But the way the minister is proceeding, actually he is trying to bring negotiations of the committee in the House. I would request that we debate the report and then the minister can wrap up.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I want to put it on record that the committee has done all it could about this loan. We have even written, been in touch with the Ministries of Finance, Lands, Water and Environment and that of Agriculture, for long. But up to now they have not come up with a concrete design to the bank because if you can recall, there is an attachment - a copy of the letter that we wrote to the minister in May and he has never responded. We wrote back to him on 19 July and he has never responded. They came up with something, which they wanted our committee to look at and we said we couldn’t.  

So I would be very comfortable if the Minister of Finance had come to say we want to go back to the African Development Bank, to re-negotiate. But I think for now this is a report of Parliament, which has been on the Order Paper for quite some time, we even wrote to you some time back that we wanted to present it. Allow the members to make an input, which the minister could carry forward.

AN HON. MEMBER: Further information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think instead of information, let us just debate. Yes, honourable members you have heard the report, it has been signed by eight out of 15 members, so it is eligible for debate.

5.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE, LANDS (Mr Matia Baguma Isoke): I thank you, Madam Speaker. I thank my colleague, Nathan and the Committee on National Economy, for the report presented.  

I wish Parliament to recall that it is over ten years since this matter has been before this Parliament. The Sixth Parliament debated the loan seeking to enhance the firm income in the south west and south eastern parts of this country and the matter was deferred back to the negotiating table between the Government of Uganda and Africa Development Bank. In the last six years we have been drawing up the project implementation document and we arrived at a document that was discussed with the three committees: that of Agriculture, Natural Resources and the one responsible for the loans, the National Economy Committee.

Madam Speaker, the letters written to me by the committee chairperson were answered in three workshops held in Entebbe and Kampala. We have held not less than five committee meetings in addition to field trips to justify where this money is intended to go. During the Sixth Parliament the question was that it was not only the south western and south eastern districts that were treeless - by then we had 17 districts. When we went back to the drawing table, the project area expanded to 36 districts as they appear in Annex 1 of the report of the committee.  

We are all well aware that the areas of Rwampara, Ntungamo, Kabula, Tororo, Pallisa, Teso and West Nile have got many hills that need planting trees and these are the sources of water. Most of our rivers begin from these hills and we need to plant these hills with trees in order to protect the water catchments. That is why the tree planting sub-component is divided into two as we see in paragraph 4.1 of the committee report, re-vegetating as much as 9,900 hectares of degraded water shade. If we do not plant trees on our hills, our springs will dry up, our rivers will dry up and even the underground aquifers where the naikontos draw water will also not be recharged. And indeed our rivers that feed Lake Victoria and other large water bodies will not be charging those water bodies. So, this is a project that should have been implemented ten years ago.  

Madam Speaker, the other sub-component is planting natural forests on private land. What my colleagues in the report have put as recommendations that we are not focusing on the institution that should implement it and they are pointing to the National Forest Authority. This Parliament made the law, which established the National Forest Authority (NFA). NFA handles protected forest reserves. It is the Forest Inspection Division and the District Forest Services that are responsible for planting trees elsewhere in collaboration with the private sector. So what I see in the recommendations 1 and 2, and so on was really discussed and these records are available in the three committee reports. We delay for a day - now we are seeing drought in these parts of Uganda as a result of no amelioration in the adverse climatic changes now going on globally and regionally what will happen if we delay this project further?  

Ugandans are migrating now from Kyotera; I wonder what will happen during the voting day. Ugandans have crossed Kagera into Tanzania in search of water and pasture and to save their strategic economic base, cattle. We must make an intervention at this time, Madam Speaker, and I pray my colleagues do reconsider what the committee puts as its conclusion.

In addition to what my colleague, the Minister of Finance has said, let Parliament endorse this borrowing with a provision, a provision in only one area that the structure for implementing in the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Environment be redesigned for proper implementation because they argue that we are creating new institutions when we would have used the existing ones to implement this life saving project.
 
I pray the committee to support borrowing this money from our own regional bank. There are reports from other sources for reasons we are yet to know, who may not be supporting our borrowing from our own bank. The African Development Bank is our own bank - we are shareholders and stakeholders, and we shall continue discussing on the proper implementation of this project when the money is with us. I so pray.

5.21
MS MARY AMAJO (Woman Representative, Kaberamaido): Thank you very much Madam Speaker. I would also like to thank the committee for this very good report and I would like to say that I agree with most of the recommendations of the committee. 

Project design is very important and that is the one thing that has got to come ahead of approval of any project and I think what this project is saying is that there are flaws in this project design. I would like to seek clarification from the minister. If we approve this project - this borrowing now, how easy is it to redesign the project in such a way that there are no overlaps, no repetitions in terms of implementing agencies and that the project is run in such a way that we get the best out of the money we are going to borrow? That is as a way of clarification. 

I agree the project is a very noble one considering that we are actually leading into a desert situation in this country, but we are also mindful of the fact that whatever dollar or shilling we borrow has got to have maximum returns. I do not see this coming out of this project design and I think I need clarification on how this design can be realigned in such away that we get some maximum returns.

Madam Speaker, by way of details, as the report says, capacity building is unnecessarily big, especially considering that this project can be done by institutions, which are already on the ground. Most of our projects have suffered. In programmes and projects, there is usually a percentage, which is accepted as a percentage of capacity building even in overhead costs. I do not know whether those were considered. I would like to again ask what criteria was used because when you look at the distribution in Appendix 1 for example, the minister has just told us that he has considered the Teso sub-region but when you look at the map of Teso, the little Kaberamaido is there without the project and yet the other surrounding districts have been covered. What is it about Kaberamaido that does not qualify to be under this project?

The emphasis, according to my own wish, when we talk about tree planting and catering for watersheds, we should also take into consideration the kind of trees that are very economically viable. Of coarse I know that timber trees are economically viable but also there are other trees like citrus, mangoes and peanut butter, which can be more economically viable and sustainable especially since people can receive income from them and we can use them to develop household income. For example, in Zanzibar most of the tree cover is made of clove trees and palMs Those two crops are the main stay. They are very important at household level and also for income. You also cannot imagine that Zanzibar – as long as Zanzibar lives there will be a problem of desertification because the trees that form most of the forest cover are also economically very useful at household and national level.

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, I would like to say that I support most of the recommendations of the committee but I would also like to inquire if something can be done to this project design so that we do not loose the project but also not go in for a project with a lousy design. Thank you.

5.25
MR SERAPIO RUKUNDO (Kabale Municipality, Kabale): Thank you Madam Speaker, I am a member of the Committee on National Economy.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, then let other people contribute.

MR RUKUNDO: I would like to point out if you can give me chance. I have listened to two ministers and it looks as if we members do not have the development of our country at heart. So, I wanted to put to them the same questions I put in the committee, which they did not answer. I will be very brief. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Rukundo, you first allow other members to comment on the report.

MR RUKUNDO: I will be brief, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You first allow the other members to comment on the report.  

5.27
MR JOHN BYABAGAMBI (Ibanda County South, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I want to add my voice to those who have thanked the committee for the work.  

The intention of the loan to have forests in this country is good. The purpose must be supported but the way we utilise the money that we borrow from outside leaves a lot to be desired. 

There is this issue of capacity building; this capacity building has become the source of income to some people and it does not do its work. You find that the people who are attending these capacity building seminars from day one of the year to the last day of the year are the same people. When they go back on the ground, they do not do their job; they only wait until there is another seminar and they “eat” this chunk of money. Shs 24 million out of Shs 51 million - 50 per cent of the money that is going for capacity building could be channeled to the private farmers who are already doing forestry to be trained on how they can manage their own forests but not these ones in Pajeros and recently Land Cruisers. This is wasted money.

Madam Speaker, I have an experience, especially on private forestry whereby a kilo of Cyprus from National Forest Association goes at Shs 800,000. This money you are seeing that they give to private forests - a farmer has to raise Shs 800,000, he puts up a forest, then after three years the Government comes in to intervene to give him the compensation of what he has already put on the ground. 

Where does he get this money from first? That is why you are seeing even the money, which was borrowed long time ago, has left little to be seen on the ground, especially through the National Forest Association. Very few people can afford this amount of money and yet we do not have agricultural banks. They say private forestry - which private forestry and yet money is going for capacity building? This could be their money to buy the seeds, give them to those people, let them do the beds and support them from the very beginning using that amount of money that you are taking for capacity building. Train them and the same people will do the job.

Madam Speaker, the minister talked about the hills; I am glad. At one time I took him to Ibanda and he visited the hills there. The Ibanda-Buhweju Bridge is the source of water almost in the whole of great Ankole. But the land ownership on those hills is very problematic; people have got land titles, they are grazing on top of the hills, you find cows almost eating stones sometimes. The Government must use this money, which they are calling capacity building, to compensate those people. Give that land to private people who want to develop forestry. If you are going to continue talking about hills whereas you are pushing 50 percent of the money, we are borrowing into capacity building, you do not compensate these land owners and then we come in to plant the trees, nothing will come out.

The Constitution is very clear on land. They have land titles and there is no way we are going to push them out if we are not going to compensate them. I am not seeing any component for compensating or buying chunks of land, which are on top of the hills. 

Madam Speaker, I do not know who is responsible for civil works in this country. We have the whole Ministry of Works but you find that almost every ministry wants to go into civil works. Agriculture through Plan for Modernization is in roads. There is another – I do not know whether it is a government programme called AMP - it is also in roads. Now the Ministry of Lands and Water wants also to be in roads. Why can’t this component go to the Ministry of Works who are responsible for civil works in this country? What is the use of having it in Ministry of Lands?

Madam Speaker, if the minister can clarify to us or undertake that there will be some re-allocations especially when you go for renegotiation of this agreement, then I support the motion. Other than that, I do not.  

5.35
MR WILSON MURULI MUKASA (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would like also to add my voice to the others who have spoken before me to thank the committee for their report and also thank the Ministry of Finance and the other ministries for conceiving this project and sourcing the funding that is before us for approval. Thank you very much indeed.

The area of focus is indeed very vital as the committee has noted and of course the Minister of Finance, that it is vital for our welfare and well being in this country. I come from Nakasongola, which is one of those arid districts in this country. Today if you visited me in Nakasongola, I would not feel very happy. Why? Because it would be very difficult for me to make you a meal. It would be very difficult because the tree cover is gone and what we have in its place are just dry brown patches of bare ground. 

So, when a project like this comes around and it is aimed, among other things, at restoring and regenerating our tree cover and therefore in a way helping our welfare and well being then definitely, a person like me very strongly welcomes it. I think it should have come yesterday but since it is here today, then let us have it. All is okay.

I attended one of the workshops about this very project. The points, which members are raising, were raised at that time and I think at the end of that workshop there was some general consensus that all these points would be addressed so that finally when the project comes into implementation some of those points are actually taken care of. But in principle, at the end of the day, we said it was okay. 

I think we can go ahead and approve this loan on the understanding that these other concerns of ours like too much money being put in capacity building and some of these things by other parallel organizations could be channeled - cost saving measures could be instituted in the project so that the beneficiaries, our people, get as much as possible out of this. I think that was - and we thought this would -(Interruption)

DR KAPKWOMU NDIWA: Thank you, hon. Muruli Mukasa for giving way and thank you, Madam Speaker. On top of what hon. Muruli has said, all these ideas were exchanged between the Government and the committee. Each one of us was actually giving great concerns with the Government saying this money may be withdrawn or may be penalized. While the committee was saying that the project set up is poor, at the end of it all, as hon. Muruli has said, we said, “Okay, let us take it for now, but the other projects which may come later on, please design them correctly.” I think we agreed in principle that we can take off and others coming later on can be designed in such a proper manner. Thank you.

MRS MASIKO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and hon. Muruli for giving way. I did attend one of the workshops and I think it was the last one in which I saw hon. Muruli Mukasa. I remember correctly what we did say and what the minister agreed to was re-designing this project -(Interruption)- re-designing and as a recommendation, and we did express our concerns, this is not the first loan we are passing. 

The concrete example and concern I will give, like in that meeting, is NUSAF. We had said we should wait and let them go and re-design. They did come here and they pleaded with us in the committee and also on the Floor of this House, and it is on record that we gave conditions as our honourable ministers are saying, then they will come to us when they come to re-designing and eventually implementing this project. As I speak now, they have never come back; not to our committee. 

You know the problems that are facing NUSAF emanating from poor design and that was the concern of the committee and of this House. So, when honourable members turn round to say that we agreed to pass, I do not seem to understand. We said they should re-design and they took commitment to do it and come to us but they brought it without amendments. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, on 19 July 2005, the chairman of the committee addressed the Minister of Water, Lands and Environment and raised a number of very pertinent issues. When you read the report you do not get the impression that those issues have been addressed by the minister. Therefore, I want to find out from my colleague, hon. Muruli Mukasa, whether in the workshop he is referring to such issues were raised and in his view, having read this report, is he satisfied that the issues have been addressed? At the end of the day we are going to pay back this is money and if we do not pay, our children are going to pay. 

So, as my honourable colleague said, it is important that we get the best return instead of saying okay, may be the government should do this in future. To be honest, we cannot compromise on effective utilisation of loan resources because if we do so we are really building a burden for our future generation. So, has hon. Muruli addressed himself to this letter and is he satisfied that the answers appear in this report?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Let us allow hon. Muruli to complete because all of you are members of the committee. 

MR MURULI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to go ahead and conclude.  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Apparently, there is another clarification from the committee.

MAJ. KATIRIMA: Madam Speaker, it is apparent that the committee is not recommending the procurement of this loan for the reasons based on the observations. The clarification I want to get is whether Parliament can go ahead and procure this loan when these observations have not been answered by the line ministers who want this loan procured?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The reason the report is brought here is for you to get the view of the committee and be ready to respond and advise.

MR MURULI: Madam Speaker, as I was saying, many of these issues were raised in that one workshop that I attended but the consensus that emerged at the end of it all is that the loan is good, and we should go ahead and procure it subject to these modifications that the committee has pointed out. Now we are here, we have been told that this loan will actually go bad by the end of this month if we do not do anything. We also know - this one we are not being told - we know about the situation –(Interruption)

MR MAFABI: The information I want to give you is that this loan was here in the Sixth Parliament, it has never expired; it is ten years. So, you cannot come and say it is going bad. The only thing we have to do is to do a right thing now.

MR MURULI: Madam Speaker, if you are ill, you are suffering maybe from a cancer which attacked you ten years ago and the doctor diagnosed it and proposed some prescription, you keep away, you procrastinate five years down the road, you do not do anything, obviously you know the end result is death and very painful terrible death. We know the harm we have done to our vegetation cover in the country; we know that our water sources are drying up in many areas.

In fact today many of our cows are dying and we do not know whether they will survive this drought this year. Why? Because of some of our activities which have brought about all these probleMs Now there is some cure being proposed and this cure is within our means. I think the Minister of Finance really spoke well. He said, “Why do we not agree in principle and then we look at all those concerns”? 

The Minister of Finance is able to put right our concerns, but let us procure that loan. Let us have it for our welfare and for our own good and I do not think we are prescribing something which we are going to suffer from. It is better to have something and have it on the ground. Let us start moving than to have nothing at all. Let us not forget the old English saying that procrastination is the thief of time. We procrastinate, we steal time and we suffer. 

Let us not forget the old saying that when you have procrastination and you want to stop it, you collar him. Let us collar this procrastination. Let us have the loan, let us have all these concerns addressed, then we have our trees, we protect our watershed, we have some income and we become better –(Interruptions)- what is the problem, honourable members? Thank you very much.

5.47
MAJ. (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA (Isingiro County North, Mbarara): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First, I want to thank government for appreciating that our environment is actually threatening our existence because the droughts we are experiencing need a lot of attention. I want also to thank the committee very much for identifying the problems in the project.

Madam Speaker, we are talking of money being borrowed to save the situation. Let me use an analogy of looking for food for starving children. If they tell you to save children from dying and you are making a budget to save and you put alcohol. They tell you, “Please, we want to save more children. So, remove alcohol and put in posho, put in proteins” and you insist, “People are dying, so you must approve the budget”. Under normal circumstances, somebody who does not want to change in public office should resign.  

If you had a committee retreat and these issues were raised - if you look at Appendix 2, No.1 alone is almost to say, more than 50 percent of the project is non-productive. If you look at No.3, what do you want to duplicate? We are looking at efficiency; we are looking at the cost of output per unit. We want to bring efficiency in whatever we do; we are not going to have debt reduction like we have had in the past.  

I agree with hon. Muruli that we need to do much about our environment, but the need now is also to do with those who are designing projects. Madam Speaker, if you look at the report, observation No.1, the loan is more of consumption than production. This is revealed by the fact that 24.8 is for capacity building, the only production resources are: agriculture – 5.9; small scale irrigation gravity – 5.6; actually the ratio of consumption to production is more than two thirds. So, the whole project is not efficient and the committee is saying, “Please, we want this loan but redesign it so that Ugandans can get value.”

The National Forest Authority and the project are creating another structure to handle the function of the National Forest Authority; I heard the minister trying to explain. You know when you take the loan - this is borrowed money - why do you have to create structures to spend more? The less you spend the better for us.  

If you look at No.5, “The ministry will produce more money to farmers” and there is no mechanism for disbursement and correction. This must reach loss of resources. We know the Entandikwa scheme, which was started without proper planning and without being criteria based and the government lost money. Madam Speaker, this must be criteria based.

Finally, if you look at observation No.8, the livestock productivity improved project for Shs 36 million was approved on 19 December and has a component for water for irrigation, but to date nothing has been done.

THE MINISTER OF STATE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY (Mrs Mary Mugyenyi): Madam Speaker, this has been said twice that the project on livestock improvement, which was approved about a year ago, has a component for own irrigation. I want to put it on record that there is a difference between water for irrigation and water for livestock. Irrigation is mainly crop agriculture. Water for livestock, which is being mentioned in this report, is a distortion. This refers to dams for livestock, and this project is on-going and the water component is being handled by the ministry in charge of water. The designs are done and I think very soon they should be advertising tenders to construct water daMs But it is not the same as the water component that is in this project that is being proposed. I beg to give this information.  

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, honourable minister for that information. But as far as I am concerned, in Isingiro County North we received only one valley tank, not even a dam and, therefore, I think I would side with the committee. But thank you for the correction.

PROF. KAMUNTU: In Mbarara and Nyabushozi, where the distinguished minister comes from, there is hardly a new dam for water and the cows are dying and the drought has come and we are screaming –(Interruption)

MRS MUGYENYI: Madam Speaker, I think my point is not taken, because what I am trying to say is that the project water that was approved is different from the water that is being proposed here. People are pained about water for livestock in the dry areas of this country; I understand and I appreciate that. This water, which was approved, which is not yet executed on the ground, and I agree, is not the same as irrigation water, which is the water being proposed in this project. I must clearly state that this water now is for crop agriculture. The water you are talking about, hon. Rwamirama and hon. Kamuntu, is water for livestock. This is water for irrigation for crops. This is information that the members ought to know.

MR MAFABI: Let me give you information about this water. I am the one, as the chairman of the committee, who presented the report. I recall the water to be collected involves even gravity water and when gravity water is flowing it does not mean it is only the cows to drink it, but also to use it for crops. The argument we are putting across is that this water in the same districts we are talking about in the livestock project, and the water has not even been put there, it could be used both for livestock and crops.  

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, chairman for giving the information but let me remind the minister, if I were you to give information here, I would tell this House that we are doing irrigation at point X, at point Z, at point Y and then people will take you for granted. But as far as I am concerned, we have problems of water and, therefore, if money was provided to bring water for both animals and agriculture and it is not in my constituency - I know Isingiro is one of those areas that are known to be having permanent water problems and we have not received it. I have no reason to believe that Buganda has received it, which is abundantly endowed with water.  

Finally, Madam Speaker, what we are seeing before us is that we all appreciate there is need to take this loan. For quite some time the ministers concerned have known the reasons why this House has not approved the loan. 

It is my humble request that ministers should go and use their record of fast tracking. You know we had a problem here and the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, under the instructions of our Prime Minister, amended a Bill yesterday and today we passed it. We want to do this fast tracking, go and address these issues, put more money to production, answer questions addressed to you on 19 July 2005, and then we should summon this House and we should pass this loan as soon as you finish it. Otherwise, in its present form, you want to hold us at ransom. You do not want to get us value for money, you want government to spend money on a non-productive sector; money which we are going to pay! 

Madam Speaker, I would not approve this loan in the present form. I urge the minister to go and conform to the rule of efficiency and then we can approve this loan. I beg to move.

5.59
THE MINISTER WITHOUT PORTFOLIO (Dr Chrispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Madam Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I think the fundamental thing in the debate is that we all agree that there are emergencies; there are imperatives on irrigation and forest cover in the whole country. We are here as two institutions, the Executive and Parliament, acting on behalf of our people. We all admit that there is a serious delay to deal with emergencies. We have all the powers, we have been communicating, but out there the country is suffering. So, I think we have to act in a way to save ourselves, both the Executive and the Parliament, because there are emergencies that our people expect us to deal with. 

Nobody is disputing the fact that we need irrigation and that we need forest cover and it is also good that the honourable minister has admitted that there were constructive criticisms, which should have been attended to and have not been attended to. But he is also saying this can be done once the loan is approved. I do not know whether my good friend, hon. Kamuntu, was absent in the committee because he knows these procedures thoroughly. I am even surprised that this loan still survives –(Interruption)

PROF. KAMUNTU: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The information I want to give is that when you have African Development Bank as a financial institution, much as we are shareholders in the bank, the moment the bank grants a loan to a member country and the loan remains on its books for one year, two years, three years, it undermines the credibility of the country and it compromises its future borrowing capacity. Therefore, as advice, it would be better for us as a Parliament to make a distinction between our relationship with African Development Bank and our internal weaknesses so that we agree as a Parliament for the minister to borrow this money on conditions when it is borrowed. At least from the books of African Development Bank, it is now a performing loan to the recipient country. Internally, we put a condition to the minister because I think we better be fair to ourselves. 

We passed a law here on micro-finance deposit-taking institutions on condition that within six months you bring a law regulating micro-finance institutions. Up to today that law has never come -(Interjections)– no, I am not saying it should be done. All I am saying is, I am warning the minister that when you do the undertaking in Parliament, frankly you should fulfill that undertaking. Otherwise you have a credibility crisis, which makes future working relationship with you very difficult for no reason, except you promise and promise and the next time you come, Parliament refuses for no reason and we compromise our position as a country. 

Therefore, I would agree, we approve the loan on condition that these – this is serious, when you look at page 7, Mr Minister, you can see frankly speaking the loan distribution, the way the loan is being used; it is not right. Similarly, when the implementation arrangements are not properly designed, it is difficult, but we must not compromise the capacity of the country to borrow. Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kamuntu, you have made a submission instead of information.

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, the clarification I am seeking is whether it is in order for a member of the committee, who has not made a minority report, to stand and recommend contrary to his committee’s recommendations? Is it procedurally correct?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, if you have a different opinion from the committee, you are expected to file a minority report, attach it to the report of the committee and present it here soon after the committee chairperson completes his presentation. But he said he was giving information and I did not know what he was going to say. So, please, let us discard that. Hon. Kiyonga, please continue.

DR KIYONGA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The procedure notwithstanding, I think hon. Kamuntu has given useful information and my advice would be two fold. Number one, we must save this loan for the country. Number two, we should approve it conditional to the restructuring internally once we have got the loan. In this country there are projects, which have been restructured totally once we have got the loan and there is need.

Finally, we need in terms of the way we are moving with projects to save time and to ensure that back benchers make full input in project design. Maybe we need something like we did with the Budget Act so that we have a process covered by law. What steps should we be taking towards moving to a project design and loan negotiation because the Members of Parliament come in late and it makes work very, very difficulty? So the structural thing to cure is to define a process by law through which we must pass so that Members of Parliament in future feel they are fully participating. But for the sake of our country, let us approve this loan then we can restructure once money is here. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.05
MR LULE MAWIYA (Kalungu County East, Masaka): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The chairman of the committee, and the members, have actually done a good job. I remember I was with you in some workshop though you did not attend but your colleagues did attend.  

It is very true and all members concerns are quite genuine concerns, but I know they are mindful also of the fact that this country is in dire need for renegotiation of the whole country. The major concerns the members are raising, because I have been part of this team, one of them was the criteria that was used to pick or select the 36 districts. Another major one was the capacity building component.  

I will also echo what my colleague, hon. Muruli Mukasa, said. I was at the workshop, all of us attended, actually three committees agreed in principle that this is a very good loan, which we should not miss for the good of the country. It is true that any good project is measured by its design. Once the design fails out even the resultant effects will not be so good. But much as that was there, we all agreed that let us secure this loan and then the redesign and all other aspects can be looked into.  

Madam Speaker, may I be informed that much as this project has been on ever since the Sixth Parliament, it is soon elapsing, I think this month. I would not have any problem in bringing or in redesigning the project if there was time. But –(Interruption)

MS AMAJO: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  Since the member holding the Floor seems to have been very close to the process leading to this loan request, I would like to seek a clarification. In the appendix that we have there is a letter dated 22 September 2005, which in effect requests the minister to put together a team made up of hon. Members of Parliament and clerical staff. If I could quote the last part of the letter: “You are requested to put together your team of technical people to be part of the working group. If it is within the two weeks estimated time for the group, two days are necessary for a thorough discussion.” 

This was a discussion on redesigning the project. The clarification I am seeking is, did that take place, because if it did why are we having the same comments coming up? Thank you.

MR LULE MAWIYA: Madam Speaker, thank you and I thank the member for that clarification sought. All of us will agree that it is not so simple to design a project. All of us can pick this and that because there is in place a project design. It is true the minister was tasked and I remember I was part of that team to look into this project so that it could be redesigned. It is not only us that could be involved in redesigning this project, all the funders that are involved in this project had to be brought on board, which was not so simple. Therefore, it takes some bit of time to negotiate a loan depending on the design that you have.  

It is true all of us even me, the Chairman of the Natural Resources Committee, I agree that this design was not the best, but it is not so bad. Only with the two aspects that I have pointed out, the component that is to do with the capacity building which this Parliament has time and again cautioned the Executive and also the selection criteria. We did not start with only 36 districts, these districts were fewer, that is 36, but we brought more on board. Madam Speaker, considering the current position we have, the whole country should have come on board. But it was not so easy to bring each and every district on board, the 36. We said that we better start with these ones as other projects also take up the other districts.  

It is true this is not the first project that has taken some districts and leaving out others, there have been quite many projects, which have followed the same line as this one. However, why are members so concerned? It is because of the biggest concern especially to do with the climate. Vegetation cover is totally missing out in the whole country and this is why one of the big reasons as to why Lake Victoria today the level is going down day after day. The riverbanks are totally bare. If you go to Nakasongola, my colleague here was giving the example of Nakasongola; Nakasongola is in a very bad shape. If you go to the North, all these have been selected but very carefully. Even if you went to the West, Masaka and so forth, all these are in a bad shape. 

I had a very good experience when I was travelling to Rwanda one time. Immediately you cross over to Rwanda, you can see a very spectacular view on the hilltops of Rwanda as you go to the capital. This is the same view we would want to see in Uganda; they are not anywhere. And my minister, the substantive Minister of Water, Lands and Environment, at one time we were in a workshop and he said that he would come to Parliament to seek for your mandate at least to take over all these hilltops so that they can be covered by trees. I thought this was going to come in a few weeks time, but up to now he has never brought it up here. 

If you are to address these problems, I would like to call upon members that all of us, it is good that we know and we appreciate the fact that this is a very good loan and no one has come out to say that it is not. But considering the time limit or the time constraint, we better take up the loan and then the rest, the redesign, can be done with all of us. 

I am normally not the type to do things or to do post mortems, but this time round I would like to call upon the Executive arm of Government to be sincere that when Parliament – because Parliament has time and again been part and parcel of the development of this country; it has moved together with the Executive. Therefore, as partners in development, we should stick to what we agreed to here. I will be very glad if Parliament approves this loan and I see the minister bringing up a report to Parliament that the redesign is here, and in fact I am going to pressurize him because I over see that ministry. 

But considering the time constraint, Madam Speaker –(Interjection)- yes, I will come back definitely. Parliament is not yet to end even if the Seventh Parliament is gone, the Eighth Parliament will come, this loan was first considered in the Sixth Parliament, we are now ending the Seventh Parliament again on the same loan; we should be very serious! Hon. Kiyonga talked of something, which moved me. How can we consider a loan for this long? Even this time constraint should not have come in. We better rethink and we better be more serious as we partake to develop this country. However, Madam Speaker, I totally support the approval of this loan and I would like to call upon my colleagues that let us move in the same direction because it is the right way forward. I thank you very much, Madam Speaker.

6.17
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Let me preface my remarks by making a few corrections. Hon. Kabakumba was very critical of NUSAF. She was really saying that NUSAF is not performing, but we have got other assessors; the World Bank, our very donors have been assessing NUSAF and I have it in writing that we are on course. There have been some problems, which you have addressed, but I have it in writing that we are on course. Every financial year we keep Parliament briefed about the performance of NUSAF through the Presidential and Foreign Affairs Committee. 

And also our districts, they are pleased with the performance of NUSAF. Of course there are always problems in any project, but on average we are on course according to the donors themselves, and when they come here they go and look at these projects. So, they do not write their reports from their hotels. 

First of all, I would like to suggest that the points made by committee are very important points and that it is possible to restructure this project; it is not so difficult. Because you have mentioned the areas, capacity building has been exaggerated, that matter can be addressed. I would like to appeal to honourable members of Parliament to approve the loan, but we shall restructure it taking into account your concerns. Thank you.

6.20
CAPT. DAVID MATOVU (Kooki County, Rakai): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Parliament today must pronounce itself loud and clear to save the committee, the Government and Ugandans. I have been trying to look at Appendix 2 of the committee report, this document by hon. Mafabi, in the last letter the minister had invited him and his working group for a workshop so that they can harmonize outstanding key issues and prepare a way forward. What did hon. Mafabi put down in ink? “Lt Gen, I cannot attend because this is not the procedure.” 

Well, these are technical issues, I do not know what was the right procedure was, but as he does that my people in Kooki are dying. So today we must come up right and clear because our people are dying. In fact to me the next war after the Kony war - because the Kony war is finished, very soon it is becoming history - the next war in this country is about resources. In my place women take taxis to go and collect firewood. 

MR MAFABI: Thank you very much my colleague for giving way. It is true they wrote to me and I wrote back to Lt Gen. that I could not attend because it is not right procedure. This follows a communication where a colleague of my committee was nominating people without a committee and that was the reason. I do not want you to read this in isolation. The reason why we have attached this shows the sequence of everything. One colleague of the committee decided to make a working group, he decided to nominate people because I said I cannot attend and I was happy that my vice attended and she briefed us. But at that time we had to attach everything; I will never hide information.

CAPT. MATOVU: This was as a follow up to your resolution you moved in a workshop. Okay, that one aside, we are time barred. Animals in my place are licking dust, I have two lakes and they are almost drying; River Kibale is drying. I was telling you women in my place, the mothers of this country, they are taking taxis to go as far as 20 kilometres away to fetch firewood; taxis! The boreholes are dry! So when you look at the major aim of this project, food security and managing natural resources.  

I want to go on record for supporting this loan, but of course as a committee and other colleagues have said, let us have some adjustments. Yes, in very many projects there are normally in built mechanisms for review. A year later they can see it and ask, “Is the project on course, is it addressing the concerns?” And they make adjustments here and there. So like capacity building, you could see more money going to production in the 36 districts, why not the whole country? Yes, because the whole country is really equally affected. 

So to me, other than giving as many reasons as to why we cannot proceed, I would rather have as many reasons why we should proceed because the situation is really very bad and as I have warned, the next war in this country is going to be on resources especially the water, especially those trees, because in Kooki all the trees are bare, they are bald like my head. People have cut trees for charcoal; people have cut trees for burning bricks. So, I want us to help this country at least for now and we help the committee, help the government and we approve this loan but with conditions.  

The other one, as the committee talked about by-laws about trees or whatever, I think government - also the hon. Prime Minister - you better come up with a community mobilization Bill to enforce all this. Because you can see the amount of time wasted in useless things; all the youths are in Kampala here dancing around; boda boda, batembeyi, you know. Why can’t we have a community mobilization Bill to help all of us leaders so that we come up and enforce some of these beautiful policies of government?  

Food security: most of these boys have left the villages and it is only the old women, our mothers, who are now feeding the whole country. Everybody is on bimeeza, on some fun things. So, I think we better come up with a community mobilization Bill to enforce the implementation of some of these government policies on sanitation, hygiene and health. Madam Speaker, I want to sincerely and strongly support that government borrows this money, but with conditions. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, honourable members, I think this matter has been spoken to for and spoken against. The members of the committee and this House have been diligent in pointing out the areas of deficiency and although some of them have not been addressed, we also have to balance the real needs of the population and I do not know whether ten years has not been too long for them to wait for resolution of this matter. Now the Prime Minister has made an undertaking, I do not know whether it has a timeframe so that we can see how to move on this matter? Does it have a timeframe, hon. Prime Minister, your undertaking for restructuring, renegotiating?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: You see, when you are dealing with timeframe, you have to deal with people who are actually dealing with the project. So, I have no hesitation in calling upon the Minister of State for Finance to indicate the time frame.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I seek your indulgence. After the month of February, which you know is a very active month for the people who speak in this Parliament, we should be able to come here by the end of the month of March to give this House an update on this matter.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: So, honourable members, that is a Government assurance from the Executive.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, we as a committee were saying that the general concept is not bad but this thing has technical problems in the implementation and the social utilization. The name sounds well, we can agree with you, but there are so many things, which are supposed to be done.  Even if you look at the donor’s comments, if you went through - which we have attached for you - they also have big reservations on the design of this project. Their attachments are there, if you look at Annex 1, they talk about absorption capacity and design. So, I would be very glad if the Executive can go back, deal with the African Development Bank and see how they are going to handle items of capacity building to shift resources to production. 

Short of that, I know very well that if the African Development Bank approves this money and it goes, it will not accept for the money to be utilized in another form apart from the one which has been agreed and that is the most important thing we must know. And it does not take long, if they talked with the African Development Bank they can seek a confirmation from them and by next week they could be back. I know that can be done.  

On NUSAF, which has come up, I agree with my colleague the vice chair. We in Parliament never looked at the development document, we have never seen the design document up to now, the implementation project, we do not know. But when they came they said, “As soon as we put this in place we shall submit to this Parliament.” It is not necessary that the World Bank has confirmed that you are doing well, but Parliament should be given this to look at. The purpose of this implementation plan is, if Parliament writes down there to check, what you approved is what they will assess you against, but that is not in place. So, we are not saying we do not want a loan, but the structure and the intended benefits will not be attained if the design is in this form.  Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: I thank you, Madam Speaker. I just want to reiterate to this House three points. One is time. I have stated before this House that time is of essence. Not only time, but also the reputation of this country as a borrower of ADB is in itself at stake. We may by the 28th of January have to lose the baby; we lose the good thing in this loan if we do not have the approval. We have also made an undertaking to do all the things that the Parliament wants us to do. This undertaking has been made by none other than the Rt hon. Prime Minister who as you know can direct and does direct members of the Cabinet to comply with directives under a certain time frame that has been set out in this House.

Having said that, I had avoided mentioning this issue but since the honourable chairman brought it up, let me just caution this House. There is a report here from the donors, a section of the donors. I do not know who sought this opinion; we in Government have a way we deal with donors. There are things that I do not want to say here about donors, this is an ADB loan, the donors are from Europe, specifically there are from DFID (Britain), the EU and Norway. This is an African Development Bank loan and I do not want to go into details, but please let us as Parliament restrain ourselves from getting involved in donor politics. I beg this House to approve our proposal.

MR NANDALA MAFABI: Madam Speaker, when this loan request was brought to us, we got information, I think the minister is saying, the information we got, which some of it is attached was illegally got to us. No, this information came through the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. If you are mentioning this, the right person should have said you never provided the information; it should have been the Ministry of Water, Lands and Environment. I get perturbed, if we have got information and we don’t utilize it; if it was confidential information it could not have been attached on this document, please.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay, I think the point has been noted. Honourable members, I would like to put the question that this House do approve the loan request for financing the Farm Income Enhancement and Forest Conservation Project.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the House is adjourned until tomorrow at 10.00 O’clock in the morning to conclude the remaining business. 

(The House rose at 6.35 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 6 January 2005 at 10.00 a.m.)












 

