Friday, 6 January 2006

Parliament met at 11.18 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I would like to thank you for coming back today to complete the outstanding business. We shall try not to keep you for very long.

11.20
MR MAURICE KAGIMU KIWANUKA (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wanted to raise an issue of business to follow. The Committee on Trade and Industry has considered a lot of business but there are two outstanding reports that we would like to be considered as soon as possible namely; the report on the petition on unfair dismissal of three former employees of the Uganda Tourist Board, and secondly, the report on the Warehouse System Bill, 2005.  

The petition, as you are aware, honourable members, is an urgent issue and we would like to save these three former employees by attending to their problems as soon as possible. Also the Warehouse System Bill has a lot of implications on agriculture, trade and the pricing of our commodities. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If the reports are ready the items will be placed on the Order Paper as business to follow.

MOTION MOVED UNDER RULE 9 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE TO 
SUSPEND THE APPLICATION OF RULE 104 SECTION (5) OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE

11.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS) (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I beg to move in accordance with Rules 9(1) and 40(d) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, 104(5), to suspend these rules to enable “The Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006” to be dealt with by Parliament expeditiously.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

AN HON. MEMBER: Seconded.

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker and honourable members. The reason for suspending these rules is that Parliament will soon, if not today, be adjourned. We are going on a long recess and this Bill should be dealt with before we go.

Secondly, I would like to thank the committee. They have worked expeditiously and the report of the committee on this Bill is ready. With those two reasons, I beg to move that we proceed with the Bill for a second reading.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I expected you to explain the gist of the Bill. Nevertheless, I put the question that this House approves the motion as moved by the minister.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS BILL, 2006

11.23
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS) (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that, “The Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006” be read a second time.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But I thought you would give the highlights?

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Speaker, thank you very much. I would like to give the highlights of this Pensions Bill. You may recall that the Constitution (Amendment) (No. 3) Act, 2005 stipulates that members of Parliament shall be paid gratuity and pension. Government consulted the Parliamentary Commission and has consequently prepared proposals for the pensions scheme and fund for members of Parliament, whose details are in the Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006.

On Wednesday, I tabled the Bill to this august House for the consideration of honourable members. The Bill carries the following salient issues that I wish to highlight: The objectives of the parliamentary pensions scheme and fund will be:

1.	To collect government and Members’ contribution.
2.	This money that will be collected will be invested to optimise the return on these contributions, so that Members can have a sustainable pensions scheme.

I would like to explain to the House the nature of this scheme. In keeping in line with the on-going overall pensions reform in the country, and in the public service in particular, the pensions scheme will be contributory. We are used to non-contributory schemes but the scheme we are proposing for the parliamentarians will be contributory, which means that it will have a defined contribution. What we are sure of are your contributions but the benefits thereafter depend on the investment of the funds.

Members of Parliament will contribute five percent and government will merge it with a ten percent contribution based on the basic salary, which is currently Shs 1,461,000 per month. That will be the pensionable emolument. 

Madam Speaker, the implementation date of this arrangement will be from the 1 July 2001 so as to take care of Members of the 7th Parliament.

The Parliamentary Commission will be responsible and accountable to Parliament for the overall management and direction of the pensions scheme. The commission will, however, appoint a board of trustees to run the day-to-day affairs of the scheme. The membership of the board of trustees is provided for in Section 17 of the Bill. 

The board of trustees will in turn be required to appoint a professional fund manager or managers, to manage and invest the contributions in the interest of the Members. The scheme will be subjected to regular reviews to determine its robustness and sustainability.  

We have provided for government guarantee in the scheme. Government will guarantee the short and medium term viability and solvency of the scheme. This will mean that government will maintain its contribution and where possible exercise the necessary audit control to ensure financial prudence, transparency and accountability of the scheme.  Madam Speaker and honourable members, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, minister. Can we hear from the Committee on Public Service and Local Government?

11.28
THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Lydia Balemezi): Madam Speaker and members of the House, I would like to present the report of the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government on the Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006.

The Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006 was read for the first time on 4 January 2006, and referred to the Sessional Committee on Public Service and Local Government for scrutiny in accordance with Rules 103 and 104 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament. The committee considered the Bill and now wishes to report its findings.

The committee considered the Bill and accepted it in principle.  

The Bill seeks to make provision for the establishment of a contributory pensions scheme for members of Parliament. 

The committee observed that: 
•	The presentation of the Bill to Parliament was long overdue.
 
•	Pegging the pensions on salary only would make the eventual pension very small, and the funds base meagre, making it liable to early exhaustion.  

•	The commencement date of 2 July 2001 will effectively lock out other Members who would have qualified by now.  

In view of the above observations, the committee recommends that: 
•	The pensionable emoluments be pegged on the total emoluments of a pensioner. 
	 
•	The effective date of commencement for pensionable service for members of Parliament be 6 July 1996. 

•	Members of staff of the Parliamentary Service who are employed on permanent and pensionable terms be brought on board to make the piece of legislation more inclusive, and to strengthen the independence of the institution.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to thank all those who assisted the committee with valuable information at the time of considering the Bill, and subject to amendments proposed by the committee and any that may arise from honourable members, the committee recommends that the Bill be enacted into law. I beg to report. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report has been presented and it has the required signatures. Can we now have your contributions?

11.34
MR HENRY MUTEBI KITYO (Mawokota County South, Mpigi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I thank the minister and the Chairperson of the Committee for bringing this overdue Bill to this House. This pension scheme for the Parliament of Uganda is actually long overdue as other parliaments already have these schemes. Our neighbours in Kenya even call it a golden handshake. When you end your term of office, you get a golden handshake of KShs 25 million and I think that is good money.  

Madam Speaker, you can see us really fighting to come back to Parliament, and to be sincere, it is because you cannot end your term of Parliament when you are rich, it is impossible. We are representing a poor society - and I am only lucky that I have had three weekends free of anybody coming to my home because I lost my primaries. The happiest person in my family now is my wife because she has stopped preparing tea for over 100 people every weekend. 

Because we are representing a poor society, they make sure that they take all the money we get from this Parliament. In Buganda here the person to respect most is your mother-in-law. But even if your mother-in-law kept money with you, I can assure you that during campaigns you would use that money without consulting her. When you lose then that becomes a very bad debt between you and her.

Therefore, members of Parliament need money at the end of their term of office. I am sure you have seen some of our friends who lost in the 6th Parliament. They are on the streets and their shoes are worn out. The same applies to Members of NRC and we do not need to mention everybody. You come to this Parliament when you are rich but you leave when you are very poor. This is because you have to support our good citizens because when you come to Parliament you become one of the senior members of society. It becomes so bad that you become destitute at the end of your tenure of serving your country. 

Furthermore, after sanity came to this country, the first Parliament was the 6th Parliament. To leave out our colleagues who served diligently in the 6th Parliament would not be fair. Likewise, including members of staff of this Parliament will actually show that we move as a team and that we are a group of persons working for this Parliament.  

Therefore, Madam Speaker, I support the Bill and recommendations and appeal to colleagues to support the recommendations as well. I thank you. 

11.38
MR JACOB OULANYAH (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and honourable members. At the beginning of November last year, I was involved in training the honourable members of the SPLM Parliament in Rumbeck and in that meeting were very senior members of Parliament from Kenya. There was a moment when we stopped to reflect on our service to our people, the independence of Parliament and how they conduct their business. 

Madam Speaker, shock would be an understatement when hon. Oloo Aringo told me what they are paid as members of Parliament. He told me in the company of the assistant clerk to Parliament that they are paid a salary of $7,000 per month, and a total of $300,000 per year for constituency development. Upon coming to Parliament, they are given an equivalent of $6,000 to buy a house in the city and $40,000 to buy a good car as a Member of Parliament.  

Madam Speaker, they are entitled to free medical service for their families and immediate dependants. You can imagine what came to my face when I told the honourable members that my salary is about $500. This is the situation we are dealing with.

Madam Speaker, the principles that are contained in this Bill have been before the House for a very long time. I remember in 2003, hon. Wacha moved a motion under Rule 97 of our Rules of Procedure to seek the permission of this Parliament to allow him to introduce the Private Members Bill and to bring the Pensions Bill. Parliament granted him that right, and on the 7th of November 2003, that Bill was duly gazetted and distributed. 

What halted it was that the process of consultation had to be undertaken with the Executive and this was done. I am glad that it has finally come. I support the recommendations of the committee especially concerning who should qualify for this fund. I think anybody who has been called a Member of Parliament should be able to qualify.

Secondly, our parliamentary service is now independent. The only link it has with public service is on recruitment, when they are consulted. However, it has no structural or institutional linkage with the Public Service Commission.  Therefore, we should be able to accommodate the staff under our own schemes so that when they finish their services here, they also are like their colleagues in the public service.

Madam Speaker, I would like honourable members to appreciate the spirit of this Bill and the principles contained therein. Furthermore, I urge the Executive that they have come this far and that they should not disappoint us at this point. I do not want to see honourable members from the front bench coming up to cite Article 93 in an attempt to block the proposals that are put forward by the committee, as that would be an act of bad faith -(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we all know that hon. Oulanyah is a respected lawyer and a very able contributor in this House. He assisted us immensely as chairman of the committee while amending the Constitution and respected constitutionalism. Is hon. Oulanyah, therefore, in order to ridicule Members of the front bench by saying that they will be quoting an article in the Constitution in bad faith, that the Article is there by virtue of bad faith and that we people on the front bench frustrate the workings of government by using or evoking Articles in the Constitution and applying them in bad faith? Is hon. Oulanyah in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Oulanyah was asking the Executive to be more sensitive, but I am sure he respects the Constitution.

MR OULANYAH: Madam Speaker, that certainly was a wise ruling and I thank you for it. I was going to conclude by urging the Executive to maintain the harmony that has existed between the front and backbench, by accepting the recommendations so that there is no need for evoking Article 93. 

I am urging Members of the front bench to accept the Bill in principle and the proposals of the committee, so that we do not have to go and argue about the details of Article 93 of the Constitution. This would assist us so that harmony is built. After all, it is only few months and we will be out of here. At least towards the end we should show that we have worked together, done things together and gone away knowing that we made a contribution to this country. Thank you.

11.44
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (Buhweju County, Bushenyi): I thank you, Madam Speaker, and I would also like to thank the committee and the minister for bringing this Bill. My contribution to this debate is on the economic point of view. One of the causes of poverty in this country is lack of savings and investable funds particularly in viable long-term projects. This problem of lack of savings perpetuates the vicious circle of poverty. 

This scheme, therefore, is one way of induced or forced savings. In my view, I am looking at this as a scheme that will in the long run help in providing funds for some long-term projects. This is because funds put into this scheme will not be utilised in the short run in which case instead of government running to donors to borrow, they can borrow from within. Therefore, I would like to urge government to start similar schemes apart from this one. 

If you borrow a leaf from National Social Security Fund, it is now one of the bodies with a lot of investable income. If we start similar schemes, we shall be able to solve the problem of lack of capital to finance some viable long term projects like electricity-generating plants, dams and long-term industries in this country. 

Secondly, when one comes to Parliament for the next five years, it is to perform a service-oriented activity. You have come to render a service to the nation and it is so bad when you render a service and you are not appreciated. I think this is one form of appreciating the services that people in this august House will have rendered this country. I have had an opportunity to look at some people who have left this House and the situation is so pathetic.  

I think this is one way of recognising our citizens who have served in this capacity, and ensuring that they continue contributing to the development of this country. This is because when your economic status lowers, you can no longer surface in the forefront to participate in the development of this country. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.47
MR WILSON MUKASA MURULI (Nakasongola County, Nakasongola): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like, like my previous colleagues who have spoken, to thank the committee and the minister for bringing this very important Bill before the House. I think for once former legislators and members of staff of Parliament are going to enjoy financial security after they have rendered their services. It is a very worthwhile Bill.  

Madam Speaker, it is needless to say that when the legislators and staff of Parliament have this financial security, this will add to the dignity of the institution of Parliament and to the dignity of the people who serve Parliament. Therefore, it is a very worthwhile, important and welcome Bill and I fully support it. 

I would also like to add my support to the recommendations of the committee. I think they are very practical, sensible and worthwhile recommendations. We should, therefore, endorse and adopt them fully without any alteration.

Madam Speaker, just one point of clarification - some legislators are of course on their way out while others who were in the 6th Parliament are already out. How is this scheme going to be applied considering the fact that they no longer have a salary? Maybe the minister will make this clear.  

Definitely this Bill has brought forth government’s concern clearly regarding legislators and employees of Parliament. I would like to add that maybe in the next Parliament, the Parliamentary Commission could take matters of financial security for members and staff of Parliament very seriously. It should also give the necessary information to members of Parliament, particularly when they have just come in. This is so that in addition to schemes like these, they can effectively invest part of their money such that when they come out of Parliament they not only depend on this pension scheme but also have some other investments or financial security to make their stay in this world a lot better.  

I fully support this Bill and urge Members to support it to the hilt. Thank you.

11.50
MRS GERTRUDE CHELANGAT KULANY (Woman Representative, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I support this Bill strongly. However, I feel that there is a group that has been omitted yet they played a very big role in the democracy of this country. The National Resistance Council (NRC) was the foundation of this democracy we are enjoying in this country. I am very disappointed that nobody has thought about them, yet during the NRC their pay was very low. It was a real sacrifice to work during the NRC and these people are still around.  I would appeal that the NRC be included in this scheme because they played a very big role. That is all I wanted to say, Madam Speaker. Thank you.

11.51
MR FRED OMACH MANDIR (Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Many people come from oblivion to pre-eminence and others from oblivion directly to eminence. However, members of Parliament have to come from somewhere respectable and on top of that they are given titles like “honourable”. Even people who come from oblivion to pre-eminence or to eminence would like to stay there. They would not like to go back to their original status of oblivion. 

It is important, therefore, that we as a Parliament effectively support this Bill. Members who have left this Parliament continue to wear the title of “honourable” but most of them to say the least do not depict that title. Therefore, this scheme is very important for the continuity of the “honourableness” of Members of this august House. 

Even when one leaves this place and now as we prepare to go for elections, there are a number of people who are prepared to ensure that they pull out Members so that they can go back to where they came from. So, it is very important that we have this pension scheme for members of Parliament whether they continue to be Members or go into something else.

Madam Speaker, the honourable minister has mentioned that this scheme will be guaranteed by government. I would like to request that this scheme, whatever funds that will come to it, should be appropriately invested to avoid any extra burden to the Government of Uganda. If the government is already going to contribute ten percent on top of the five percent that members of Parliament are going to contribute, then it is important that the liability of government should be determined ab initio.  

Madam Speaker, it has also been mentioned that there will a board of trustees. It is important for us to qualify who should be members of this board of trustees, and what their responsibility and liability is because they are the ones who are going to be entrusted with the management and investment of the funds. Therefore, any investment, which is not appropriate could land this scheme into trouble and make it collapse.

Finally, I support this Bill and I urge you also to support it. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

11.55
MR MARTIN WANDERA (Workers’ Representative): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I recognise the need for a pension scheme for members of Parliament. However, I would like to say that first of all, I do not agree with the timing because about a year ago, Cabinet sat and agreed on preparing a comprehensive Bill to cover all public officers -(Interruption)

MR KAGIMU: Madam Speaker, this honourable House has a very strict code of dressing. I wanted your guidance as to whether the honourable member on the Floor is dressed according to our code of dressing.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The honourable member informed me that he has a boil on his neck and is unable to dress properly today.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, Cabinet took a decision that there should be a comprehensive Bill to cover all public officers. Cabinet has not receded this decision and as we speak, the First Parliamentary Counsel is busy drafting a comprehensive Bill. They have not received any instruction not to proceed with it and members of Parliament, the judiciary and members of the traditional Public Service all make a contribution –(Interruption)

MAJ. RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are on record in this House for passing Bills and studies are carried out and if necessary later on these Bills are amended. Recently, we passed a Bill concerning institutions of higher learning and the minister told us that they are still studying and making a final amendment to clean up the whole Bill. 

The clarification I am seeking is whether the Member on the Floor is aware that the Public Service Ministry and the committee concerned are taking on the concerns he is raising and that later on they will be addressed. Is it wrong to pass a Bill and later on carry out studies so that they can be amended in future? Do you have to stop business and speculate?

MR MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank my colleague for giving way. I happen to have been on the committee set up by the commission to study this subject and we got a report from them. The commission had carried out research in 86 Commonwealth parliaments, and found out that every parliament had its own pension scheme except for the Parliament of Seychelles where that parliament shares the same scheme with their public service.  

The committee, therefore, recommended in tandem with the practice of other parliaments to have a separate scheme for Parliament, because the nature of service of Parliament is very different from that of the public service. Thank you.

MRS ZZIWA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I thank the Member for giving way. I want to further inform him that it is on record that the commission had actually moved ahead to give notice on this Floor that a Parliamentary Pension Scheme be presented to this House. It was as a result of the arrangements, discussions and understanding between the Parliamentary Commission and the Executive that the Executive agreed that it would be prudent to bring forth the Bill. This was for purposes of ensuring that this Bill and subsequently the Act was more coherent with the changes that are being carried out in the regular public service pension arrangement. 

I think that whilst this Bill has been brought, it does not mean that public service is not undertaking the transformation it promised for the whole service. Therefore, I think that we are in order to have this Pensions Bill brought so that we can debate and approve it. Later on public service will also bring the necessary amendments whereupon this august House will again have the obligation to deal with members of public service accordingly. 

As regards the timing, since the start of the 7th Parliament, there was an arrangement to bring this Bill to this House. Since we are coming to the end of this term, it is prudent that this and any other business, which may fall by the way side after the 7th Parliament ends be brought before this House to be dealt with accordingly. I thank you.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker and honourable members, I am not challenging the fact that members of Parliament like any other public officers deserve pension. The point I am making is that there is a general problem with the entire pension system in this country and my question is –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, I am very sorry to interrupt hon. Wandera, as he is a very good debater. However, Madam speaker, you are the one who brought this subject onto the Floor and you did so timely. You even persuaded us to come to this House so that we could finish this business. 

Therefore, is hon. Wandera in order to start suggesting that it is ill-timing to bring this motion on the Floor yet we are all anxious that we should expedite and put it behind us so that we can go to the villages and campaign? Is he in order to waste your time and that of this House by meandering away from what is necessary to be expedited?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, he is not. Hon. Wandera, the Parliament of Uganda will continue to exist and if it becomes necessary to repeal this Bill and merge it with the comprehensive one, it will be done. We cannot stop simply because we have not completed everything.

MR WANDERA: I think freedom of speech is also for those who think different from the majority in this Chamber, and I pray that people listen to me. The point I am making is that, there is a general problem with the entire pension system in this country and the question I am asking –(Interruption)

MS KABAKUMBA: Madam Speaker, a point of order was raised and you did rule. Is it in order for the honourable member to challenge your ruling by continuing with a point that you have ruled him out of order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He is out of order. Honourable member, please move to another point.

MR WANDERA: No, Madam Speaker, I have not challenged you –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, you are challenging the timing within the context of the whole economy. I have explained to you that Parliament is not expiring today. At an appropriate time, even if this Bill is passed, it can be revoked and incorporated into the comprehensive one. This should not be a bar to other laws coming here on the same matter.

MR WANDERA: Madam Speaker, I moved away from that point. The point that I am making is that why should we proceed with our own? There is a general problem, but now we are picking out our own and not dealing with concerns raised by other public officers. You are the lawmakers; you can take a decision. Equity is important. I know we are doing well, but we must also be seen to be doing well by the entire public. 

As we speak now, there are outstanding pension arrears of Ugshs 303 billion; this Parliament has failed to come out very strongly on that and the thing that we are doing is to plan for our own pension, yet for all the five years we have been getting gratuity. I think we are very unfair and we must rethink our actions, Madam Speaker. 

12.00
MRS MARGARET ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker and I want to thank the honourable minister and also I thank the committee for ably bringing this Bill before the Seventh Parliamentary Commission comes to the end. 

True you have said, Madam Speaker, that Parliament of Uganda continues. But it is also true that in a history of this country, Parliament or Members of Parliament have not had an opportunity of getting pension. And it is also true that the Constitution of Uganda, 1995, requires all Members of Parliament to be full time legislators. On that in effect makes them either retire if they were in public offices or even leave or relinquish whatever activity they will be doing. 

And the objective of the pension definitely is to care for the Members as they retire, as they age, for purposes of maintaining their social welfare. And it is true that many Members of Parliament in the current Parliament, or in the previous parliaments, have seen very serious social degenerations due to the fact that they no longer have any social upkeep in the situation. It is in that vain that the Seventh Parliamentary Commission –(Interruption)

MR WANDERA: May I know from you whether it is only Members of Parliament who after their service do not have anything to keep them living as they were when they were in service? 

MRS ZZIWA: The honourable member knows very well that there exists a pension arrangement in public service. It is true it exists. It is true that it was improved upon I think in 1992 or so, and it has not been sustainable and government is planning to have it transformed. But there has never been a scheme for Members of Parliament; that is also on record. So, that is why the Seventh Parliament planned to have a pension scheme after a comprehensive study done in the Commonwealth Parliaments. And it is only Uganda, for instance, in the East African region, which does not have a pension scheme. So, it is for that reason that the Seventh Parliamentary Commission sought it fit that we should have this opportunity. 

And I want to thank the minister because we have had very many discussions and interactions over this. And it is true the minister has ably informed both the Executive and the Seventh Commission that Executive has plans to have the public service pensions arrangement improved upon. And by us having this Bill enacted, it does not mean that that for public service should cease. Let public service proceed, after all if this deals with the Parliamentary Commission, then it will only integrate it in the main public service. So, it is for that matter that since at least Parliament did not have anything in place, let it have something in place, which will be integrated in the others.

I want to thank the committee for acknowledging that it is important to define the areas, which were relatively contentious in this Bill namely; the pensionable emoluments. It is true that pensionable emoluments would not be able to give the effects we desire in the pension scheme if they are only calculated on the basic salary.

I also thank the committee for being able to improve on it to make sure that the other emoluments are included in this package. And I thank the honourable minister for looking at that with the considerable appreciation. Because that was one of the main basic concerns within the Pension Bill, which had been initially made by the commission. 

I want also to thank the committee for acknowledging that the pensionable service should at least include the period under which the Parliament of Uganda was able to be acknowledged in a democratic arrangement under the Constitution. That is why we are looking at the period, which starts on 3 July 1996, because we know the Constitution was promulgated on 8 October 1995. And I think for all purposes we have been able to look at the pensionable emoluments of the head of state and other past leaders from that context. So, I want to thank the committee for being appreciative to the situation.

I want to assure the Members that the commission has put in a lot of interest in this area, because every other time when, for instance, one of our colleagues ceases or dies, there has been a lot of concerns put on the Floor of this House. At least within this Bill many aspects of social welfare will be dealt with either when the Member retires ordinarily or when he ceases in terms of mortal death. So, I want to assure the Members that when we pass this Bill, we shall be able at least to address partly the welfare of the Members who would be either leaving or not leaving at the material time, but were able to serve this country in this honourable manner of being a Member of Parliament. 

I want to conclude by also requesting that as we pass this law, we should not say that public servants might not have the opportunity to have their Bill presented. I wish to request the honourable minister to expeditiously bring the Bill for the whole public service so that it is dealt with. Parliament will have this Bill as other institutions like Bank of Uganda, like Makerere University, like Mulago and others do have their pension scheme arrangements. So, it will not be in isolation. I thank you and I will urge the Members to support the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think this matter has been spoken for and against. Can I ask the movers to respond?

12.15
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (PLANNING) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Madam Speaker, I just want to communicate to this House that I have instructions from the Treasury and Government to say that, we have very strong reservations on two of the recommendations that have been made by the committee:  

The first recommendation on page 2, which is that the pensionable emoluments should be pegged on the total emoluments of the pensioner.  My instructions are that the Government Treasury is to request Members to oppose this recommendation and it is not because of any other reason, but it is premised on two grounds:  One, we need to appreciate the point that hon. Martin Wandera was raising of the total obligations that the government has, not just this area, but in many other areas.

Secondly, a total emolument is in itself vague for a Member of Parliament here. A Member of Parliament gets a salary, it is applicable to everybody. The other allowances are variable; they are dependent on many other things.  Therefore, we cannot have a pension arrangement that is based absolutely on variable and shifting grounds. Anyway, Madam Speaker, my instructions are that government will oppose this amendment. Secondly –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, as I said, I had a privilege of working on this as part of a task force set up by the commission, and we looked into the issue the minister is raising. We also looked at the kind of pension that is paid to members of the public service when they retire, and we compared the kind of pension that is paid to a PS, for instance, because he is the highest officer in the public service and the pension that will be paid to a Member of Parliament. And when we computed on the basis of the Ugshs 1.1 million which a Member gets, you will get in the region of about four or maybe less than Ugshs 400,000 a month.  Whereas a permanent secretary I think is in the region of about one million plus.  

Therefore, it became necessary to come as close as to the highest public officer and even what is being presented of the total emoluments of Members of Parliament currently brings the Member of Parliament’s pension to a figure just below that one of a permanent secretary. Therefore, unless the minister believes that when a Member of Parliament leaves after getting whatever he gets right now, he should get something less than even one percent of what he is getting. That is a different matter.  But this was very carefully considered and I am surprised that the minister has not been properly briefed.

MRS ZZIWA: It is also not true, honourable minister, that the emoluments of the Member are not known, they are known and they are defined and it is a basis on which as a commission we were able to establish, which can be included within the pensionable emoluments.  

It is also true, honourable minister, that when we look at those pensionable emoluments, the Members will be contributing. It is not like you are just going to get money from government and put it there. Members are going to be contributing from their emoluments. So, if the Members feel that they should contribute both on their allowances, I can define them, because you know we sat with you in the commission because you are a member of the commission and even when you say you have instructions from the Treasury, then I become a little - because I thought that even at one time you had instructions from the Executive. So, I think that one will be your –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: I think, Madam Speaker, we have a procedural problem here. The Bill we are discussing is brought by government and not any other person, and what is defined in here is what I am referring to. And when Madam Commissioner says, “We in the commission” we do not have a commission report here. I do not have anything in this House in which the Commissioner, Margaret Zziwa, has defined, what she calls pensionable emoluments. We have a Bill here which has been brought by government; we have a committee report here, which we are looking at and I am saying that our instructions are enshrined in the Bill and it is my starting point for submission.  

May I continue, Madam Speaker, to say that my further instructions which are again set out in the Bill are that, we will not be able to support the recommendation that the effective date of commencement for the pensionable services of the MPs should be 6 July 1996.  Again it is premised on affordability. We are prepared, as indeed enshrined in the Bill, to consider MPs that became MPs as of 2 July 2001 and thereafter. 

However, we are prepared to accept the third recommendation, which includes members of staff of the parliamentary service into the pension arrangement. That is a noble recommendation, which is not only logical, equitable, but also affordable.  

Secondly, we will also be making a correction in the Bill where we will make the amendment that reflects the treatment of a Vice President as in Clause 5 of the Bill to include the Prime Minister.  This is consequential, because the Constitution in Article 108 and Article 106 as amended, makes the Prime Minister get the same treatment as the Vice President, which is enshrined in those Articles related to Article 106, which relates to the President. I just want to put this House on notice, Madam Speaker. 

MR OKUPA: Now that you are proposing to have the Prime Minister in, what is the proposed date of commencement for the Prime Minister?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: On the question of the Prime Minister, I think they are excluding him from this scheme; that is what the minister is saying. Is it not? He is being excluded from here.

12.20
THE MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. In addition to what the honourable minister has said, I would like us to consider the following issues: First, we are beneficiaries, and we are sitting here and cutting the cake according to the size of our wishes, at the same time we are being watched by the rest of the country.

MRS ZZIWA: Is the honourable minister in order to black mail this House that we are being watched when it is true that we have always been watched when we are passing the laws concerning good governance of this country, we have been watched all the time when our comrades are fallen and they lie here, their families seated here with nothing? Is it in order to be black mailed in such a way, Madam Speaker?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, we have always operated in the open, we are not doing anything stealthily.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. We are continually watched and as we talk now, we are also being watched and hon. Zziwa is watched, in the constituency is watched, everywhere. Therefore, there is a question of morality whether we like it or not, and we can sit here and decide by majority -(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Is it in order for hon. Prof. Tarsis Kabwegyere also Minister for Local Government to impute that this House is immoral when in fact the issue of social security is globally accepted and the Parliament of Uganda is the only national Parliament in the Commonwealth - If I had the opportunity to contribute to inform him that it is the only national Parliament without a pension scheme and that this proposal in the Bill is coming to this House after extensive consultations, not only with the Executive, which I believe is part, but also with consultants and even public service. 

So, is he in order to impute that we are passing a law because we are immoral; that this House does not deserve the honourable nature it has, that it is an immoral House and, therefore, passing an immoral law? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, actually honourable minister, this is a Bill from the government. So, we the Members of the House cannot become immoral for discussing a Bill brought to the House by the government. Our rules enjoin us - I am directed by the Constitution to give priority to government business and this is what I am doing.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, when I said, “There is a moral question,” I did not say it was immoral. The spontaneity of hon. Mwandha overlooks my logic.  When I said it is a moral question I did not say we are doing an immoral - [Hon. Rwamirama: “Point of Information”]- no, the government is presenting a Bill, the government is not opposed to pension, the government has said what we can afford within the economy.  

A case of Kenya has been mentioned, the so much that is given to the Members of Parliament and Tanzania and Rwanda name them all. Are they the same as Uganda? Is the economy of Uganda the same as the economy of Kenya, or are we sitting here and equating ourselves - why don’t we equate ourselves with Britain? Why are we not getting the same benefits as United States, because we are dealing with a different - [Hon. Rwamirama: “Point of information”] - please be fair and I make my remarks. The question of starting, for example, with NRC, why not start with 1961? 

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The clarification I am seeking from hon. Tarsis Kabwegyere, Minister of Local Government, Member of Parliament Igara West in Bushenyi District and Chairman Kampala University is, if you heard what hon. Mwandha said and hon. Zziwa who were privy to the discussions, that when you compute the pension scheme it will still go below under the rate of PS, and you know in our protocol Members of Parliament are above that, why is the minister so hurt that somebody who is perceived high should come closer to somebody who is perceived lower? Is there logic? What sort of logic?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the basic salary of a permanent secretary is almost twice that of a Member of Parliament. Do you know why? He or she is a permanent employee, if you want to argue –(Mr Okupa rose)-this House is a House where we are supposed to talk and people listen to each other; it is not mobism.  

The salary of a permanent secretary, the salary of the Chairman of Public Service Commission and so forth is much higher than the salary of a Member of Parliament. So, if you want to get the same percentage of pension, raise the salary of a Member of Parliament to that of a permanent secretary then you will have no problem. Is that not a logical point I am making? It is a simple point. The salary of a permanent secretary is much higher than that of a Member of Parliament so, his/her pension will be bigger. That is simple logic. Why are we comparing ourselves with a permanent secretary whose basic salary is more than twice that of a Member of Parliament? So, the cure is to raise the salary of a Member of Parliament to that of a permanent secretary.  

Let me lastly - because I am also here, I exist in history and I want to conclude –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA:  Madam Speaker, is it in order for hon. Kabwegyere Tarsis to continue to be irrelevant when he knows very well that we are not discussing raising of salaries of anybody, we are talking about pension? He continues to debate without having the recent information as if we are here to discuss salaries. Is he in order to derail the House by raising things, which are totally irrelevant? Is he really in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think he was using it just for analogy but please focus on the recommendations.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, I want to repeat that our wishes notwithstanding - I am a beneficiary to this - there are things that we must consider for history – [Mr Byanyima: “You and who?”] - me and hon. Byanyima Nathan, me and hon. Mwondha Patrick.

Madam Speaker, what government has looked at is the economy of Uganda and we have made decisions before and we have failed to implement them. I want to tell you that when we budget here and we fail to get the contributions, like we are seemingly getting shortages from our donors, we do not meet our obligations, we keep adjusting.  So, we cannot sit here as Members of Parliament and be oblivious of the economy we are running. We do not –(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: I wish to seek clarification from you, whether you have taken off time and appreciated that the pension scheme we are talking about is not going to draw money for once and at a go? It is going to be a contribution from Members over time and you will only graduate for pension when you are able to fulfil the conditions set out namely; among others, you have served for 10 years and all those 10 years you have been contributing, you have been able to qualify by the age of 45, among others. So, this one is not going to put a strain or a drain on the economy at ago.  

I think we should also appreciate that when we look at the priorities of this country, at times they become contestable, but we always look at them objectively and it is in that breath that we are looking at the issue of the pension scheme in this breath. It is really in order that this pension scheme is put in place and Members start to contribute. If we do not put it in place, they will not be able to contribute and when they are not contributing then you are not able even to meet what you would expect to make as a contribution from government.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the hon. Zziwa Margaret has referred to page 2 where the committee recommends: “The effective date of commencement for the pensionable service for Members of Parliament should be 6 July 1996”. Now, are we going to pay the contribution the Members should have made or are they going to – those who were in Parliament in 1996, are they going to contribute? So, when the honourable member says that there is not a strain on government and is supporting this proposal, I do not know whether the logic exists? So, if we are talking of contribution by Members then the effective date cannot be 1996. It means government is going to contribute to those people who never contributed to the scheme. Is that not logical, am I mad in saying this?  

So, if we are talking about contribution, if you wanted to be logical then it would be people with effect from the next Parliament who make a contribution. However, government has said we can start with 2001 because we happen to be part of that Parliament. Is that not a fair argument? So you take it back, and if you use 1996 simply because that is when you had an elected President, that would be the only logic –(Interruption)

MRS BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker.  The information I would like to provide the honourable minister is that, even this Seventh Parliament we have has not contributed anything, we are getting from government; so the same with the Sixth Parliament who did not contribute anything. And for your information, the Sixth Parliament was getting only sixty thousand per month and that is the little money we are asking for. Thank you.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, I just want to bring to the attention of Prof. Kabwegyere Tarsis that when we are looking at these things, we are looking at all the variables not one single variable. He has brought the issue of the Sixth Parliament, that government is going to pay; there is another variable that you should have served for 10 years, so those who did not come back government is not going to contribute for them, they do not qualify.  It is only those who have continued up to this time who will get the money but also who should have met the condition of 45 years. If they have not reached 45 years they cannot still get these moneys.  

So, we must look at these variables in totality unless you are looking at the power of the variable. If you are looking at the power of the variable in the model they vary, in the model of pension, what is the power, unless you tell us?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, it is a pity that the honourable minister has not taken time - and I do not blame him because he has not had the opportunity - to have some of the information, which is available on this subject.  

On the 20th of March last year, the Speaker led a high power delegation consisting of himself and his Deputy and Commissioners, and I was privileged to be part of the delegation, to meet the President and discuss this very subject. The subject was discussed at length and there were almost half the Cabinet, and I am surprised that hon. Musumba Isaac has forgotten that he was there.  

On the 23rd of March that is three days later, the Rt. hon. Prime Minister wrote a letter addressed to hon. Henry Kajura, Third Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Public Service, also addressed to the hon. Gerald Ssendaula, the then Minister of Finance Planning and Economic Development, to convey the directive of the President after that meeting. And one of the directives - and this is what I wanted to quote for hon. Kabwegyere so that he does not lose any more breath discussing matters, which have been discussed. The Prime Minister said, and I quote: “The President also directed that the pension scheme be extended to cover all from Members of the Sixth Parliament.” It is in black and white and this letter was copied to so many people. Obviously the Minister of Local Government was copied this letter, but he did not have to be copied this letter, but everybody got a copy of this letter.

Now, when you hear hon. Musumba and then hon. Kabwegyere telling this House – the President gives instructions conveyed by none other than the Prime Minister and then they come back here and bore us with a lot of irrelevance. I just do not understand –(Interruption)

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, we have brought in this House a Bill - let me remind, Madam Speaker, the procedure that is followed before government brings a Bill here.  A Bill is presented and cleared by Cabinet and the statutory Chairperson is His Excellency, the President. So, a Bill is brought here, even matters that seem to be corresponded upon are considered. It is, for example, virtually wrong to say that all people in the Sixth Parliament should be part of the scheme, it is not possible. Madam Speaker, is the honourable member in order –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable minister, I do not think it is the intention that everybody who was in the 6th Parliament should be here. No, the Members who have continued in service since the 6th Parliament are the ones who are being addressed here –(Interjections)- but it is not practicable! How can a person who has not continued to be here be part of the scheme.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Speaker, the quotation by hon. Mwandha that he met the President and the President did this and so forth, the President has met hon. Mwandha and persuaded him to be a member of the Movement and the President has not succeeded. Why would he not succeed after discussing a matter with Finance in the climate of this country and recognize that the economy cannot handle a situation.

MS KIYINGI: Madam Speaker, hon. Mwandha said that the honourable minister is boring this House with irrelevancies. Is the honourable minister, therefore, in order to continue boring us with the irrelevancies, bringing an issue, which has nothing to do with this pension scheme? Is he in order also to give the impression that this pension scheme is dependant on whether the honourable Member, who is raising the issue, has accepted to be a member of the movement or not? Is he in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think I will not make a ruling on that, please conclude.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: The government supports a pension scheme. The government has given acceptable benchmarks. The government is made of people who are beneficiaries of this scheme, and at the sometime recognising where we are in running a country. Therefore, the recommendations as given by the committee go beyond what is supportable by the evidence within the economy. Therefore, we would like to persuade Members of this House that they take the Bill as it is rather than urging the government to do what it cannot afford, demanding what the government cannot deliver. It would be a historical disaster if a scheme was put in place and then it could not be implemented.

Lastly, it is not enough to have a chorus of voices. History is here to judge the chorus whether we like it or not -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Is the honourable minister in order to insinuate that when Members debate in this House they are chorusing. Is he in order to start stating that government has what is affordable and maybe the Pension Bill, which it has brought may not sound affordable when he knows very well that all what has been brought before this House has been subjected to debate? When he knows even now having 60 ministers may not sound affordable but we do have them. Is the honourable minister in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Chorusing is part of our Rules of Procedure. So, I do not think anybody should insult the way we work. Can I ask the minister of pensions to respond?

12.50
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE (PENSIONS)(Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I wish to thank the honourable members for their contributions and also to thank the committee for their report. As my colleague from the Ministry of Finance has already stated, what we have presented is what government can afford and I am not going to repeat the instructions from the Treasury, they are clear. So, I just want to emphasize that we are not going to accept the recommendation number one and two, simply because it is not affordable and we must accept that it is not affordable. 

And also to say on the use of the basic salary, I want to inform the honourable members, Madam Speaker, that this is a standard procedure because in all our pension management we use the basic salary.

On the issue of permanent secretaries getting more pension than we shall have, I would like to inform the honourable members that government is moving away from a non-contributory pension scheme for public servants. So, at this point in time, we cannot lament on what government is already reviewing.

Secondly, the permanent secretaries by the time they get that pension, they have worked for more than 30 years. Put ourselves in the context, in this scheme we are suggesting 10 years and then retirement. For the permanent secretaries, they work for 30 years and their terms of employment do stipulate that they are permanent and pensionable.  We are just coming up with this scheme; it was not in place. (Interjections) Madam Speaker, can I be heard?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us hear the minister.

MRS MUKIIBI: It is not true and I want to say it again: it is not true that there were no arrangements for our retirement. There was an arrangement in the form of gratuity. (Interjections) Please give me time to explain.  The practice in Government is that –(Interruptions)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, the kind of information she is giving is totally unrelated to what we are doing and the minister has always gone back to this point of gratuity. The word “gratuity” comes from the word “gratitude” and this is an allowance or a payment given to somebody to appreciate the part that person has played in any given situation.  

Incidentally, in this very comprehensive study of Commonwealth Parliaments, which the commission carried out, it was found that a number of parliaments give gratuity in addition to pension and the two are not related. Therefore, the honourable minister who is supposed to be our expert on these matters when she begins to mix up gratuity and pension I shudder. Because the pension we are talking about is social security.  Therefore, Madam Speaker, is she in order to begin shooting herself in the foot when she is presenting her own Bill and mixing up issues: that there is already a pension scheme when in fact pension has nothing to do with gratuity? Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: If pension and gratuity are different, then she is out of order.

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. I wish the honourable member had allowed me to finish my sentence because I am not refuting that they are not the same, but I am just saying that the practice in government is that when you are not pensionable, we give you gratuity. When you are on contract, we give you gratuity. Even the present permanent secretaries are not on pensionable terms; they are on contractual terms and we are giving them gratuity. If you become a permanent secretary out of the private sector, you will not be pensionable, you will get gratuity.  

Madam Speaker, I just wanted to educate Members, but I am not disputing the fact that we do not have pension, but we have something in place apart from pension. Instead of pension we have gratuity. By the amendment of the Constitution, we have changed that order. That is why government is coming up with a pension scheme and it is also going to maintain the gratuity.  

Honourable members, I want us to be considerate because we are debating this Bill on the background that government has an outstanding Pensions Bill of Ugshs 300 billion.  We as legislators cannot overlook that and we in government definitely we cannot. So, we have come here with a modest legal framework to provide pension for Members of Parliament. This pension we are providing is different, it is contributory so that government or the Parliamentary Commission can come up with a pension fund. It is contributory, both members of Parliament and government are going to contribute into this fund.  

So, it is calling on taxpayers’ money because government is going to contribute 10 percent of our basic salary, and each Member of Parliament will only contribute five percent. So, when we increase the pensionable emoluments, we are increasing government’s commitment. That is why the Minister of Finance has said: “No, we are not in a position to accept these amendments.”  So, honourable members, I want to appeal to you to accept the Bill as it is. It is good that it is the beginning of the pension scheme for us.  

Madam Speaker, before we go to the committee stage, I would like to make a small correction in the Bill. It is in Section 13 - I have been advised that I move it during the committee stage. Madam Speaker, I thank my colleagues, ministers who have supported the government position and I would like to conclude by appealing to Members of Parliament to accept the Bill in the form it is because it is actually a good Bill. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MRS MWESIGYE: I have been listening attentively to the arguments and it is so obvious that recommendations 1 and 2 of the committee have very high support of this report. I am aware that these recommendations offend Article 93 of the Constitution to the extent that they are imposing a charge on the Consolidated Fund. Madam Speaker, as we move to the committee stage, these recommendations and the subsequent amendments are likely to pass. I need your guidance to the extent that what happens when Parliament knowingly passes a Bill that is ultra vires? I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I do not think that the Bill is ultra vires. In any event if we find it impracticable, we can come back and amend it. You can bring an amendment Bill later; it is not going to take effect today.  

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, the honourable Minister for Parliamentary Affairs is asking you to rule on the constitutional interpretation. The issues being raised here do have financial implications and there was a debate in this House during the Constitution amendment about Article 93. The arguments were given. So, the House appreciates why there is Article 93. Should the Members pass the provision, which is inconsistent with Article 93, what do we do? This is what she wants you to guide this House upon.  

MR MWANDHA: I think this business of Article 93 can be overstretched. This Bill is the property of this House. This House has the back bench and front bench. When we discuss issues in this House, we are discussing and persuading each other with the aim of eventually arriving an agreeable position to the House. I think we should not overstretch Article 93. The essence of Article 93 - if I can borrow the Constitution from the honourable minister, please - is in terms of a deliberate Bill or motion brought by a private Member. There is nothing in Article 93, which talks about any amendments that may be made on the Floor of the House.  

Madam Speaker, I think Article 93 is intended to gag members of Parliament from making good laws for this country on the basis that it is going to be a burden on the exchequer.  How many times are we going to be stopped from making good laws for Uganda on the basis that they conflict with Article 93, when in fact in the process of amendments we are amending and persuading each other as a House, which House includes back benchers as well as front benchers?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Speaker. This provision that is being referred to reads as follows: “Parliament shall not, unless the Bill or the motion is introduced on behalf of the Government –
(a) proceed upon a Bill, including an amendment Bill, that makes provision for any of the following….”  

Now, an amendment on a Bill moved by the minister is not an amendment bill. I think the Executive should not take us for granted. When the Constitution talks of an amendment bill, it is not referring to an amendment on a Bill brought by government. So, I think let the Executive not hide into legalities trying to take advantage, thinking that we do not understand the law.  We might not be lawyers, but some of these laws are very clear to even a layperson so long as you can understand.  So, I think the Executive should stop fooling us, trying to make Parliament appear as if we are making –[Mrs Mukiibi: ”Point of Order”]- I withdraw the word, so there is no need to make a point of order. (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: He has withdrawn the word.

DR LYOMOKI: I have already withdrawn so it is overtaken by events. So, the clarification I wanted to seek, Madam Speaker, is whether an amendment moved by a Member of Parliament on a Bill brought to this House by the Executive becomes an amendment bill. That is the clarification I wanted to seek.

MR BYANYIMA: Madam Speaker, let us be more serious. These colleagues of ours, ministers - we are of course looking at the variables, the year, age and whatever, we want a Member of Parliament who has served this country to have something modest. And I want some of our colleagues like hon. Musumba, an economist, to tell us the modest figure he would expect somebody who has served this government for 10 years as a Member of Parliament to get.  He has a paper there that makes the figure of about Ugshs 13 million at the end of five years. You do not get a pension at once; it is supposed to be running every month, you get a package so that it can keep that particular person moving. Let us not haggle about this issue. 

You know, as soon as somebody becomes a minister, he toes that particular line and fails to be realistic about issues. We have moved on so well together on the basis of give and take. I appeal to hon. Musumba and colleagues, hon. Benigna Mukiibi and Prof. Kabwegyere to tone down a bit and possibly get some time, go back to the VIP room and look at the figures first. We are not in for peanuts; you would rather take it back. We have been living without a pension, but if the pension is coming let it be a bit modest. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, I just want to clarify to my honourable colleague that when I come and make a contribution here, I do not come as hon. Musumba. Because as hon. Musumba, I was in the Sixth Parliament, I would be happy to get money as much as I can. But we have a position as government, which we bring here in our capacities, by virtue of the portfolios we hold. I just wanted to make that clarification.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But, honourable minister, what I am seeing is that the picture you have in government is that as soon as we make this law, this money becomes an immediate charge. It is not starting now!

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Speaker, the clarification I want to give to honourable members is that, the scheme we are proposing is a contributory scheme, which means that what we contribute and what government contributes is put into a fund. Then there will be fund managers who will invest that money for us so that at the end of our term, we shall get both what government we shall have contributed either through five or 10 years plus the interest, which will have accrued.  

I want you to change the attitude because after getting that lump sum when you retire then you go and invest your annuity, that is, you get another institution, which will manage your pension. If you want it per month then they will manage it.  But in this Bill we do not go that far, we create that fund, if you want a lump sum at the end of 10 years you get it and you go and do what you want with that money. So, you cannot sit here in this House and start speculating how much money you will be getting per month. I want you to change your attitude because the pension scheme we are proposing is different.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Minister, let me repeat, when we were designing this scheme in this committee, to which I was privileged to serve, we had the advice of technocrats in this field. There is no way you can design a scheme without knowing what you are going to get at the end of the day, and the accrual expert worked out all the figures to the nearest cent to come very close to what would be reasonable for a Member of Parliament who retires to get.  But, when the honourable minister stands in this House and begins to say that we should take the Bill as it is, knowing very well what the salary of a Member of Parliament is, really this is mockery to anybody who retires from this Parliament and expects to get a pension, it will be in a range of less than Ugshs 400,000. Is this what hon. Mukiibi wants to get when she leaves here, because it is based on Ugshs 1.01 million? This is not the case.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, what hon. Mwandha is saying is one side of the story, the other side of the story is that the committee is now proposing that you take the subsistence allowance, the transport allowance –(Interjection)- I am telling you what is in the report. I invite Members to read the report. You read page 1, the amendment to Clause 2: “Pensionable emoluments means the approved total monthly remuneration of a pensioner including his or her basic salary.” What is the meaning of this? They are saying monthly remuneration; now I want to know what is that? So, Madam Speaker, unless there is a clarification I can sympathise with what hon. Mwandha is saying.  But also the committee itself has made no recommendation that brings us closer. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Could the chairperson define for us what they have in mind so that we can understand?

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Speaker; the committee looked at - because in the existing Pensions Act allowances are not considered when looking at pensions, and in the Pensions Act it is stated that the pension will be worked out from the employees basic salary. In this case, when we look at the basic salary for a Member of Parliament is Ugshs 1.04 million and this would be –(Interjections)- so the committee Members looked at the other emoluments that a Member gets and this was put to government to see which other emoluments would come to considering what the Members of Parliament have been getting. What we did not want to come up here is the word “allowances” but there are others say gratuity, which we thought that since it is given to a Member during his term of office, then the other emoluments could be considered and added onto the basic salary. These are the other payments, which are paid to Members of Parliament during their term of service –(Interjection)- emoluments are the payments given to a Member of Parliament.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, if you talk about the totality you are probably talking about housing, substance, transport so, does it become unwieldy? 

MR KAKOOZA: This is my experience I know. If you talk of the basic salary and you put it with emoluments, it cannot be both; it should be one of the two. If it is specific it is on emoluments; that is okay, but when you put it on the basic salary then it is different. Emoluments are in cooperation in totality, these are gratuities –(Interjection)- no, salary is not emolument. Totality is gratuity, it is mileage, it is subsistence allowance and constituency allowance. 

MR WAMBUZI: Madam Speaker, we were in the committee and when we were discussing this and we realised that, if we passed this Bill as it is, it will be futile for somebody to travel from Koboko or Moyo to come here to collect the equivalent of that cheque. I know very many civil servants are not coming to collect the pension, which is being paid now because it is not worth it. You cannot go to collect a cheque of Ugshs 100,000 when your transport is Ugshs 250,000. Therefore, it was necessary for the ministry to agree with you, Madam Speaker, and with the House that something has got to be done. Pegging pensions on the current salary –(Interruption)

MRS MUKIIBI: Is the honourable member on the Floor in order to say that pensioners, some of whom are in this House, are not collecting their pension because it is very little yet, we have improved on the pensions, not only that we are now posting them on their bank accounts, but they are also getting them promptly and without much ado? Is he in order to say that they are not collecting their pension and yet they are getting it through the banks? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I am not familiar with how they transfer these funds.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I can appreciate the difficulties we have in this House to appreciate the emoluments of the Members of Parliament. You see, when we were discussing this subject, we realised that the Ugshs 1.04 million cannot enable a Member of Parliament to function. We have got an example, in the UK; Members of Parliament get a particular payment to enable them to live in London. Because when you are representing a constituency, say, in York, you also have to have a home in London to be able to attend to your responsibility. In Ghana, for instance, they have flats, which they give Members of Parliament to live in. The same applies to India. 

In Uganda, we do not have those facilities at all, hence the need to provide subsistence allowance. The word subsistence allowance in a way is an anomaly. Because it is intended to enable you to – when I was working in the public service, subsistence allowance was given only when you left your station to go and work for a short time and then come back. But this payment, which Members of Parliament receive, is a payment to enable them to maintain the two homes: one in their constituency and another in Kampala to enable them to discharge their responsibilities. And, therefore, it is an emolument. It is an emolument just as you get a salary. 

And it was on that basis that we recommended that the term emoluments should include that amount of money given to Members of Parliament, but which we know is intended to enable them to have a home in Kampala for the five years they are deliberating in Parliament. So that this is taken as part and parcel of their regular monthly income and, therefore, should be pensionable. So, that was the rationale. We did not say that allowances are not part of the calculations for pension. We took that one into account because of the nature of a Member of Parliament’s kind of life style that he has by Constitution to have a home in his constituency and also to have a home in Kampala so that he can – I hope the minister appreciates this. Thank you.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Speaker, for me I do appreciate the argument put by the hon. Mwandha. But the problem lies in the structure of their payments.  Therefore, for us to reach at what one can call a pensionable emolument, I think we need to define a pensionable emolument separate from what is currently obtained in the structure of the payment of MPs. And in that respect, therefore –(Interjection)- yes, so that we can agree on what is sustainable, affordable and what in our view can constitute a formula –(Mr Ruhindi rose_)- You know, when people do not allow us even to say what we want to say, and yet we have a problem with –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: I thought that what the honourable Minister of State for Finance is trying to explain, to propound can best be done at committee stage. And without wasting much time, Madam Speaker, I propose that we proceed to committee stage particularly in view of the fact that you ruled that what is being done or what is being proposed by the committee is not ultra vires. Can we proceed to committee stage?

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Speaker, in view of the developments in the House, I seek your indulgence that we adjourn for 20 minutes and make some – okay, I have been advised that I request that the House adjourns so that we can carry out further consultations on this Bill. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, as we adjourn, I want to request the honourable minister to help in the consultations she is going to make, because when she went to make the Bill, definitely there had been a Bill which had been brought by hon. Ben Wacha on behalf of the commission, and in that Bill, part of the defined concepts was pension emoluments and I wish to quote.  I do not know why; yes, because the way hon. Musumba was moving seemed like we did not have any background or prior consultations. I think it fair that we do not open up a Pandora’s box. We had a lot of discussions, even where we have had disagreements and we reached some level of understanding; let us keep the gentleman’s agreement and be able to move ahead. I wish to quote, because within the proposal –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  You have the proposal there?

MRS ZZIWA:  Yes, this is the one, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Shall we hear it; maybe it will help us.

MRS ZZIWA: It states: “Pensionable emoluments means salary plus allowances.” And it was here.

MRS BALEMEZI: Yes, Madam Speaker, I wanted to request that we come up with a compromise, because in the existing Pensions Act, we have it that “pension is paid from the basic salary or as stated otherwise.” And this “stated otherwise,” is where we wanted to put as to what that “otherwise” was and that is where the committee was looking at and in this case, maybe we look at the subsistence allowance, because the committee wanted to do away with the word “allowances.” But since in Parliament all the emoluments we get are in form of allowances, that is why we thought of talking of emoluments.  

So, this is where I would like to request that when we come to this compromise, let us look at what we would put into “otherwise” because this is a Bill or a law, which has not been in existence and we have to come up with something, which is meaningful at least to people who have been honourable members. I thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, honourable members, I think it is important that we all understand and appreciate the law we are making, so that it is clear not only to the consumers, but also to the implementers. So, let us suspend for 30 minutes.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Speaker. The consultations the Minister in Charge of Pensions is envisaging is that we must consult with Cabinet.  We cannot –(Interjections)- yes, this is a government Bill and government makes decisions through Cabinet. We cannot sit the four of us here and make a decision in the next 30 minutes. So, Madam Speaker, I would request that we adjourn sine die.

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Speaker, we still have business on the Order Paper. If the honourable minister thinks that we may not be able to proceed with the Pensions Bill, then she should not proceed to suggest that we adjourn sine die. I think she should leave it to your discretion to see how we proceed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now, honourable members, I was under the impression that the consultations are between the minister and our committee, that is how I was going to suspend for only 30 minutes.

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, in fact the honourable Minister in charge of Pensions did ask for 20 minutes; that is what we heard from here. Now, if you are saying you are going to consult with Cabinet - unless she is rescinding her decision. Do you want to rescind?

MRS MUKIIBI: I was advised to seek adjournment because we have to consult Cabinet. I did not put a time frame. Thank you, Madam Speaker.  

Madam Speaker, I want to move that the Bill be withdrawn. (Laughter) Yes, to enable us do further consultation.  Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

MR MUTEBI KITYO: Madam Speaker, is Cabinet trying to tell us that the good working relationship between the Executive and Parliament is being broken? We have been here, toast around by the Executive to do the work they want and we have been loyal. How come that now you withdraw totally, sine die, a Bill which is to the benefit of Members of Parliament? I am disturbed.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, I think the motion being moved by the honourable Minister of Pensions is being moved in very bad faith. I have to repeat what I already said because I have been part and parcel of this process having been put on this committee to work on this. During our deliberations, everybody, including the minister was involved. We could not move without consulting her and her senior technical people at all levels.

Now, it seems to me that government is doing this simply to deny the Parliament of Uganda a pension. This is the only Parliament in the Commonwealth without a pension. Our sister Parliament in Kenya has been running for decades. Our political history has not allowed us to have these benefits but this is the time for this Parliament to make history and come up with a pension. Colleagues who were once honourable members should not be paupers when they can no longer earn. 

In fact, Madam Speaker, you may recall that when we went to meet the President, he supported the idea of a pension scheme. I have read from a communication from the Prime Minister directing that this scheme should be effective from – with due respect to hon. Kabwegyere, I think he should follow parliamentary decency and not disturb anybody when he is seated. Therefore, I do not know whether this House should accept the bad faith in which the minister is moving this motion.

MRS MWESIGYE: Madam Speaker, government has brought the Pensions Bill to this House in very good faith. We have debated the Bill and government is simply saying that this is how far we can go in these circumstances. We are failing as government to agree with Members on what constitutes emoluments. The minister demanded for an adjournment so that she can consult Cabinet. Is the honourable member in order to impute bad faith on the minister, when she said she would only withdraw the Bill to consult government? We cannot pretend that we shall pay ourselves so much money when we know we cannot afford it. She asked to go and consult further so that government checks in its coffers and see how much more we can afford. Is he in order to impute on government bad faith and bad motives?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I think everybody works here in good faith and we should not impute any ill motives. I think the minister is in a difficult position.

MR MWANDHA: I accept your ruling, Madam Speaker. I did not mean to hurt the Minister of Pensions, who is my very good friend but I just –(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Madam Speaker, we remember the time when we hosted the President of South Africa, President Mbeki, President Yoweri Museveni gave a Runyankole proverb that day – unfortunately I may not be able to quote it - but when he translated it into English, it meant that it is abominable for someone to give you something and in the process of you extending your hand to receive it, the giver withdraws it. It is an abomination. 

MR MWANDHA: Madam Speaker, it is usual that consultations are carried out in this House. The minister wanted 20 minutes to consult and very often we do consultations between those who have differing views, in order to harmonise the position in the House. However, in my view, consultation does not mean withdrawal of the Bill. That is why I was tempted to say what I said, which I have apologised about. Surely, do we need the Bill withdrawn in order to consult? The Bill is a property of this House; it is up to this House to deal with the Bill the way it deems fit.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Speaker, one bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. I urge the House to pass the Bill the way the Cabinet has brought it. Members of Parliament know that most times when we travel we have serious economic implications and sometimes the civil servants travel first class. Therefore, I am appealing to members to adopt the Bill the way it is. Subsequently, we shall adjust and bring in more people who are not included now and see how to amend it. I urge members to proceed and pass the Bill.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, you have heard the eloquent presentation of the Chairperson of the Finance Committee. We have come a long way and there is almost a bird in the hand. Supposing we took it one step at a time so that we pass this and continue reviewing it? Is that acceptable to you? 

MR BAMWANGA: Madam Speaker, I concur with hon. Rwamirama’s position because members have been travelling outside Uganda to meet our neighbours in Kenya and Tanzania. Indeed, hon. Rwamirama has said that we have been travelling economy class while the Permanent Secretaries travel business class. It is not the first time and it is not going to be the last time you are disgraced. If you have been disgraced before as Members of Parliament, how won’t you be disgraced even after you have left Parliament?

I agree that the little that you can afford for these Members of Parliament who will leave Parliament is passed. In future, we would find a way of amending this Bill. We have seen former Members of Parliament and ministers in this country walking with their shoes at an angle of 45 degrees. We have seen them with dirty shirts and coats that no longer fit. If we cannot agree to change the Bill, let us support what hon. Rwamirama has just said. We shall improve it in future. I thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Honourable members, I now put the question that the Parliamentary Pensions Bill be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS BILL, 2005

1.41
Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question -(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I have an amendment to clause 1, to substitute 2005 with 2001. This is for purposes of harmonising it with the definition. 
 
MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I thank hon. Lyomoki for moving that amendment. It was a typing error and I accept the amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 1 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 1, agreed to.

Clause 2

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 2 do stand part of the Bill –(Interruption)

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to make an amendment to the definition: where we have “member” I request that we insert “and a member of staff of Parliament” between the words “Parliament” and “contributing”.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we agreed in the general debate that it is okay for the members of staff to be provided for. Therefore, I think it is a harmless amendment by the chairperson. I put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, we have more amendments to clause 2. Where there is “pensionable service means service as a member beginning from the 2nd day of July, 2001” we should insert “member of staff of Parliament” immediately after the word “member”. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, it is appropriate to include the staff of Parliament. We have already agreed that they will be part of the pension scheme. Therefore, it is not contradictory to what we have agreed. I put the question –(Interruption)

MR KIWALABYE: I also propose an amendment to clause 2, on retirement. Instead of ten continuous years of service, we should have five continuous years of service as a member. The justification is that the Constitution prescribes five years as the term of service of a Member of Parliament. After every five years, a member retires and renews his contract. Therefore, when you say ten years, it is as if we are amending the Constitution to extend the term of office of a Member of Parliament. I would like us to say “five continuous years of service as a member”, instead of ten years. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is in line with what we have agreed.

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, I should justify why we recommended ten years. Ten years is to safeguard the fund. It is some kind of disciplinary action to stop people who are still in Parliament from taking away their money from the fund. In clause 6, we take care of those who cease to be Members of Parliament after five years. However, we encourage those who are still in Parliament to leave their money in the fund until they have served a period of ten years. That was the object of this –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. There is a mix up on the concept you are using in terms of catering for Members of Parliament for this pension.

First, you are talking about 45 years and then you want to link those 45 years to ten. That means you are excluding a big section of Members of Parliament, for instance the Members of Parliament representing the youth who will never be part of this type of package. You are excluding members who come here when they were still young like hon. Otto who came here when he was 22 or 23. 

With the concept of pension, you either talk of an advanced age with a certain period or talk of the period alone so that if a person comes here with 23 years and serves for 15 years that is 38 years can be able to get pension. But you cannot say that a Member of Parliament who comes in young and serves for 15 years cannot be even able to achieve pension. You know with pension, you have to look at the – someone can be young but serves a longer period or someone who is a bit elderly serves a shorter period. These are concepts that are in pension. 

However, I can see that the way you are handling this thing leaves out certain sections of people and therefore you are marginalising the youth Members of Parliament; you are marginalising those Members of Parliament who come here when they are young and serve for a long period.  

When you talk of 45 years, it means even our colleagues who came here at the age of hon. Otto, even if they worked for 20 years they can never get pension because they will never get to 45 years. Therefore, I think this is really not being sensitive to certain groups of our population and I would, therefore, think that at a later stage, I will be able to amend – to lower the age to 40 and also to bring in the concept of some person who is young but who has worked for a longer period.

The clarification I wanted to seek, if we do not amend this retirement issue, we really have problems. When I move in clause 12 to bring my amendments - because I do not want to reach there and be told that I would have brought this amendment around the time of definition of retirement - I just want to clarify whether the concepts I have talked about I will be at liberty to bring them later on even if I do not bring them here at the time of defining retirement.

MR MWANDHA: Partly, I will respond to what the minister gave in response to the proposal to the amendment and to hon. Lyomoki. The idea of ten years is the qualification period. In fact, what the minister is saying and which hon. Kiwalabye is amending is that to qualify for pension in Parliament, you must have served ten years. He is saying that is too long. You should qualify for pension after serving five years and I think that makes sense. 

I know that the minister was arguing that, “No, we want you to continue contributing even after five years”. Of course, you will continue contributing. If a Member of Parliament has served five years and comes back to the next Parliament - for instance people have served in this Parliament for 45 years, and if they come back in the Eighth Parliament they will continue contributing to the pension. However, those who will have dropped out will qualify for pension. This is what hon. Kiwalabye is saying. 

The minister is saying, they will not qualify for pension, they will only qualify for what they will have contributed and then we say goodbye to them and I think that will be very unfair. Therefore, I want to support the proposal by hon. Kiwalabye that actually the qualification period should not be five years but ten. In fact, in the Parliament of Canada, you do not have to wait for five years to qualify for pension. Once you have done your first year in Parliament, you qualify straight away. But five years is okay; it tarries with the period of our term of office in Parliament.

Now to answer the question of hon. Lyomoki, the concept of a pension is to enable a person to continue getting some income when he is unable to earn income. The idea is that if you serve in this Parliament, and even when you have qualified for pension out there, you do not get your pension until you are 45 years. The assumption according to the experts is that up to the age of 45, you can even get alternative employment. However, from the age of 45, then we are saying you are now pensionable and you can get your pension from Parliament. Therefore, there is no contradiction with the age of 45 years.

In summary, you qualify for pension after serving a term of five years, as hon. Kiwalabye is suggesting, and when you are 45 years old that is quite reasonable.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Do you have serious objections honourable minister?

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to draw the attention of hon. Mwandha to sub-section 13 where we have catered for those who cease to be Members of Parliament after five years. In sub-section 13 about the refund of contributions -(Interjections)- but you see I would like members to understand the concept of pension and the concept of a fund. If we retire at five years, it will be a temptation for everybody after five years to ask for their money. 
 
HON. MEMBERS: No.

MRS BABA DIRI: The way I understand it, I think after five years you have saved your money for pension and when you go out, you are not refunded until you are 45 years. Is that how I understand it? Yes, that is what it is. You are not going to collect the money; you do not need any refund until you are 45 years when you come to collect your money. Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: The minister is confusing two things. There is pension payment when you have qualified for pension. The design of the minister’s Bill is that you do not qualify until after ten years. Okay! She is also saying that if you have served up to five years under Section 13, you are refunded your contribution. Okay! That is all you have, plus government contribution. 

What we are saying, Madam Chairperson, is that getting what you have contributed and what government has contributed is not as good as getting a pension because pension is the monthly payment to carry you for a period of 15 years, which is defined in this Bill. Therefore, the two things are different. I think what we shall do when we come to Section 13 is to delete the period of five years so that a Member of Parliament who leaves Parliament anytime, even before the end of five years, can get his refund. But when it comes to qualifying to be pensionable, you have to serve consecutive five years and you have to be 45 years old. Those are the two qualifications.

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Chairperson, to emphasise that, I would like to draw the attention of the honourable minister to clause 12, which is actually talking about retirement benefits. If I may be allowed to read: “Benefit shall be paid to a member who retires or ceases to be a member on or after attaining 45 years of age, subject to service as a member for a continuous period of ten years or more.” So you can see. If the term of office is five years, and now you are requiring me to have served continuously for ten years so that I qualify for my pension, how come - because there is no alternative, Madam Chairperson. 

The Constitution is there; you serve for five years and you are free to seek another mandate, but that is a fresh mandate that the life of Parliament is five years. So, if I join the scheme, I am supposed to be there for five years and at the end of it, I should be qualifying for benefits.  

MR KITYO MUTEBI: Madam Chairperson, I am a bit confused. To me this looks like a trust fund rather than a pension because when they say that after five years you get your contribution plus the contribution of government, is that the end of the pension or am I supposed to earn pension monthly as I grow old and I am unable to earn myself money? Is this a trust fund or a pension fund?

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, that is why I had asked Members of Parliament to change attitude. What we are proposing is a contributory pension scheme; what you contribute and what government contributes, plus the interest, which accrues that is what you go away with. You can buy annuities and make it monthly payments and so forth, otherwise, that is it. It is not like the ones we are having with the Public Service. So, this one is a contributory scheme. That is why we wanted the period of retirement to be ten years. 

If you get out before ten years then you get your money in a lump sum, go and see what to do with it because the period is short and the amount is small. If you want to spread it per month, then you go to the insurance institution and buy annuities for them to manage it for you considering the amount, which you will have come out with. That is the reason why we were suggesting ten years and this was a proposal by the Parliamentary Commission.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I read the mood and I would further advise members as follows: you can repair a house, which exists, but you cannot fear to build it simply because you do not have money to repair it. Therefore, my advice is that in the interest of time we should pass those amendments that we agreed upon in the committee. At an appropriate time we shall revisit this Bill and polish it.  

MR OKUPA: The title of the Bill is a contradiction.  Could the minister clarify?

MR MWANDHA: Let us talk pension language. I am very disappointed that the minister is confusing two things.  Even in the Public Service, if you worked less than ten years you would not qualify for pension and because you do not contribute, you do not get anything. You just walk away. We are saying that the qualification period for the Public Service is ten years. Now the minister is importing that period of qualification to this Bill. It simply cannot fit the nature of Parliament. That is why hon. Kiwalabye rightly proposed an amendment to the effect that the qualification period be reduced to five years. If you serve for less than five years that is when Section 13(1) applies. You simply do not qualify for pension. 

For instance, if you came to this Parliament and after two years lost a petition and walked out, you would only get what you and the government contributed. However, this is not pension. Pension is paid in old age for a given period of expected lifespan. The minister is saying, “You get your money and then decide what to do with it.” That is not pension. You are just getting back what you have contributed.  

Let us save time and accept the very reasonable proposal by hon. Kiwalabye and make five years the qualification period.  

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, in view of what hon. Mwandha is advancing, I concede. (Applause)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Thank you. Honourable members, I put the question –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, the committee had pensionable emolument definition. What should be the best? Should we follow the amendment by the committee? It has to be clear in the Hansard. Should we take the amendment by the committee?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Hon. Kakooza, when we agreed to go to Committee Stage, we had agreed to take the minimum as proposed by the minister.  

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, it is not definite because the way it is, when you read what pensionable emolument means and the amendment of the committee, it does not conform to what members have been talking about.  

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, the issue hon. Kakooza is raising has been a subject of discussion in this House. We said that instead of the extreme position of withdrawing the Bill to consult, we should pass the Bill with the provision as stated here and eventually have something as Parliament. With that, we could move to the next step.  

MR OKUPA: Madam Chairperson, it was moved by Maj. Rwamirama that we accept what the Cabinet has brought. Some of us were also holding the view of the committee. The Executive says we should accept the minimum. We did not reach a compromise on that. This is the time to reach a compromise. Therefore, allow us to move this amendment and put it to vote. We lose it or get it. That is how we arrive at a compromise. 

Therefore, I move an amendment to the definition of “pensionable emolument” by substituting the current definition with the following: “Pensionable emolument means the approved total monthly remuneration of a pensioner, including his or her basic salary.” I beg to move, Madam Chairperson.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I oppose the amendment. It is not entirely honest on the part of hon. Okupa to bring that amendment because he has been in this House during the general debate. We agreed to move to the next step of the Second Reading based on the understanding that this matter is so wide that we need to have more consultations. We agreed to pass the Bill instead of withdrawing it. I oppose this amendment on grounds of Article 93 –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, could I improve what he is saying? According to the definition here, if you say we take the Bill as it is, I do not understand. I am saying if it is pensionable emolument means basic salary, we should include only what the Act allows. Instead of the word “excluding”, we would take just two words to be the definition of pensionable emolument, “including subsistence and gratuity,” which has meaning. When you say it excludes allowances and excludes subsistence - which hon. Gagawala supported - you cannot come all the way from Moroto to pick Shs 100,000.

MRS MWESIGYE: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. We have already discussed that issue and agreed. Is it in order for honourable members, who perhaps at that point were out of this House, to take us back?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, the matter being raised by hon. Kakooza is the matter over which we agreed. Instead of throwing away the entire Bill we agreed to take the minimum and in future have an opportunity to review it. That is how we agreed to move to the Committee Stage. 

MR MUKASA MURULI: Madam Chairperson, we are men and women of honour and integrity. You remember we had decided to go but changed our minds when hon. Rwamirama said, “A bird in the hand is better than two in the bush, let us get back here and pass this Bill the way it is.” We already have some other good amendments, which have come along the way. Therefore, let us not deviate from what we agreed on in the beginning. 

Let us leave this question of gratuity and allowances. We should pass it as it is because after all, even some of the beneficiaries of this sometimes do not have gratuity. We are talking about workers who have been included here and do not have subsistence. Let us stick to our word, which made us stay here this afternoon. Let us not complicate things, honourable members.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, we also agreed with our front benchers that we should take on amendments as proposed by the committee. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, we were due to put the question on the amendment by hon. Kiwalabye. Therefore, I now put the question that clause 2 be amended as proposed by hon. Kiwalabye.

(Question put and agreed to.)

 Clause 2, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 3

MR MWANDHA: Maybe the drafters of the law will put things right. Originally this Bill did not envisage members of staff being part of the scheme and I would like to suggest that when the Bill is re-drafted by the Parliamentary Council, wherever there is “member” they will also remember that this includes a member of staff.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that should be in the Hansard.  

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I suggest that we delete the word “both” on clause 4(2).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us finish with clause 3 first.

MRS BALEMEZI: Yes, we should add at the end of the last paragraph “or is a member of staff of Parliament” so that it reads: “This Act shall apply to any person who on the date of commencement of this Act was a Member of Parliament whether as an elected member or an ex-official member or is a member of staff of Parliament.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let us say that wherever the provision for a Member of Parliament is we should also add the members of staff. 

MS AMAJO: Madam Chairperson, clause 3 SAYS, “The Act shall apply to any person who on the date of commencement of this Act - that date is 2nd July 2001 – but there are members in this House who were not able to be here on that very date. They came slightly later -(Interjections)- but that is not what the clause is saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: You would like to remove the word “commencement” and just say any person who was a member?

MS AMAJO: When you are counting ten years when do you start? If example I came in September/October because the district was not there, am I covered under this, it is not clear.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Or should we add the words “who subsequently became a member”. The honorable member is worried that she was not here in 2001, so how does she fit in?

AN HON. MEMBER: Under 5 she is covered.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, when we say commencement of this Act and we say the Act commences in July 2001 that means that everybody who came board after July is deemed to be covered.

MR MWANDHA: I think the concern of the honorable member can be covered under 5(3) because 5(3) says: “All members of the Seventh Parliament shall on the date of commencement of this Act be deemed to have joined the scheme.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Supposing we say, “This Act shall apply to any person who on the date of enactment of this Act …” because we are enacting now. Will that be more current on the date of enactment because enactment is now?

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson we had a problem with this date of commencement and I think we need the advice of the First Parliamentary Council.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So we defer this particular part?

MRS MUKIIBI: I think so.

MR KUBEKETERYA: Madam Chairperson, when you look at 5(3) it is very clear it says all Members of the Seventh Parliament shall on the day of commencement of this Act be deemed to have joined the scheme. So that interest is covered so clearly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, no, it is covered under 5(3).

Clause 3, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to put an amendment to clause 4(2), for the first line to read: “The scheme shall be a contributory scheme under which Members of Parliament - we should delete ‘both’ - under which Members of Parliament - and we add ‘and members of staff’ - and the Government shall make a contribution to the fund in accordance with Section 6. That is, we are deleting the word “both” on the first line and between Parliament and the word “and” appearing on the second line, we add the expression “members of staff”.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Because they more than two now; is it not?

MRS MUKIIBI: They are not both they are more than both, so that it reads: “The scheme shall be a contributory scheme under which Members of Parliament, members of staff and the Government shall make contributions to the fund in accordance with Section 6.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: That is okay, because they are more than two now. I put the question that clause 4(2) be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 5

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, I have an amendment to clause 5, to include the Prime Minister. After the Vice-President we should also include the Prime Minister so that the section reads as follows: “Membership of the scheme shall consist of all Members of Parliament and members of staff of Parliament, Members of Parliament whether elected or ex-official except that any member who is also the Vice-President or a Prime Minister shall not be a member of the scheme because the Prime Minister is also going to be catered for elsewhere.”  

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I need to make an amendment to clause 5(1) the first line to read that: “Membership of the scheme shall consist of members of staff of Parliament and all Members of Parliament whether elected or ex-official except that of any member who is also a Vice President and Prime Minister shall not be a member of the scheme.” The first line we are inserting “Members of staff of Parliament –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think we had said that wherever the words “Members of Parliament” appear we shall sequentially add the words “members of staff” and it would be taken care of during the drafting.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 5, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 6

MR KAKOOZA: Madam Chairperson, on contribution scheme since we have agreed with the government also when you go to the percentage of contribution and with a definite figure we get I want to be here practical that the net income of an MP on the basic salary they are talking about, five percent contributory is about Shs 50,000; and government is contributing Shs 100,000. 

I wanted to amend by raising the percentage so that the worries of the members are addressed. It should be raised to a certain percentage depending on our basic salary, to read as follows: “There shall be the deduction from each monthly payment of the pension emolument as we have agreed to a member, a sum calculated at the rate of … for a member to contribute 15 percent on a net income, that is about Shs 150,000 and then pension of emolument.” 

“Then government’s contribution to the scheme shall be calculated at the rate of 30 percent so that we get 330.” The total amount becomes to 480 then we get a substantial amount so that the other worries are eliminated, which we had because we have agreed on the basic salary. Thank you. I beg to move.

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, I stand to oppose the amendment for the reasons, which have been advanced before that we have agreed that we should not increase government commitment in this Bill. When you do that you are proposing an increase in government contribution, which is against the Constitution. We have agreed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What I heard from the honourable member is that there were two legs with that proposal. There was one that members themselves raised additional five percent and contributed ten percent that the members themselves raised an additional five percent, and then there was the second one that the Government contribution also increases. So, if members are –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: I want to give more information to explain better so that it can go to them. If you go to the net salary, that is 1.1 -(Interjection)- emoluments, which we have described here, ten percent is Shs 100,000; the contribution of government. For a member it is five percent of one net; Shs 1 million is Shs 50,000. The contribution from members should increase to 15 percent and also government goes to 30, so that the whole amount of contributory is 330, so a member contributes 150 on the basic salary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think that is what I was explaining to the minister that there were two legs with that proposal, the one that the members increase their contribution and the other that the government increases. That is what we need to address now.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chair, the members are free to examine their own contribution, the quantum of their contribution. But when it comes to the government’s contribution, I am under strict instructions to plead with this House not to affect what government can afford to contribute. 

MR OCHIENG: Madam Chair, it is now very clear that government is not really serious with this thing. This element that we are trying to push an extra mile for seems to be futile because other members here are trying to say that we should go by the Bill the way it is and then later on we will amend. You cannot do anything in this Parliament unless you have been given a certificate under Article 93. It is government that is saying no, you take this or withdraw. We will be basically wasting our time here. I think government should take this very seriously. A Member of Parliament is a Member of Parliament. We have gone through all the difficulties. We have accepted all the Government pleas but we are saying after all the service that you have rendered here, what comes out? 

We are talking about Shs 150,000. Some headmasters now get pensions close to Shs 400,000 per month, a headmaster. How can you tell a Member of Parliament to get Shs 120,000 a month, a Member of Parliament? Are we not seen to be doing some work here in this Parliament? I think government should be serious. Otherwise, we are wasting time and I would like to plead with Members of Parliament that this thing is in our hands now. The reasoning that Government is trying to advance that let us allow it and then we will amend later, you cannot amend anything, not even a Private Members Bill without the consent of this government and government must be serious now instead of taking us round and round. Thank you, Madam Chairperson.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chair, we are talking of a principle. We are trying to pass a principle and the calculations will come later -(Interjections)- the point I am making is that we see that the salary is now 1.4 and by the way, the calculation of 10 percent is not on the net; it is on the gross. Wait, I am giving information, so can I –(Interruption) 

MR KAKOOZA: Can I give him information, Madam?

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Wait, I am giving information –(Interruption)

MR KAKOOZA: No, can I give information because he is misleading the House.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Let him finish.

MR KAKOOZA: That is gross; it is not net income –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Secondly, the salary of members of Parliament is not fixed here and forever. Therefore, to use the figure of the current salary is actually exiting our emotions more than helping us to get through the principle. Let us get the principle. The salary will change. 

MR KAKOOZA: Can I give information, Madam Chairperson? If the economy is today being inflated from five, we are going to seven percent. What do you expect in the next five years, how will that amount you are talking about be? It will be peanuts. If we passed the principle as a basic salary, the net income of a Member of Parliament is 1.1, which you take home. So when you use 10 percent, you get just Shs 11,000. A member should contribute Shs 150,000, we take it as a principle here, we increase it to 15 percent and also government increases to 30 percent, any basic salary would have been determined by then.

MR MURULI MUKASA: Madam Chair, I would like to appeal once again to members –(Interjections)- yes, we are passing this Bill but this does not mean that when we pass it, it will not be subject to amendment later on. Yes, by the Parliament, Parliament is not going to go away nor will government go away. Come 20, 30 years, Parliament will be here and government will be here. Definitely, when conditions change, honourable members –(Interruption)

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, our rules are very clear that when we are legislating, we should not anticipate making a law in future. Is it in order for a senior member of this House, the hon. Mukasa Muruli, whom I respect a great deal, to violate that very clear and simple rule by anticipating a Bill or a law in future? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, we do not legislate in anticipation. You know, we are looking at two things: we are talking about the contribution by the members and one member is proposing that we increase the contribution to 15 for the members but what about for Government?
MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The proposal of ten percent by government and five percent by the Members of Parliament is standard. That is the formula we are using in NSSF and it is the formula we intend to use in the Public Service Pension Reform. So I want to urge honourable members to accept this standard practice. 

MR TIBARIMBASA: Madam Chairperson, is it in order for the minister to tell lies to the House that the ten percent is standard, when the government gives Makerere University 20 percent? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I do not have the information about that. 

MR KAKOOZA: The law of income, which we use in this country, indicates that the highest is 30 percent on the next income you get from government.

DR LYOMOKI: I thank you, Madam Chairperson. The procedure of this House is very clear that when an amendment is proposed, we debate it and after we move ahead. I see no reason why we are causing unnecessary stalemates. If for instance an issue is raised and the Cabinet is not accepting, I think what we have to do is to move ahead and vote on it. If it passes, it passes, if it fails, it fails. So there is no need for the Cabinet to continue causing a stalemate. The point that was raised earlier, saying that any amendment to increase certain costs is against the constitution, I think at the beginning we made it clear that the provision of the Constitution talks about an amendment Bill and not an amendment to a Bill.  

I suggest that we proceed normally. If there are certain things that the frontbench is not accepting, we vote on it and proceed, whether it is lost or passed, instead of causing unnecessary stalemates. If we move like this, we shall end up in the earlier stalemate because the amendment that is being proposed is just bringing a very small amount of money compared to the earlier one, which was bringing in a whole package of emoluments, a total of about Shs 5 million. 

This amendment is just bringing a small addition. I see no reason why we should really cause unnecessary stalemates when we the Back Bench accepted to drop the idea of bring on board all the other big allowances. Now we are saying, in the same spirit, can’t they also just increase something, which is not going to be much compared to what we dropped? Let there be good will and let us proceed, instead of causing unnecessary amendments. Thank you, Madam Chairperson. 

MRS BYAMUKAMA: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I would like to seek your guidance as to whether the reluctance of government to increase its percentage should hinder our willingness to increase our percentage to 15 percent; because we are the Back Benches and in accordance to what hon. James Kakooza has said, I think it makes sense for us to increase ours to 15 percent and then if government so wishes, it should increase but if it does not, then that should not stop us. I would like to seek your guidance as to whether we can do this?  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But our side is voluntary.  If we want to increase it, let us increase our own contribution. If we are willing to pay more every month, I do not see the problem. If the owners of the salary are prepared to pay more every month, there is no problem. 

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, I am only raising to agree with that ruling, which you have made - or guidance. As Members of Parliament, relating to our emoluments we can adjust our percentage to the levels that we think are affordable to us as Members of Parliament.  

The Government, however, can only put a rate that it can live with and that is what is here. But also, hon. Kakooza has kind of misguided this House. The pensionable emoluments we have agreed on will be based on the basic salary; that is what the law says. It does not demand net of tax; it is on the basic salary as in your instrument of appointment. 

MR KABAREEBE: Thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. I am seeking clarification from the Minister of State for Finance. When he says that this Parliament should not have the capacity to talk about the percentage as proposed by government in a Government Bill, I believe this is not a Private Member’s Bill or motion, this is a Bill brought by government to be harmonized by this Parliament. What Article 93 of the Constitution talks about is a Bill in general but not an amendment. 

Because when the minister says that he is under strict instructions, first of all, strict instructions by whom? They do not know what is even happening in this House. Who instructed them? They are not allowed to talk on phone in the House and I did not see him go out to consult. Madam Chairperson, let these few ministers who are here help us. We do not want to be seen to be against government or to argue with government in terms of money. 

This is something very simple, only 30 percent increases by a certain amount of money, both contributions by Parliamentarians and government is far less than Shs 500,000. And when you see a minister resisting very seriously, as hon. Musumba is doing, he makes me think otherwise. Why did hon. Musumba get all the money, which is confident that he does not even want the Shs 500,000, which we are battling to get?  

I am trying to convince hon. Musumba, with your colleagues, please accept this small amendment and let us go with that. I do not want to begin wondering about how hon. Musumba got all the money that he does not want all the Shs 500,000 per month. I thank you very much, Madam Chairperson. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to put the question. 

MR MWANDHA: As you put the question, maybe let us make a last attempt to make the matter very clear for hon. Musumba. You see hon. Musumba is treating this House as if it were a court. He keeps on saying, “I have strict instructions, I have strict instructions,” as if –(Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chair, when the name Musumba is mentioned as if it is a personal label, is the honourable member in order to ignore that there is what is called collective responsibility in government and that a decision that is made must correspond with the Constitution? Is the honourable member, therefore, in order to seem to think that it is the position of hon. Musumba as an individual when in fact hon. Musumba is part and parcel of the Government, which is provided in the Constitution and guided by the Constitution?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, honourable members, I did talk about this matter when we were discussing the Budget because the same things were being said and I did say that the members on the Front Bench are speaking for the Government and it is not a matter that should be personalized.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, I withdraw the remarks I made in respect to naming the honourable minister in his person, but the point I wanted to make is this. If you make a very simple calculation based on what we get today, Shs 1.4 million, if you take 10 percent of 1.4, you get Shs 140,000.  

Five percent of that is Shs 70,000. Shs 70,000 plus Shs 140,000 is Shs 210,000. Members cannot understand what kind of pension a member will get, when you are actually basing on this very miserable figure of Shs 210,000 and what hon. Kakooza is saying is that since we have agreed that we shall not amend clause 2 to define that pensionable emoluments include all these other things that would raise the figure. For instance, if you took the average amount of say Shs 5 million and saved 10 percent of Shs 5 million; that is Shs 500,000.  

Five percent or Shs 5 million will be Shs 250,000. Shs 500,000 plus Shs 250,000, the total contribution would be Shs 750,000. When you compare Shs 210,000 to Shs 750,000, you see that a member will get a miserable sum in terms of pension. So hon. Kakooza is saying that since we have agreed on not amending clause 2, in order to beef up the pensionable emoluments, let us as Members of Parliament increase ours and in the same phase government also increases - we are talking about taxpayers’ money - so that at least by the end of the day there is a reasonable amount. By the way it does not even get Shs 750,000. It is only Shs 420,000 and I thought that this is a reasonable amendment.  

Therefore, I would like once again, having made it so clear in terms of figures, to call upon the ministers to be with us. By the way, the ministers must remember that today you are at the Front Bench but you never know when you will go to the Back Bench. So you do not stay at the Front Bench forever and some of these things catch up with you. So, Madam Chairperson, I would like to call upon the minister to accept.

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, hon. Mwandha has made a very passionate appeal. He has presented a persuasive case on the side of the recipients but let us look at the supply side. If you look at the supply side, you realize that in the Parliament that we are going to have, in the Eighth Parliament, because this law is for now and for the future; in the Eighth Parliament alone we are going to have more MP’s than we have today, because we have created more districts. On the supply side, we still have constraints. The Bill for this Parliament is going to go higher. If it was a question of just leaving it to us - because we members of the Front Bench have been reminded that tomorrow we will be members of the Back Bench, and after we shall be on the streets. That maybe true. 

So, if it was left to us as individuals, we would probably be writing here 60 percent, 70 percent, government contribution, why not? But that is not the case, Madam Chairperson. We have an obligation to this country and we are only trying to ensure that we strike a balance. The Members of Parliament can increase their portion. 

I propose that within the law, we support the Members of Parliament, and that is where I also belong, to increase our portion as Members of Parliament. However, as we continue to pay gratuity and have bigger numbers in this Parliament and now, we have added on the staff, the Bill is definitely going to go higher. I believe that we should - I can assure you that next year or in a few months when the next Parliament is considering its own emoluments for salary some of these issues maybe taken into considerations. But now I oppose any attempt to affect the Bill we have here. I thank you.

MAJ. (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Madam Chairperson, under normal circumstances I would have expected the Minister of Finance to give the proposal a thought because if you are getting money from members, which they are contributing for five, ten years, you are actually borrowing from the public. So you should also appreciate that for members to increase their contribution, they are giving you breathing space and you can utilize that money. You know, you do not disburse it. The idea is that you are not going to disburse it immediately for five years. So I would like the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public Service to consider that because it is really simple.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to put the question. I put the question that clause 6(i) and (ii) be amended as proposed by hon. Kakooza.

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Much as we want to vote, I wish members could acknowledge that even us the ministers are in the same category as the other Members of Parliament. We are Members of Parliament; we are going to vote together on our contribution –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. Policy formulation entails that Cabinet brings a law here, members debate on it and vote on it. When we change it, it does not mean that even the minister has voted against it. When a minister brings a Bill here, he or she is not personalising it; it is in the realm of public domain. You are a minister on the Front Bench and we are Members of Parliament at the Back Bench and we must work together. 

So, is it in order for the member holding the Floor to start personalising the debate by saying that we are going to vote and the Members of the Front Bench are also Members of Parliament, therefore, they must – is it in order for the honourable member to start personalising this debate when we are here on the serious duty of passing the law for this nation?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable Members, you know that we are here in partnership. Let us try to work in a cohesive manner over this matter.

MRS MUKIIBI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. The point I am trying to make is that the Constitution is very clear. Article 93 is very clear; hon. Lyomoki Sam knows that, hon. Mwandha James and everybody else knows that and the Article even says that amendments on motions must not create a change in terms of increasing the charge on the Consolidated Fund. So I would like to submit that whereas we can increase our own contribution as MPs, we cannot increase government’s contribution on this Floor –(Interruption)

DR LYOMOKI: Point of order, Madam Chairperson –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I want to remind all of us that the legislative process does not end when we pass this Bill. The consultations continue; there is the assent stage. If the Government feels that it is not satisfied, they will come back here with this Bill.  

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chairperson, other than travelling that road, may I request that we stand over –(Interjection)– allow me! Other than travelling that -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, he is making a proposal.

MR MUSUMBA: I stand up in a spirit of accommodation, and I am trying to find a soft landing for all of us, for the Government and the Parliament, which is moving the amendment. I am saying that is it possible to stand over this particular provision so that we can come with a harmonised position? I can appreciate the point that is being made by the mover of the amendment, just like I would want him to appreciate the point that the Government is making and there is room to meet at some level. That is why I am asking that if it pleases you, Madam Chairperson, we stand over (i) and (ii) and the House can pronounce itself later when we get a harmonised position. It is my prayer.  

MR MWANDHA: Since the minister is so rigid, I want to persuade my colleagues in this House that we increase ours and leave government’s contribution to where they want it.

MRS KASULE: Madam Chairperson, I want to remind my colleagues that at the beginning of all these issues, the front bench was not in for this idea and when it came to voting, amendments had to be made to persuade the Front Bench to accept it. So, honourable colleagues, as we talk about this issue, this is the gist of this matter. Why do we stay over it, for what reason? We should bear it in mind that they did not want it in the beginning and this is the gist of the matter. Saying that we stand over it is as good as saying that they carry back their Bill. So, if they are willing to carry back their Bill, like they did on the Domestic Relations Bill, let them do it because this is the gist of the matter. Stand over it and then do what, what will we have passed minus that?

I want to request the ministers not to interfere with your proceedings, when you want to put a question, please go ahead and put the question, we vote and go.

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, hon. Kasule Lumumba has not been with us since we started and we have agreed that we do not increase government’s commitment in this Bill. Otherwise, the way we are moving, we are back to square one and I think I want to bring my motion that we withdraw the Bill and do further consultations because we are back to square one.

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, we have invested so much time in this Bill. We have sat here, it is long after lunch time and we cannot be put against a wall and intimidated each time we make a proposal and the Minister for Pensions threatens to withdraw the Bill. I withdrew a statement I made here that these people are not bringing this law in good faith; I had to withdraw it because I was under pressure but honestly, how can we get to this level and the Minister of Pensions once again intimidates the House by saying that she wants to withdraw the Bill? Is she in order to continue intimidating us with withdrawing the Bill each time we make an amendment?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I have already indicated to you that the legislative process is not concluding with the completion of this Bill. The consultations continue right up to the assent stage. Let us complete this Bill and let it move through the normal way, for further consultations. If the state finds that it is not able to implement it, they will bring it back. Let us give them what we think –(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Madam Chair, I am seeking guidance from the Chair. Judging from what I heard when you said that we should pass and then reconsider afterwards, when government has been very clear, what are we then doing?

MR MUSUMBA: Madam Chair, let me retaliate government’s position. We shall not be party to this illegality. We want this position to be put in the Hansard that under Article 93, someone cannot just stand -(Interruption)

MRS KASULE: Madam Chair, is the honourable minister in order to say that they will not be party to this illegality, when you are ably chairing this committee stage, with your good guidance; for him to say that he will not be party to this illegality, are you misleading this House, when you sit in that Chair to give us your guidance? Is he in order to impute that your work is just misleading this House, to make the Front Bench do illegal things?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: No, he is out of order.

MR MUSUMBA: Thank you, Madam Chair. If the term “illegality” is offensive, I –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Obviously it is offensive.

MR MUSUMBA: I withdraw the term “illegality.” I have withdrawn the term “illegality,” and this information, Madam, is to you and through you to hon. Zziwa. The point I want to make is that under -(Interruption)

MRS ZZIWA: Madam Chair, can I beg that the House do resume?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: There is a motion for the House to resume.

MR MWANDHA: Can I seek your guidance, Madam Chairperson, before the honourable lady calls upon the House to resume? Are we saying that at this material time, having invested all this time in trying to discuss this Bill that we are accepting the intimidation given to this House by the minister and, therefore, we should withdraw and the Seventh Parliament will have no law to introduce on pension at the end of the day? I see what is happening we are going to go back to the House. These people are going to withdraw the Bill and that will be the end of the matter. Why should we sit here all these hours only to be intimidated each time we say something, and we accept the intimidation that they are not going to be party to this, and that this thing is illegal? Are we really going to bring ourselves to this level of intimidation? I need your guidance.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Honourable members, I would like to convince the Government that we continue with the process of consultation based on what we are going to pass. The Government has an opportunity to reject and return the Bill to this House for consideration. It has been done under the Land Act; it has been done under any other laws. So, why do we not move and if there a point of disagreement, it will come back to this House? (Applause)  So I put the question that clause 6 be amended as proposed by hon. Kakooza.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 6, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 7

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 7 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, agreed to.

Clause 8

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 8 stands part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 9 stands part of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, agreed to.

Clause 10

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I would like to move an amendment to clause 10, on the second line, so that where it reads that “it shall be paid into the fund”, the head note is amended by substituting for the words, “paid into,” with “paid to”.  Then the sentence will read that: “Contributions deducted from member’s emoluments and Government contributions under Section 6, shall be paid to the fund,” not into.  

We are deleting the words, “paid into;” we are crossing out “paid into.” I repeat, Madam Chairperson, the sentence should read: “Contributions deducted from member’s emoluments and government contribution under Section 6 shall be paid to the fund.” I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON:  Okay, I put the question that clause 10 be amended as proposed by the chairperson.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 11

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 11 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, agreed to.

Clause 12

DR LYOMOKI: Consequential amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: To clause 12?

DR LYOMOKI: Yes, clause 12 in sub-clause (1)(10), substitute the word, “ten” appearing at the end of the sentence, with “five”. And this is a consequential amendment because we have already handled it in the definition.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay I put the question that clause 12 be amended as proposed by hon. Lyomoki.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 12, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 13
.
DR LYOMOKI: Two amendments, Madam Chair. The first one is consequential first of all to change “ten” to “five,” because now the concept is five years. But the other amendment is to substitute the word “and” appearing in the second line in clause 13(1), with “or”, and the purpose of this amendment is to cater for all. Because if you look at 12, we are talking of someone who is 45 years and above and he has served for at least five years. 

When it comes to the refund in clause 13, the current phrasing is talking about someone who is less than 45 years and has served less than five years. But we have categories of people who will be less than 45 years but have served more than five years. If we leave it in this current formulation, we shall not be catering for those who are less than 45 years but have served more than ten years and I think I fall in that category. 

Supposing I cease being a Member of Parliament now, I have been here for ten years but it will mean I cannot even be refunded and yet I cannot even qualify in 12. So, when we put “or” it caters for all groups. Otherwise, if we just put the word “and” then we are excluding a certain category, which will really be so unfair. It means that one category cannot even benefit. 

If someone is less than 45 years and has served for less than five years, he benefits but that one of less than 45 years but has served more than fives years cannot benefit even from the refund. So it means that you are leaving out a certain category. I think that you substitute the word “or”. You remove “and” and substitute it with “or” so that it caters for all to read: “Those who are 45 or have served less than five years ….”  I beg to move.

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, This clause was to cater for those who are under 45 years and have served for less than ten years and since we have already amended the ten years to five - in fact I was finding this clause redundant. I propose to delete the part, which was not referring to 45 years. It would read: “A member who retires or ceases to be a member whose age is less than 45 years and had less than ten years of pensionable service”. I beg that we stand over this and I consult my technocrats because of the amendment we have done above.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay.

MR MWANDHA: But let me explain, Madam Chairperson.  Under 13(1), we are talking about who does not qualify for pension on account that he has served for less than five years, and to me the question of age does not arise. If you serve this Parliament for less than five years, it means you have not qualified for pension and, therefore, you are entitled to the refund of your contribution and the contribution of government, whether you have served for two years, three years or four years. So, whether you are 45 or less, this should not arise. Therefore, the question of 45 here is redundant. 

Probably the minister may be correct by saying that we may have to redraft that one and may be either delete it or put it together with sub-section (2) by bringing in the element of contribution by government and the person concerned. But I think what we need to do here is to simply delete the question of age. Time is okay; five years is okay.  We only delete the question of age.

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to propose that we pass this since we have recommended that the Bill will go back to the Executive and the committee for consequential amendment.

MR BADDA: I am seeking your guidance, Madam Chairperson. I remember we have already passed clause 2, which really gives way for these 45 years. Right now the life expectancy of a Ugandan is 45 years and you are aware that one of the qualifications to enter this Parliament is 18 years. I envisage a situation where a member comes here at the age of 18. He serves here for two terms, that is approximately ten years or five, then he has to wait from 28 up to 45 years when he is almost nearing expiry! I would really request, if you could assist me negotiate with colleagues here, that we bring this to 40 not 45.

MRS ZZIWA: I appreciate that the honourable minister is consulting but I think if you read that clause and according to what hon. Mwandha has said, really if we just delete the 45 years and then we leave five years as we had already accepted, then I think this clause can be redrafted to exactly reflect what the meaning is intended to be. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you are proposing we delete the 45 and then where there is ten we insert five and then the drafts people will redraft this and we adopt the clause?

MR MWANDHA: Madam Chairperson, we shall delete the words “whose age is less than 45” and also delete “ten” and replace it with “five”. Therefore, it will read as follows: “A member who retires or ceases to be a member and has had less than five years of pensionable service shall be entitled to a refund of the member’s contribution together with a contribution made by government on his or her behalf calculated with interest”. That will make No.2 redundant, so we shall delete No.2.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, clause 2 is catering for someone who leaves Parliament before the attainment of – there is a difference because under section 1 we are giving that member a government contribution. Under clause 2 we are denying that member government contribution. So, there is a difference. We should retain the two because they are slightly different.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: What about the age? 

MRS MUKIIBI: It can arise when someone maybe has ceased to be a Member of Parliament under any circumstances, maybe he does not qualify, and maybe the court has ruled. That is where clause 2 applies; it is a penalty. So, it is not the same. This No. 2 should be retained. Clause 1 should be amended according to hon. Lyomoki’s amendment. We have agreed.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: It was on the age where we wanted to remove the 45 and insert 40.

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, can you request hon. Lyomoki to move his amendment, please?

DR LYOMOKI: Thank you, Madam Chairperson. I move that we substitute the word “and” appearing on the second line of clause 13(1) with “or”. I beg to move.

MR BAKKABULINDI: I am seeking some clarification.  Much as I am a bit convinced by hon. Lyomoki’s contribution, my problem is that it will now sound as if it is not a pension but just a contributory fund –[Hon. Members: “No.”]- That being the case, then I support him.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 13(1) be amended as proposed by hon. Lyomoki.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 14

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 14 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, agreed to.

Clause 15

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15, agreed to.

Clause 16

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 16 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, agreed to.

Clause 17

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I wish to amend clause 17 and insert a sub-clause (e) below to read, “Clerk to Parliament” – to insert sub-section (e) reading, “Clerk to Parliament.” 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: A new sub-clause (e)?

MRS BALEMEZI: A new sub-clause (e) so that we include “Clerk to Parliament” as one of the members on the Board of Trustees of the pension scheme.

MRS BYAMUKAMA: I would like to raise the issue that when you look at 17(2), the Clerk to Parliament shall be the Secretary to the Board and Chief Executive of the Fund. How will this be accommodated if you incorporate the clerk under (d)? I would like the chairperson maybe to reconcile her position with this particular aspect. The clerk is already under 17(2).

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, the Clerk to Parliament has to be included under the official members of the Board of Trustees both for voting powers and to be a member who can also articulate issues pertaining to the interests of the staff. Yet if he is just a secretary to the board, he will just be noting down whatever the board members will be discussing but he will not be having voting powers, neither will he have powers to discuss with other members on the board. That is how the committee looked at it.  

MRS MUKIIBI: Madam Chairperson, in this Bill we have catered for the Clerk and we have given him the portfolio of a Chief Executive of the fund, which means when there is a board meeting of the members of the board of trustees, he is there as a secretary and afterwards to implement what the board would have decided. So, he cannot be again having a vote. That is how we looked at it so I oppose the amendment.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Is that okay?

MR KITYO MUTEBI: Madam Chairperson, I wanted to bring a small amendment to clause 17.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: On the same one? We are dealing with clause 17(1).

MR KITYO: Yes, on the board of trustees. Madam Chairperson, the interest of this fund will be eaten up by the overheads and I am of the view that the board of trustees be constituted by our Parliamentary Commission, hiring only one or two capable employees under the normal Parliamentary employment to manage the fund. The more you put there trustees who will sit and earn allowances and whatever, at the end of the day it will be eating into the interest, which would have been earned by members. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: But I think let us dispose of the issue of the Clerk. Is the chairperson still insisting on the amendment?

MRS BALEMEZI: Madam Chairperson, I concede to what the minister has moved.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: The amendment has been withdrawn.

MR KABAREEBE: Now that that one is withdrawn, because I thought that if the Clerk was on this body it would mean that the staff would be catered for. Now that he is not there, he will be there as a manager, then we need to have staff because they are also members of the scheme who must have a representative. I want to move an amendment that we have two members of staff representing –(Interjections)- how many are ours? Ours are like five, so we can have two. I am proposing that we have two members elected by the staff themselves -(Interruption)- I am being convinced by colleagues that we can have one person elected by the staff.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So we introduce a new sub-clause to say, “One member of staff elected by the staff”. Is that okay?

MR MWANDHA: The work to be done by this Board of Trustees of the Pensions Board is going to be very technical and I am aware of No.3.  However, I would like to suggest that this board be set up by the commission as opposed to the Bill enumerating the people who are going to sit on it. Of course the Minister of Finance would be ex-officio, maybe even somebody from pensions department of government. But I think the constitution of this board should be a matter of the commission so that we get people elected on merit or chosen on merit as opposed to people even being elected to go on this board who may not necessarily be very knowledgeable on matters of pension because this is a highly technical field. 

So I want to propose that the board should be set up by the Commission of Parliament ensuring that the Parliament is represented by say two people. The Minister of Finance and maybe the Minister for Pension can be ex-officio members. If you mention people by title say Chairman of Parliamentary Committee on Economy, you can never be sure that at that time you have a person who is knowledgeable in this field. 

Not only that, if Parliament decides to restructure their committee, there may be no Committee on Economy. So I saw that it is better to have the commission set up this board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: So you are proposing that all these be deleted and the commission appoints the board. You do not like these ex-officios? 

MR KIWALABYE: Madam Chairperson, this board to me is responsible for policy more or less because under 3, they are mandated to engage a professional manager. So, matters pertaining to technicalities and the professional way of managing this fund will be under the manager who will be employed by the board. 

This is a fund, which is for the members and the staff who must be represented on the board. I do not see how we leave it to the Commission just to appoint these board members. From where? They will also be picked from the Members of Parliament; from the stakeholders. So, there is no harm for the law to specify these stakeholders: Members of Parliament, Minister of Finance and the representatives of staff as it has been proposed to form the board. So, I propose that we leave it as it is.

MRS MUKIIBI: There is this (d) whereby we are proposing two Members of Parliament elected by Members of Parliament. This can fill the gap, which the honourable member is envisaging. When these people campaign to be on this board, they will put out their credentials and we can get expertise by this provision (d) as they campaign to go on this Board of Trustees. Madam Chairperson, I think we should leave it as it is. It will be catered for as the people canvass for support to be members of this board.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: Okay, it means that on 17, we have only the proposal for one member of staff elected by colleagues? I put the question that clause 17 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 17, as amended, agreed to.

Clause 18

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 18 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 18, agreed to.

Clause 19

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 19 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 19, agreed to.

Clause 20

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 20 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 20, agreed to.

Clause 21

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 21, agreed to.

Clause 22

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 22 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 23 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 23, agreed to.

Clause 24

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that clause 24 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 24, agreed to.

The Title

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, I want to introduce another clause here, which will allow government to increase this fund in terms of percentages in case an opportunity knocks.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I think it is covered under 23; I think there is room to review. Even there is an actual person who reviews the performance and operation and recommends to the commission -(Interjections)- you know you people, now you are sitting down and speaking. I do not know what you are saying. Are you contributing or you are just whispering?

MR KABAREEBE: Madam Chairperson, I had intended to bring in this according to how the Minister of Finance and Minister for Public Service had promised that in future if they see that they can manage to - so if it is already catered for, then I withdraw the amendment. 

MR KIGYAGI: I have something on the title because since we are contributing, I think there should be a word “contributory scheme”. That is my proposal because it is a contributory scheme and when you say parliamentary pension scheme, it is as if we are not contributing. 

MRS ZZIWA: The pension can be of several types and though this Bill or the Members Parliamentary Pension Bill has adopted the contributory type that does not rule out that it is not a pension scheme. For that matter, we do not need to define it within the title. It is a pension scheme; it is a pension Bill.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

The Title, agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

3.41
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Madam Chairperson, I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRPERSON: I put the question that the House do resume and t he Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Madam Speaker, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions Bill, 2006” and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE 
REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

3.42
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS BILL, 2006

3.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE, PENSIONS (Mrs Benigna Mukiibi): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions (Bill), 2006” be read for the third time and do pass. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question that the Bill entitled “The Parliamentary Pensions (Bill), 2006” be read for the third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title settled and the Bill passed.)

THE PARLIAMENTARY PENSIONS ACT, 2006

MR MWANDHA: I just want to congratulate the Minister of State for Pensions –(Laughter)- I was saying she has made history in Uganda. She will remain in the books of history of Uganda as the minister who for the first time introduced and successfully got a Bill on Members’ pension passed and I really congratulate her. (Applause) Also, I congratulate the Seventh Parliament for coming up with the Pensions Law. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFUGEES BILL, 2003 

3.44
THE MINISTER OF DISASTER PREPAREDNESS AND REFUGEES (Lt Gen. Moses Ali): Madam Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Refugee Bill be read for the second time. Is it seconded?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it was seconded. 

LT GEN. MOSES ALI: Madam Speaker, the current law is outdated and inconsistent with the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda. It is my hope, therefore, that every effort should be made to correct this law this year. Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Chairperson, maybe if you could summarize?

3.45
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL AND FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mrs Margaret Zziwa): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I want to thank the members for appreciating that if we do not consider this Bill now, all the work which has been done by the committee will go down the drain because it cannot be saved. So, I want to present the report from the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs on the Refugee Bill.

This Refugee Bill was read for the first time on 10 February 2004, pursuant to rule 154(c) and it was referred to the Committee of Presidential and Foreign Affairs. The committee proceeded to scrutinize the Bill and it wishes to present its report. 

Within the methodology, the committee visited the refugee settlements of Kyangwali in Hoima, Kyaaka in Kyenjojo, Nakivale in Mbarara among others. The committee also attended a workshop organised by the Office of the Prime Minister and this helped the members to get introduced to salient issues, which are highlighted in the Bill by the various stakeholders. The committee also scrutinized the relevant documents before it proceeded to look at the Bill clause by clause. Also the committee met with the team from the Office of the Prime Minister, which was led by the Minister in charge of Disaster Preparedness and Refugees, to clarify on the issues that had been raised. 

As part of the background, Madam Speaker, Uganda has had a long experience with the problem of refugees and this dates as far back as the 1940s when the first Polish refugees - over 7,000 of them were hosted in Masindi, Mukono, Mpigi and Soroti districts. This was followed by a refugee influx from Kenya and Sudan in the 1950s and then another influx from the DRC and Rwanda in the 1960s. The third wave of refugees was in the 1980s from Sudan and Somalia. 

From the 1990s until today, Uganda has continued to receive refugees as a result of the crisis in the region particularly from Rwanda, Burundi, DRC, Sudan, Somalia and the already protected refugees from Tanzania. 

Uganda is currently hosting 235,750 refugees in the following refugee settlements: Pakelle in Adjumani, Palorinya in Moyo, Ikafe in Yumbe, Madi-Okolona, Rhino Camp, Imvempi in Arua, Nakivale and Oruchinga in Mbarara, Kyangwali in Hoima, Kyaaka I and Kyaaka II in Kyenjojo, Kiryandongo in Masindi, Ibuga in Kasese District, Kahungye and Rwamwanja in Kamwenge District. 

In addition to the refugees in the settlements, there is also an urban caseload. Details on the distribution of these refugees according to nationality and gender are contained in Annex 1 and Annex 2 respectively. 

The current refugee policy in Uganda emphasizes the following: 
•	Promotion of self-reliance for refugees and host communities. 
•	Integration of services for the refugees within the broad framework of government and local development plans. 
•	Implementation of long term measures to empower refugees in preparation for their eventual voluntary repatriation and 
•	Improvement of social conditions in the host communities through social development to enable them cope with the burden of refugees and for the benefit of both the refugees and the host communities.

The committee was informed that in spite of hosting refugees for many years, the Government of Uganda has continued to depend on outdated colonial refugee legislation namely, the Control of Aliens Refugee Act. This old law is not only archaic but its provisions are also restrictive and inconsistent with the standards and principles set forth in the International Conventions and Uganda’s Constitution. 

Arising from the inadequacy of this piece of legislation, the Refugee Bill, 2003 was introduced and the Bill seeks to repeal and impress the control of Refugees Act, Cap. 62 with a new legislation, which among other things:
(a)	Conforms to the relevant provisions of the current Constitution, particularly regarding the protection and promotion of fundamental human and other rights and respect for international law and treaty obligations.
(b)	Gives effect to the relevant international and regional conventions and instruments, particularly the 1951 Geneva Convention relating to the status of refugees including its protocol of 1967 and the 1969 OAU Convention governing specific aspects of refugee problems in Africa and the East Africa Corporation Agreement.
(c)	It also incorporates Uganda’s domestic policies and practices and procedures for refugee status determination and humanitarian assistance delivery guidelines and also;
(d)	Provides for other related matters.  

The committee in its scrutiny of the Bill made the following observations: 

1. 	Access to land by refugees

The committee observed that Uganda’s Refugee Policy and practice among other things emphasizes the promotion of self reliance for refugees through allowing them to access land for a period they are in Uganda so that they can grow their own food instead of depending on relief food. 

The committee was, however, concerned that the refugees in Uganda live very comfortable lives and in many instances, they are more comfortable than the nationals. They are given big chunks of land on which to settle yet some nationals neighbouring the refugee settlements do not have land. This comfort given to the refugees causes them not to want to go back to their homes as cited in the case of some of the Rwandese who have refused to go back home despite efforts by the refugee administration to promote their voluntary repatriation.

The committee recommends that the Refugee Policy in Uganda be revised with a view to making refugees prefer their countries of origin by reducing the amount of land they have at their disposal.

The committee also recommends that the land released from settlements should be availed to the landless nationals. 
 
2. 	The porous nature of Uganda’s borders 

The committee in its tour of some refugee settlements observed and received reports that the porous nature of our borders has caused uncontrolled inflow of aliens in the country. This was particularly evident in the Nakivale Refugee Settlement in Mbarara and in Masindi District. In Nakivale, the committee found about 5,000 aliens of Rwanda origin who had a refugee status in Tanzania but were forcefully repatriated back home by the Government of Tanzania and instead of going to Rwanda, they found their way into Uganda due to the porous nature of our borders
. 
The Government of Uganda has decided not to grant them refugee status and the UNHCR has also decided that it has got nothing to do with them because the international refugee law does not permit an individual to have refugee status in more than one country. However, these aliens insist on staying at the reception center in Nakivale, locally referred to as kibaati and the population of the aliens in kibaati is steadily dwindling because they keep absorbing themselves into the local population illegally. Some of them have acquired land from the locals. 

In the case of Masindi District, the aliens keep coming into Uganda from DRC and there are no efforts by the Government to register them. They have mixed up with the local communities unrecorded.

The committee was concerned that Uganda’s borders are too porous and pose a threat to the stability of the country. Allowing illegal immigrants to access parts of the country stealthily undermines national interest and could pose a security risk to the nationals. 

The committee was informed that Ugandan borders are porous because the Immigration Department has been for a long time understaffed hence having a presence in only official crossing points. However, Cabinet has approved a proposal to change the department into a directorate and with this new development the directorate will be able to recruit more staff to cover all the unreachable areas. Forty-one vacancies were advertised earlier last year and we look forward to them being filled to address this problem.

3.	 “Crime Against Peace” as used in clause 5(a) is subject to many interpretations that could be exploited to victimize certain refugees

The committee was informed that a comprehensive definition of the term “Crime Against Peace” is found in the 1954 London Agreement and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal. The committee was further informed that within this Bill, the term is understood to mean acts, which include planning, preparation, initiation and waging war of aggression or a war in violation of international treaties, agreements and assurances, or participation in a common plan, or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of the foregoing. 

The committee recommends that the term should be defined in the interpretation section.

4. 	Surrender of refugee status 

The committee observed that clause 6(b) provides that surrender of refugee status is a ground for cessation of the status of a refugee. The committee noted that relevant international refugee conventions and established principles of protection do not envisage surrender of refugee status as a ground for cessation of the refugee status. In the context of established principles of refugee protection, the clause in its present form predisposes the refugee to a situation of lack of international protection at a time when the refugee has lost national protection.

The committee recommends that clause 6(b) be deleted.

5. 	Refugee Appeals Board 

The committee is concerned that in the Bill, the proposed qualification of members of the Refugee Appeals Board under clause 16(2) excludes knowledge of human rights, yet it is integral in the management of refugees.

The committee recommends that knowledge of human rights should be a pre-requisite qualification for membership to a Refugee Appeals Board.

6. 	Time limit within which a person should seek asylum

The committee noted that one of the cardinal principles of the regime for the protection of refugees is the principle of non refoulement. Under this principle, the state that undertakes to protect refugees is bound not to expel or return a refugee or asylum seekers against the will of the refugee to the territory where the refugee fears persecution.  In order for the state to meet the obligation imposed by this undertaking, a person who seeks asylum must in all cases be afforded an opportunity to make an application for asylum.  Therefore, the placement of a time limit on the capacity of a refugee to make an application for asylum has a potential to breach the principle of non refoulement. 

The committee recommends that the provision under clause 19 that places a time limit on the application of asylum be deleted. 

Because of the services of an interpreter at the hearing of the application for a refugee status, the committee was concerned that clause 24(2) stipulates that an applicant must bear the cost of the services of an interpreter used at the hearing of an application for a refugee status. The committee observes that this clause undermines the principle of effective access to justice, a principle that is central to both the constitutional standards of the Republic of Uganda and the International Refugee Law and practice. 

The committee noted that often, persons seeking asylum are destitute and without capacity to secure the best necessities of life. Under these circumstances, it is highly probable that the persons seeking asylum will be unable to pay for the services of an interpreter. The committee recommends that the Government of Uganda must bear the responsibility of providing an interpreter at the hearing of an application for refugee status. This obligation should be extended to all instances where the refugee engages with agencies of the Government of Uganda in matters that relate to the protection and care of refugees.

7.	Refugees and politics 

The committee was concerned that clause 35 as drafted in the Bill leaves it open for refugees to engage in national politics. The committee observes this is wrong because leadership in this country is a preserve of the citizens. The Constitution of the Republic of Uganda does not envisage the participation of non-citizens in the politics of this country. The committee recommends that the clause should be redrafted to bar refugees from participating in the politics of Uganda, either directly or indirectly. 

8.	The extradition of a refugee from Uganda

The committee notes that the Bill under clause 41(b) (ii) gives too much power to Cabinet in the extradition of refugees. It stipulates that the minister responsible for refugees may in consultation with his or her counter part responsible for internal affairs order the extradition of a refugee in accordance with the application of the extradition law. 

The committee observes that consultation between two members of Cabinet is not sufficient to permit the extradition of a refugee because Cabinet constitutes one body that is bound by collective responsibility.  The committee, therefore, recommends that the Minister for Refugees should consult with the Judiciary prior to the extradition of a refugee. 

In conclusion, Madam Speaker, the committee hereby presents this report to the House for its consideration and begs that it be adopted with the necessary modifications. 

However, the committee reiterates the position that whatever changes are proposed to the Bill should reflect and draw from the principles and standards set forth in the provisions of Uganda’s Constitution, the 1951 Geneva Convention and the 1969 African Union Convention governing the specific aspects of the refugee problems in Africa and other refugee instruments and Human Rights Conventions. Madam Speaker, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson. Honourable members, we have received the report so the business remains alive but in view of the forthcoming national programmes, we would like to adjourn for now and you will be invited on notice to come back to complete the Bill, because we cannot do it today. The House is adjourned; you will be invited back on notice.

(The House rose at 4.06 p.m. and adjourned sine die.)



