
Wednesday, 3 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR CHILDREN BILL 1995

(Debate continued.)

MR TIVU: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I congratulate you for the year 1996 and wish you prosperous New Year and all of us Members of this House.

Mr Chairman, I support the Bill with the following observations and advise to Government and Government to come because I believe this Bill is support to bring a fundamental change in addressing the problem of the social class especially of the children.  

Mr Chairman, in looking at this Bill I want first of all to reflect to the recent syndrome of boards, committees, task forces, and commissions which is a rampant in government, but which do not address the realities of the problems existing within the nation.  When you have these commissions and task force you end up seeing pajeros and on papers allowances to the Members of these Commissions and the problems remain unaddressed and, therefore, if this is alternative development strategy I want us, myself and all Members here, when we build Pakwach bridge, when we build Owen Falls Dam, when we tarmac the roads and we build this House in 1960s, whether these bodies and commissions existed and if they never existed how did we achieve this alternative development strategy without these commission?  So, when we are looking at - addressing the national problems we should look at different alternative development strategies other than looking at one way.  

I do not want to see these bodies to remain white elephants with that logistics, we have seen some commissions and councils which are there, but when you ask them what are you doing the first answer is there is no logistics and yet Parliament’s time had been wasted debating on this Commissions and, therefore, I do not want it to happen with this very important Council which we are going to form to deal with the children which is a very important class of society.  Therefore, when we are forming these councils we must make sure that there is proper logistic given to them so that they finish the work.  

Then I want to ask a question; what machinery will this council have to monitor the activities of the relevant Ministries and other bodies, which have parallel functions and roles?  I ask this question because I want to reflect on my experience in Aids Commission.  In Uganda Aids Commission I discovered UNDP has also come up with a parallel body like Uganda Aids Commission and we asked them how do they account to us, there was no clear answer and I am sure there is also going to be other bodies formed, either in the international or nationally and we shall have no machinery for this council to monitor their activities and yet funds whether national or internationally will be going under the pretext for the development welfare of the children, but this money as I said will be either for rewarding some certain class of society either politicians or disgruntled people in order to fight them down.  The development of the children as a teacher; I would like the coordinative development of the child to be emphasized, in many occasions you will realise that bodies are formed, you have seminars organised, but the child is never asked or inquired what is his problem or what is the cause so that he also has an input in a way of addressing his problem.  So, I suggest to the Council if it is going to be formed to also involve the children so that the coordinative knowledge is also put as an input for the development of their welfare.

When you look at the nature of the council on page seven to me it looks so amorphous and it is tantamount to forming alternative Government because all the sectors of the Government are there and we really do not see the role they are going to play, it is another cabinet altogether, and the financial implications are so high and I believe in a way of co-ordination it may become difficult.  Therefore, I suggest there is need reduce the number and also to see the composition by appointing people who are technically like commissioners and so on.  

My view of Permanent secretaries is that they are only administrators; they might not be technical people in either health or education, but we have put all the Permanent Secretaries of ministries here, but these are only Social scientist and public administrators, but the problems we have are; health related problems, poverty and so on.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I agree totally with the point raised by the Member. These Permanent Secretaries who are numbered to be as many as 25 are actually redundant here, because the experience which I have was in the KDA, there were so many Ministries which were to form the council and whenever a Chairman calls for these Permanent Secretaries none of them comes in to put an input and eventually they came in - in other words they became a problem in the council and the KDA was put into limbo and Karamoja never took off because of the number which I see exactly in the same Bill like this one.  I support what the Member is raising and definitely this is a redundant and should be scrutinized properly.

MR TIVU: Thank you very much for that information.  In fact, if you had the KDA in Geneva the 25 would have gone to attend it, but unfortunately you are having your meetings in Karamoja or Kampala they were not interested in attending it (Laughter)

Mr Chairman, there is also need for the Government to involve uniform remuneration for Members, directors or committees in all Government funded bodies.  Because when you look at the remuneration aspect of these bodies there is variation and in commitments and variation in performance of these bodies.  So, I think it will be of benefit to the nation if we made the benefits and terms of conditions uniform for all these members.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification in light of the fact that, the volume and the status of institutions do vary.  I can imagine a person looking after a small hotel or Uganda hotel for example, as a Chairman and a Chairman of a big corporation like Railways for example or Uganda Revenue Authority the volume of work there and the one sitting on a board say, one small hotel should they really - does the hon. Members once think that those two carry the same weight, do the same volume of work and transact and hold the same responsibility?  I doubt, I would seek clarification from him to enable me to –(Interruption)


MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, in early 1980s, the hon. Member raising the clarification was a Minister for Commerce and I do not think he was equivalent to the Minister of Defence by then, but these were two important Ministries in Government.  What I am saying is, but they were getting the same salary. 

So, what I am saying is, may be, there can be variation and the margin on the number of the Members depending on the size of the institution, but as for remuneration it should be the same because they are going to discuss policies, that is my view.  The General Secretary to me should be on competitive basis other than to be appointed so that you get a competent person because if you are to be appointed what qualification will he have, and what criteria shall we use?  So, to me it is best if the General Secretary is to be appointed on basis of interview.

Lastly, there is a syndrome of expertise in our institution development and capacity building.  You will find as soon as this council is involved you will see all Bazungu who are either families or not families who will come and look to attend to these children problems without any experience on childhood problems So I think Ugandans we have had our university for the last 25 years, I believe we have build enough capacity especially on social issues, therefore, I will request the Minister in involving these council to make sure that expertise issues are minimised -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Whereas I appreciate the hon. Member’s concern on the membership of this council I want to remind him that is a National Council for Children, therefore, if it is a National Council the membership must be a Ugandan.

Number two, that clause 7.2; on page 9; says with an amendment on it, “And the Minister on the advice of the Council shall appoint one representative of donor agencies who will have observer status on the Council”.  In that situation, Mr Chairman, I cannot see these Bazungu who are worrying hon. Member taking over control of the Council.  Thank you very much.

MR TIVU: Mr Chairman, in Article 10; sub-clause 2; they says,” the Council may also appoint - every specialised committee appointed under this section shall consist of less than - okay, that section the implication is that, that Council will have to find advisory committees somewhere and it is a common phenomenon that those foreigners or those donor agencies will put their technocrats deliberately to go and advise as if we do not know how to advise, that is what I mean.  Because they will come under the - of coming to advise us, so that is what I was reflecting.  

Lastly, I think this law is more or less a prejudice because I already see, just as I was entering the I found there was a vehicle of the National Council of Children and it seems there is already a body existing, you know, this kind of prejudice law making is very dangerous I must warn because what would happen if the Parliament refuse to pass the law?  

So, I think in future we must avoid this and minimise such kind of prejudice otherwise these were the causes of the French Revolution as you remember in 1989, and I think unnecessary bodies and unnecessary organisations with that facilitation is very dangerous I was perturbed two days ago when I found that the body guards of even Prime Minister had refuse to work because they were not being paid their allowance and the reasons was because we have amorphous bodies which we cannot sustain.  So, I think we must be very careful in putting people and formulating bodies according to the weight of our economy.  I thank you.

MR DRANI DRADRIGA (Ayivu County, Moyo): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would to support this Bill, in so doing I want to lament the long time taken by nations in this world in bringing out effective conventions and laws and regulations -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Could you use a microphone?

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Mr Chairman, I was saying that I want to lament the long time taken by many Nations in this world in bring out very effective conventions, laws and regulations that can effectively address the plight with the children.  Even in Uganda until recently it has been difficult to get effect mechanisms through which the plight of the children can be addressed.  It is because of this reason that I look at this Bill as being a very important Bill, in so far as it lays down a legal environment that can look after the three cardinal issues connected with children, namely; their survival, their protection, and their development.  

This Bill has four key areas which I want to emphasize.  The first is coordination; coordination through the Council, and coordination through the committees.

The second one is advocacy; unless there is mechanism for strong advocacy among the various level that deal with the activities of children there is no way you can have an impact at various levels.  

The other issue is monitoring; monitoring is extremely crucial, in fact, these councils which you are seeking to set up in the Bill unless it has a strong monitoring mechanism down to the grassroots there is no way the ideals which we have set in this Bill can be achieved then of course evaluation it is important that through this council thorough and legal revolution is carried out of all the activities, of programmes and projects involve the children.  

This Council which we are seeking to set up has a lot of bureaucracy as the previous speaker pointed out it is difficult for so many Ministries to come together with some NGOs, with some members of public to be able to effectively co-ordinate.  I have had some experience in some similar bodies, where the Ministries are not directly involved; they are not directly presented on the board it becomes a bit difficult to monitor what is happening in the Ministry.  Therefore, it is important, that special desks are set up in Ministries this should be done in every Ministry, it should be done in every district and fortunately enough provision has not been made for local council officials designated those can act as desk officers for the local councils, but there is need for desks officers for children’s affairs in every Ministry.  This is going to assist the strong advocacy work that I have talked about; it will also ease on the networking at various levels.  

Communication is very important if this Council has to be very efficient and has to achieve it’s desired goals.  The communication we are talking about is not always the top to bottom it should be the other way round there must be that free flow of information, so that public concerns can be attended to with a lot of ease, and, in fact, emphasis should be more on the lower structures and the council should only be an ethics organisation.  If you look at clause 7; it has been recommended in the amendment which was circulated yesterday that, the officers who will be sitting representing Ministries should be of rank of Under 

Secretary, in practical terms it is normally difficult to get a quorum of Permanent Secretaries and even Under Secretaries, in my view we could have even accepted a lower rank, say, principle secretary and well, if necessary even Senior Assistant Secretary.  I have been a civil servant before; ranks really do not  mean much once you have sufficient experience and secondly it is difficult to  raise quorum if you find a Permanent Secretary or Under Secretary is involved in so many activities and you will run the days of not having quorum.  I served one time on the board and in that board some times we always had no quorum for say, one or two months because of this kind of problem.  

There is need for the Council to be independent it must exercise a lot of independence although the sectoral committee made an effort to reduce the powers of the Minister which were really pervasive at the beginning I have seen there still some errors where the Minister has to sanction a lot of things.  There must be a lot of independence given to this council and the Minister can control the effect of harmful activities of the council through his normal administrative monitoring machinery.  

Mention has been made by the previous speaker on clause 8; where the council may hire expertise, but I want only to make one comment the question of experts is really a new colonial disease.  Because when you talk of consultancy we now have a lot of private firms in Uganda which carry out consultancy work, but you will be shocked to find the council is still insisting on foreigners I think that is the element which the former speaker was really expressing.  We have a pool of indigenous Ugandans who have those skills so I would like to advocate very strongly that we take a local expertise we have them here.  Mr Chairman, (Interruption)

 MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for giving me an opportunity to give information to my Friend the hon. Member.  The point here is that, some of our programmes especially on the economic side have been going wrong by employing foreigners as evaluators or expertise in different things.  Some of these people come to Uganda none from Ugandans and then request Ugandans to write an evaluation and it is those evaluation that are called the expertise in those different things.  So, without getting the local people - you know of our economy doing very well, but when you get down to the way it is doing very well when we even have the Entandikwa and there is no money in the countryside you wonder what the advise being given by IMF and World Bank is doing when they cannot even advise for instance the way we can get the Americans to liberalize the sell of Japanese cars in those countries and Japanese visas then wonder whether the valuation of expertise is anywhere to assist Ugandans.  Thank you.

MR DRANI DRADRINGA: I thank the hon. Member for his information.  Mr Chairman, we have International organisations working here let us form partnership with them and utilize their expertise, these organisations which are, UN, International NGO’s, International Developing Organisations these are here we utilise them instead of going out.  

In clause 24; I have said that, it has been emphasized that the Auditor General or an Auditor appointed by the Auditor General or by the Council by the approval of the Minister.  I think this is not necessary the Auditor General is empowered by the Constitution to authorise audit, so really there is no need to go and put in the law requirement for him to appoint somebody or the council on the approval of the Minister.

Finally, my own focus through this Bill is that when it comes operational this country should be able to see a better spectrum affecting the children, we shall be - in seeing programmes and projects, some projects like those which can promote health care services, which can promote education, projects which can address vulnerability of children, which can address water and sanitation, we aim at improving on the mortality and mobility rates among the children this should be our focus and we must emphasize training at various levels unless we do that, the plight of the African Child and more importantly the Ugandan child shall still remain a big challenge and his marginalisation shall continue.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS NTABGOBA (Women Representative, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill with few observations.  Mr Chairman, as a Ugandan who have spent many years I have seen the plight of children in our country growing pathetic year by year.  So, I do not feel very excited to be part of law makers of these laws affecting the children because what is happening the community does not mean that the absence of National Council for Children or the Children’s Statute has made the conditions of our children so bad, a step like this, may be, is okay, because I hope a situation may improve.  

What I mean is this, when you go in the suburbs of the city or many other urban areas and you also extend and reach the rural there so man children who cannot attend school.  When you visit homes you find the children whose parents cannot afford a piece of soap for the bath daily, you also find that Ugandan children today are not assured of a balance diet. So, all these conditions I do not think are due to the absence of these laws we are enacting today, I think there is something very fundamental which Ugandan legislators must address. 

In support of this Bill, I could see one of the object as being to ensure proper co-ordination, to provide the structure, monitoring and valuation of all policies and programmes relating to the survival, protection and development of the child.  When we look at the format of this Bill, it is very national and seems to end at national level.  It lacks some kind of link at the local level, I am mindful of the fact that yesterday this House passed a Bill for children this provide the local councils to handle all issues connected with children, but when you look through this one the council doe not seem to have much link so that I am assured that these members of the council will actually have means of coordinating with these local councils and this regard, I do not know whether problems of our children will not remain the same.  Because after all I think I am justified to be a bit pessimistic while we have been talking about children year by year, education provisions, policies to ensure that children attend school, the constitution provide for universal education in spite of all these in addition to children roaming on the streets and villages we now see many more being born on the streets this is a very pathetic situation.  

So, I hope as we enact these laws Ugandans who will be appointed by Minister to handle these issues will make sure, will be creditable enough to try and help the community to alleviate and cater for these problem. I am reliably informed that there is a Government National Plan of Action for Children and this was completed in 1992 and to the best of my knowledge this has not been Table in Parliament here, I do not know why this plan of action was not made available for Members of this House at least before so that we can see the co-ordination of these laws in regard to what Government had laid down as a plan of action for children.  I do not know whether it was intended or accidental, but 1992 is a long time I think Members deserved to have a copy.

The plight of children again, all the concern in our community naturally it is women who normally handle children affairs right from the conception and the general care.  So, I once again appeal to the Minister to make sure that in all these appointments many more women are involved (Applause) It is in our cultural in Uganda even men who are here, you know some of them cannot even change a nappy of the baby, to them it is a taboo.  It is we women who normally cater for these children and provide -(Interruption)

MRS R. KALEMA : Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that in my opinion the whole problem that we are debating now and even the Bill we passed yesterday is because we have the problem of believing that children belongs basically to their mothers for care taking, but at the same time their children of the men.  

Until we get to a stage when we will realise that every child has got two parents, and unfortunately in our country here, parents particularly the male parents have not taken trouble and unfortunately the female parents have agreed to be parents without the help of fathers, until they get to the problem of finances.  So, the point my Sister is raising is that some men do not know even how to change the nappy is because men try to divorce themselves from practical parenthood of their children they just like to produce them.  Here children are just born and children just grow and to a great extent, the children who are involved in this Bill we are passing most of them are children who do not have two parents living with them and as long as we have this problem, it is really difficult it is high time as we debate this male parents must realise their responsibility, we should in fact, be debating parenthood responsibility because we cannot debate Children’s Welfare without debating parenthood responsibility.

MRS NTABGOBA:  Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Kalema Rhoda for the information.  You can see the problem, the basic problem of the child really lies with the mother and even care taking in the absence if the mother you find it is a grandmother or a house girl not a houseboy.  So, this is where I wanted to emphasize to the Minister that he should broad base as much as possible in making appointments, go into the rural, go into the slums, go into the suburbs and make sure that we get a -(Interruption)- of representation from women.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am really finding difficult in the position, the position is, let us take the city of Kampala and when I move around the streets I see a lot of children who are begging on the streets sometimes sleeping.  Now, the question is, I am not sure whether majority of these children know their fathers, but I know it is more certain of a mother than of a father; the reasons are obvious.  Now we are in that situation because many times mothers do not tell us whose child the previous is -(Laughter)- and many times they purposely deny if the father to be is poorer than the one they can claim.  So, many children get to wrong fathers who doubt and then we have a lot of abandoned children with no proper claim.  Thank you very much.

MRS NTABGOBA: Mr Chairman, I was just concluding my contribution to give other a chance.  What the hon. Member is only showing us is that men are only interested in producing children, but not following to going further to look after them, that is why you see mothers and children on the street, those children have got fathers for sure.

Finally, the issue of broad basing appointment in our society not just getting well to do parents is very important it is what I wanted to ask the Minister to make sure that he actually goes deeper into our society to make sure that people who form this council represent every sector in our society.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MRS OKER MARY (Women Representative, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to contribute to this very important Bill.  Mr Chairman, this is a very important Bill because we are handling the vulnerable groups and our future citizens and it is very unfortunate to hear an hon. Member of this House who is very concern with only pregnating a woman then at the end of pregnating that woman he denies the pregnancy and the responsibility of that child lies entirely with that unfortunate woman and the child.  Mr Chairman, it is very sad that I see many hon. Members here smiling, I am not smiling because of what the very hon. Member said that there children on the streets who are not being catered for and yet we are here very hon. men and women trying to find out means and ways of how to protect and care for these children.  (Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that a survey of the street children carried out in the towns of Jinja and Kampala has revealed that of the 3,800 identified street children more than 80 percent know their mothers and their fathers they are not parentless.  The conditions that have put them on the street are not due to lack of a parent, but economic hardships where even some parents push their children on the street to beg for them.

MRS OKER: Mr Chairman, I think that information speaks for itself exactly what the point I was driving forward.  Mr Chairman, I know very well that when we are talking about the child survival and the child protection start right from the words of conception when a woman conceive and here in Uganda we have been told that maternal mortality rate is very, very high, it is 130 per thousand lives, but that is 130 women dying of child bearing.  Now this should be the responsibility which this NCC should address to find a way right to the grassroots level let us not talk of the urban area, let us address the issue of what actually makes our women die of children bearing at the grassroots level in the rural areas that should be the concern of this NCC.  How to first of all to co-ordinate the Ministries which are concern with the health of the mothers and then co-ordinate with them so that we try as much as possible, because this is very country, Uganda is the country which has the highest maternal mortality rate in almost all the developing countries and it is very sad.  

We have also observed according to yesterday when they were Tabling this NCC Bill that the infant mortality rate is 103 per 1000 lives birth, that is most of our children dies below the age of one year of preventable diseases and this is the issue why this NCC has been brought into place so that they could try to find a way and co-ordinate which Ministry should address the issue of the death of our children below the age of, may be, one year or below the age of five years many of our children do die.  So, that goes on to help our children a protection and many of these diseases are nutrition and what have you, we have abundant food in Uganda here where we should address the issue and the NCC should know. 

When it is established, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I do support the Bill, but when this body is formed it should not look at the issue of the children like many other bodies we have formed like, Revenue Authority here, it is we who have come out again to criticize Revenue Authority.  We have created many bodies like; the Aids Commission we are the very people who establish these bodies we are the very people again criticizing these bodies.  My concern is, we are dealing with the future the generation to come, if in Sweden the infant mortality rate is only 8 per thousand that is only 8 children dying per one thousand life of a child below one year, you can see ours is so high.  

As many Members have already said, let this NCC once it is established it should go right to the grassroots level, the Vice Chairman of the local council 5 has already been put in place, but other machineries should be put in place so that the very vulnerable groups these are the infants are reached and they are cared for and we can only do that through research and data collection of what actually makes us lose our children at a very early age like that.  

I have another point which I would like Members to know, that is the issue of the civil strike which normally affects the children.  Civil strike has been a problem in our country more so, in the area where I come from and in the NCC comes into being and since we are also having NGOs or International organisations involved in the welfare of the children I am appealing to this NCC once it is formed that they should really tackle this issue of civil strike which affect lives of the children very seriously, you have heard us many times complaining how the children below eleven had become victims and yet they should have not been victim of that circumstances and we have the International organisation handling children, they should come earlier, but not to wait when the situation has become disastrous and come when it is already inevitable, my appeal is that once there is a civil strike the children should be catered for and their  issue should be look into  because they are very vulnerable there is nothing they can do, they depend on the adults.  

The last point I would like to raise is that, very many of our children do not go to school those who go to school are already what we call fortunate children these are not the children we should be discussing here, but very many of our children do not go to school because of poverty.  The NCC I am calling upon them, once the body is established that these are the issues we should look into.

The former Attorney General raised the issue yesterday here of the extended families which have not been catered for in the Children’s Bill, but me I am saying that, it is just like the other member who said that, there very many children here on the Kampala street. Every one of us knows how many children he or she has produced; you take care of your child that is already catered for in the Bill.  The African know that the extended families - but these extended families, these are the children who have just been planted here, and there without -(Laughter)-  So, those who are planting their children should not call them extended families no, they should address to issues and look after their children.  With that I support the Bill.

MR MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Mr Chairman, I would like to make remarks in three different segments, first of all the first segment is on our procedures as exemplified in yesterday’s sitting.  The second one will be a general remarks on the subjects and then a few specific words on the Bill.

Yesterday we passed the Children’s Bill in such a way that you found it necessary to announce to the House that the Bill has passed and announce it again it has passed.  There were doubts even among the Members as to whether we had done it or not.  Mr Chairman, the day we sat before yesterday’s sitting hon. Mayanja Abu had complained that he just could not pass it.  What we were trying to do yesterday was like trying to fit a square into a circle, we have Rules of Procedure, which are already in existence before the Standing Committees, which were created.  When we created the Standing Committees it was hoped that the Rules and Procedure Committee would sit down and adjust our rules of procedure to match them with the new activity of the committee, but the Committee did not, the end result, we do not exactly know, after the standing committee has discussed the Bill should we debate it or should we just pass it or should we move to the committee stage, it was such a ridiculous situation in the last sittings, that other Members felt they just give up and Mr Chairman, you wisely adjourned the council to the other day because the confusion was staggering.  

I hope that the Chairman of the Rules and Procedures Committee who happens to be absent will gather his committee so that the rules and procedures are adjusted in such a way that there is a smooth movement of the Bills from the day they are read the first time to the time their committed to any standing committee and I hope that each Bill goes to a standing committee and then further on up to the end of the Bill. Mr chairman, that is the end of my complaint on the procedures.

The Children, is such an important subject, that one would say the National Council probably is a belated way of seeing a problem that has been here and through reading the Bill, one realises that the Bill is standing on a despondent sort of stand point. Throughout, it talks of the survival of the children.  The word survival itself predicts that the child already is in trouble.  Will the child survive?  So, this survival is repeated throughout the Bill.  Which actually means that we are looking at the whole subject from a negative point of view.  And that being the case, one then realises that it is unbelievable that a Council as important as this, would be discussed as late as today.  

I mentioned the time we discussed the other Bill that, it has been the observation or it was of the eminent psychologist that the child is the father of a man.  That being so, then it is eminently important that we do everything possible to make sure that the child is taken care of.  And it is amazing that in view of the number of children who are running around, one would simply say, they are street children.  Yet everybody knows streets get no children.  And it is not that, these children are the future citizens as the other Member said.  No! children are not future citizens they are already citizens right at birth.  Once they are citizens, they are citizens and there is no question of saying it will be in future that they will become the citizens.  And when does the future start in any case?  Is it after they turn 18 years or slightly before?  

Mr Chairman, it is important that we make the House with care.  I am a little bit disturbed that throughout this Bill, what I hoped is not mentioned.  Having passed the Bill on children yesterday; one would think that probably the National Council is like a watch dog which is coming on to take care to see that the Bill that we passed yesterday is such an important piece of law is followed and is appropriately applied.  But throughout this Bill, there is hardly any mention of the Bill that we passed yesterday.  I do not know according to the drafts men, which of the two was drafted first?  It could even be that this one was drafted before the other one was.  And if it were still they would have looked at both to see that the two are now matched in their activities.  We have heard from an hon. Member in the Back Benches, talking about the problem of action.  It is ridiculous, that problem of action is mentioned in this Bill in such an important way that one still keeps on wondering what is this problem of action, where is it?  And of course, the opinion is, it should have been with us.  I was whispering to the Chairman of the Committee here, that his failure to demand for it, was something unforgivable.  He says he has a copy, but for us we do not.  

Now specifically on the Bill.  My remarks are quite quick this time, Mr Chairman.  On the Bill, I thought that in the functions of the Bill Section Number 5, the all-important CRC - that is the Convention on the Rights of the Child; should have had a mention somewhere.  Indeed in my opinion I thought that, those functions which are enumerated a, b, c, d; all the way to (j); that coordination of government activities by this Council in such a way that the convention of the rights of the child is fulfilled.  It should have been included.  It was on the 20th of November, 1989 that Dr Kisekka signed on behalf of Ugandans this Convention.  Which then made us party to it and made us responsible for whatever it has in it.  

So, generally speaking, it seems to be it is the world wide now guideline not only for protection, but to all matters relating to children.  And I would have hoped that, among the functions of the Council, there would be one which says, to coordinate or to work closely with government in realising that the provisions of the Convention on the Rights of Children is followed.  I looked at the membership of the Council and noticed a ridiculous thing whereby the Minister appoints five Donor Agencies to an observer status.  And I thought it sounded sort of ridiculous that the Minister should write to the World Bank representative here and say, I appoint you as an Observer in this Council.  Mr Chairman, supposing he refuses?  That by itself will be ridiculous.  These so called Donor Agencies even though the word ‘Donors’ is largely misused.  Sometimes they actually do donation.  On most occasions of course they only lend us money.  But in case where they do actually donate; it would only be a favour when they would accept being of the Council.  

So, I would rather think that the Minister would not appoint.  Instead he would request a Donor Agency to have an observer status on the Council.  And Mr Chairman, I am proposing an amendment so that we modify this language to suit what seems to be more reasonable.  

Then, I looked at the functions of the specialised Committees and I sort of uphold. Because among the functions when it is expected that, these are specialised Committees, each one in a particular area.  The five of them, even though there are doubtful ones; the Committee on Finance and Economic Policy.  And I remained wondering what the Committee on Finance and Economic Policy, would be doing as a special function in this Council.  But I thought I would like to be just in case one would say, we are thinking of how the matters of finance as relates to children, or economic policy sort of a vague subject; I could not exactly convince myself that it should been there.  As a matter of fact I think it should not.  But NEC, specialised as they are; when you get to the functions where the Bill states that each will work in its specific area and report, advise and recommend to the Council on matters relating to its specific area in particular.  It is after that ‘ in particular’ that you get the a, b, c, d; down in the line and then you get the wonder of your life.  The particular ones are general.  It seems as if the Committees specialise that, they may report on anything.     

AN HON. MEMBER:  I would like to thank hon. Mayengo, he has been ever supportive on several issues.  But my worry is that, he has not read the Report of the Committee which I did circulate yesterday, and I have observed that, what has been mentioned has already been covered in the Report that I gave.  For instance, under Clause 7(2) on page 9; the Committee made a proposal to amend this Clause; by saying that, the Minister on the advice of the Council will appoint.  His problem now is will appoint.  But not on his own; but on the advice of the Council will appoint one; not five this time.  The Committee recommends one representative over the Donor Agency, who will have observer status on the Council.  

Secondly, when we came to this part which is labouring on part four Clause 10(1) ‘the Committee has now been reduced from five to four.’  The first Committee is dealing with capacity building; not on healthy and nutrition as it appears in his draft, which he has not revised.  So, we are now creating a specialised committee on capacity building.  Capacity building is not a common thing.  You have to be knowledgeable.  So, that is why we are calling it a Sessional Committee. 

The Second Committee, is a Committee on Research and Better Management.  The best understanding of the Committee, which works on this Bill, I think these are Sessional Committees.

The Third one is Communication and Advocacy, which is a straightforward Technical Committee.  And the last one is a Special Committee on Finance.  Because NCC is going to get funds from Government, funds from Donor Agencies, funds from well-wishers.  And we need to raise funds and invest.   So, I think we need a committee of this nature in the Council.  So, my request to the hon. Members who are yet to contribute is that, they should read the Report of the Committee, so that you do not derail the House by adding a point, which has already been covered in the Report of the Committee.  Thank you very much.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I thank the Chairman of the Committee for this explanation.  Probably I should mention that you do not cross the bridge until you come to it.  There is no way Members would have read the Report, without having first received it.  All the same.  It is now Section 11 that I was labouring when the Chairman rose to get back to the actual nature of the Committees.  I apologise to him for not having read his mind about the Committees that they have already been reduced to four and another one created instead of the five.  All I have read is the Bill, and nothing else.  And all I am saying is what I am thinking about the Bill.  Specifically on Section 11, which is rightly in front of the Chairman; when a Committee for example on what was Health and Resolutions, which now he decided to name the Specialised Committee on Capacity Building, makes a Report as is required in Section 11.  It says ‘the functions of each Specialised Committee are to recommend and report to and advise’ sort of queer language here; the grammar is mixed up.  But Mr Chairman, the Latin saying is ‘Mal grammatica num viscient chartum.’  That bad grammar does not weaken the agreement.  So the meaning comes out. (Laughter)

All policy matters relating to the Committee’s specific sector of Child Survival Development and Protection in particular: (a) The financing activity.  Now easy that the Specialised Committee on Capacity Building will report, advise and recommend on matters concerning financing activities related to child survival, development and protection.

The same Committee also advised, recommends and report on the formulation, and revision of training and capacity building.  And the same Committee does each of these functions down to (g).  Mr Chairman, I thought that each Specialised Committee should advise, report and recommend on matters relating to the specific area in which that Committee is concerned. (Applause) 

This will avoid the misfortune of the Committee neglecting what was given and just going on to tackle what is no business of that Committee.  The Chairman was saying this Bill is a small one but, small as it is, it has caused confusion in Section 11 and I hope that we shall be able to straighten them out.  Mr Chairman, I support the Bill strongly.

MR MWANDHA (Representative for the Disabled):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to commend the Minister for coming up with this Bill to set up a Council to look after the welfare of our future generation the children.  Mr Chairman, the people we are legislating for, it is estimated that the children that is up to the age of 18 years; number about 7 million people.  And of course among these people, the children themselves are the vulnerable members of our society.  But even among the children, there are those who are even more vulnerable like the infants, like the orphans, like the street children, like the disabled children and so on.  I am glad that we are this Council, and I am glad that yesterday we passed the other law which is quite comprehensive, it covers children in all circumstances.  

I would like to address my mind to the children with disabilities.  It is estimated that, 10 percent of these children actually have disabilities of various types.  And these children, it is unfortunately the majority of them belong or live in the poorer communities of our society.  Because these are the areas where immunisation is low, where ignorance among parents is high and so on and so forth.  So, you find that these children need a lot of support.  They will need a lot of things that are being mentioned in this Bill.  And I am hoping that, this National Council will be able to look into the affairs of Children with disabilities, it will be able to look into the area of their treatment, treating their disabilities, areas of their health, areas of their rehabilitation and of course their education.  At this stage I would like to commend the CA.  The CA addressed issues of children with disabilities. (Applause)  

In Article 32 and 35, the State is required to give Affirmative Action and Parliament is supposed to pass laws to ensure that these children are given an opportunity to realise their full mental and physical potential.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, after having promulgated the Constitution, we have got a lift in this building, and the hon. Member who is speaking finds it very difficult to go to the second floor.  Maybe this Parliament and this august House will think of repairing that lift so that the hon. Member on the Floor can be able to go to the second floor without getting to stretch his feet to go up.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA: Okay, thank you for that observation.  As I said, I do appreciate what the CA said, and I think it is a challenge to this Parliament and the next Parliament to put laws in place, to ensure that, that particular provision in the Constitution is fully realised.  

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  I would like to inform my Colleague hon. Mwandha that somehow we have been making the laws in this House.  We have committed certain omissions arising from the procedure or sometimes to the Chair into the sitting and making the laws of the House.  So, what I pray is that in the New Year we must go in for making good laws.  It is the best good laws that govern Uganda.  So, I would like my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House to click to that not another.

MR MWANDHA:  I thank the hon. Member for the information.  But the point I wanted to make really, is that, the NCC should take it upon themselves to ensure in future that these provisions in the constitution are really realised.  And I am glad that we have this organisation now being formed.  Because the way this Parliament is resolved, maybe other people may not know what we are talking about.  But at least there will be continuity in terms of the facts that we shall have a Body responsible.  

I think one of the tasks which this NCC shall have to take on is really to sensitize parents of disabled children.  Mr Chairman, many parents of disabled children of course when their children become disabled, they become very disappointed.  And then because of lack of awareness in the field of disability, they intend to neglect the children who are disabled.  In many of our communities, a disabled child will be kept always in the background.  He will not be even be allowed to come and greet the guest or whatever.  

Because people intend to associate disability with all sorts of things.  Things like misfortune, witchcraft, bad luck, curse and things of this kind.  So, I think one of the things the Council should do, is really to try and create awareness not only for parents but for political leaders, civic leaders and other leaders, to ensure that actually the aspirations in the Constitution are realised so that the children can grow up and realise their potential so that they are not a burden to society.  Otherwise, if this is not done, these children will end up begging for a living which will be a real unfortunate thing which I am sure not many people would like to see.  

MR DRANI DRADRIGA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that some efforts have been made; like some NGOs which are coordinated by Ministry of Local Government and maybe other Ministries too.  Whereby centres are created and which counseling is carried out and I have even seen some surgery is carried out.  I think these efforts should be continued so that the children who are disabled can realise their full potential.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please could you wind up hon. Mwandha.

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, let me wind up.  Mr Chairman, I would like at this stage to commend many of the District Councils which have made provisions in their District Budgets for people with disability.  And Mr Chairman, I know my own District of Iganga has done this; I know the District of Gulu has done it.  But even the district of Hoima has gone much further and provided for enough money in their budget to ensure that children with disability in Hoima would receive education.  Which I think this is most commendable. (Applause)  I hope the hon. Members here when they go back to their respective districts, will prevail on their District Councils and ensure that adequate funds are made available for people with disabilities. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO (Nominated Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  Mr Chairman, while supporting the Bill, I wish to draw the attention of this House to the fact that, the government I think was not willing to bring in this Bill.  I am disappointed.  The first draft of the Bill was ready in May 1993.  I have the draft, and every Member of the House was given this draft of the Bill; two years coming to a third year.  The government is not willing to bring the Bill for us to debate.  

While we were waiting for the Bill, the government went ahead, appointed the Secretary General, in the names of hon. Pulkol who was there.  Now we devote to the Council.  We do not know whether he accounted for whatever he did, he went to another ministry.  

Similarly, I understand there is already a chairman, who happens to be the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee.  Now, I do not know. (Laughter)  Yes, it is up to him to deny, but he is the Chairman.  Now when he is asking us to establish a Council, which he is a Chairman, I do not know whether it is fair for us to go ahead.  I would rather say that, let him resign the other one and then come to us for the official debate of this Bill.  Otherwise, the public will continue wondering whether this House is actually serious or we are there to endorse what has already been done by the Executive.  

Likewise, we have the Work Plan of this Council.  Lend out or spent out what the Government intended to do in 1993; it is laid out here.  I would be very happy if the Chairman who happens to be the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee had told us what he has done so far since he assumed the Chair.  So that we can know, what he has achieved, what problem he has faced.  So that when we are legislating and creating a Council, we would be borrowing from his own experience, and see whether the thing will be successful.  Because it is useless to create a Council which may fail.  Because already he has some data.  It would bring the interest to this House if he could tell us about these foreigner donors.  How many have come in?  How much he has collected?  How much is already in his account?  And how much he may need from this House? 

I wish to support the Members who have debated earlier and said the Membership of the Council is too big.  When initially in the draft, the Minister had proposed that the Membership involves 35 Members.  This was still in the draft report, not a Council.  We would rather make it 39.  So that every district is represented.  And then, it would be more representing than 35.  Mr Chairman, we would rather have at least a Committee slightly of less representative of the different Ministries.  Now I can see that, all ministries are represented except the Ministry of Defence.  

Now, we need the Ministry of Defence on this Council so that these kids need more protection. (Laughter).  Yes, we have a lot of Kadogos who will need rehabilitation and now, Ministry of Defence should come in.  Because the Kadogos can be better handled by the Ministry of Defence.  Therefore, we should also include the Ministry of Defence here to take care of our Kadogos.  Mr Chairman, where somebody is saying now that they have matured.  That could be okay, but Kadogos are continuing to be bold.  

I have looked at the proposed Bill under Section 3, the Minister is saying that, the Council shall be semi autonomous.  Now at this Clause, what do we mean by semi autonomous?  Either it is autonomous or not, I do not see.  Now, can the Minister trust me to get a clear idea of what he wants us to create?  What does he mean by semi-autonomous?  Does he want to create one where he is going to keep a remote control, a gift with one hand and he withdraws the power with the other?  So long as his liking is autonomous if he is not, he says No! I told you, you are semi autonomous.  Now, which one are you creating? 

Mr Chairman, since we came in this House, the arguments and the disappointments of the Members of this House has been creating organisations which are semi-independent of the Ministers.  We have seen wars between the Members of the Board and the Ministers.  Where the Minister says dismiss that one.  Then we come back and say, No! You do not have the powers.  Instead of losing faith, he dismisses the full board.  Now, if we have to create a Council for Children, let them be independent of the Minister, I mean let them only report to the Minister and then he can advise.  But this idea of semi autonomous, we are  going to create another department.  Not a Council to do a good job. I would request the Minister to create a Council which can work independent of his day to day supervision.  Where you can trust that you have appointed Members who can do the job.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to draw the attention of the hon. Member holding the Floor to the circulated amendment by the Minister, where he is clarifying to us that semi autonomous, is going to be replaced by self accounting.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Minister.  The problem is that, when the Minister brings in the amendment, they are smuggled to ensure; I have not seen any.  So you make our debate impossible when you see there is an amendment. Well, I have not seen it.  You are lucky you have got it since you are a Minister. (Laughter)  

So, you have made my debate impossible.  Because I do not know what you intend to amend.  But then, let me put it on record that, while you have seen that one, maybe there are similar cases which will need his attention.  It is important that we have this Council to first of all, to control these organisations which are just around cities claiming to be responsible for these abandoned kids.  It is so disheartening to find so many organisations claiming to be catering for kids.  You find some busy carrying cooked food, giving out this food; but behind you hear rumours that they take photographs to look for money abroad.  There is no accountability for such monies donated to this country.  Each one minds his own business, and these kids are give peanut.  It is high time when we have this Council, it should coordinate and control these NGOs.  We have seen some of these claiming to be church organisations, this and that.  But these kids are still on the street.  They just give out peanuts and go back and say look! I have done a good job.  These are under my organisation and they are under my control.  We need to control these organisations which come in to assist our own kids.  

MR ONGORA ATWAI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, it is the third time that this talk about NGOs is coming up in the House this afternoon and I am beginning to feel concerned whether it is really necessary that we include in our law the appointment of a representative of the NGOs.  We may have quite a number of them; and these NGOs act in a authentic sort of manner.  They become selfish and what criteria are you going to use to appoint that and leave that?  I think we are trying to go beyond our jurisdictions.  We need to leave these people out if we are to control them.  Unless you are saying that, there is going to be follow up where, whoever is appointed to sit on this Council is going to convene another meeting and report back the resolution and procedure and whatever the Council is following.  So, I feel it is safe to leave these NGOs out.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Thank you.   Now you can see every Member has concern over these NGOs coming in.  Because actually there would be a struggle over who has come in.  Each one will like to be represented.  Anyway maybe the Minister has a union of NGOs where they insist. 

MRS MATEMBE: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the information I would like to give to the House is that, certainly NGOs in this country have so far been the most dealing with the children I can assure you.  Take UWESO, UNICEF, Save the Children’s Fund and other Local NGOs.  On children, it is the NGOs who have been trying their best; Sanyu Babies Home, all these NGOs have been trying their best to care for these children more than what the government has been doing.  When we are debating, I would like us to debate bearing that in mind and knowing that, actually the NGO’s interest should also be catered properly in this Bill which is trying to establish a National Body to work for the children.  You should not look at them badly because they are the ones doing the work.  I thank you.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr Chairman, I have no objection, we actually recognise the good job done by the NGOs. But I would also request the Member to look behind that we have NGOs which have done a very bad job.  We have NGOs which are not here for a good motive. The idea is just to front for other people behind to get money.  Where the case, was it in Mbarara where an NGO was standing to be chased.  I read it in papers maybe you know better.  I read it.  It was the RDC of Mbarara who said that this NGO has swindled the people there; I do not know, the Member maybe knows better.  But we have to protect.  While we appreciate that, we have good NGOs, we also have bad ones which we need to control.  So that, when we get money, they do not end up in the pockets of the few who have created these NGOs.  We have good ones.  For instance, Sanyu Babies Home, has done a recommendable job; UWESO, but we have bad ones which also have been created to enrich the few.  

I have seen yet in the Council when you look through section 20.  Under Clause 20(3); we are creating a Council which will come to this House to be given money, we are creating a Council if it gets this amount shall be a charge on the Consolidated Fund.  Now, Once you agree that the Minister is saying that, with the approval of the Minister for Finance, this Council can get a loan and this loan can be charged directly on the Consolidated Fund.  I am advising the Minister that with the new Constitution, these laws can only be approved by this House.  Because this money will be a burden of the taxpayer.  Before you negotiate with the Ministry for Finance for a loan, you should present your budget to this House.  So that this House knows how much money you are borrowing for this Council and for which activity?  Otherwise, this nation is tied of getting involved in debts and we are just told after you have defaulted and you want us to pay off.  We would rather get involved.  The taxpayers should know what money we are borrowing and for what purpose?  So that later when you ask the chief taxpayer, or when you ask my grand son to pay at least I would like to have been a party to the debts we contracted. (Applause)  

Going to the Bill, this one maybe will come at the Committee Stage.  It was a drafting problem. Maybe it was a layman who wanted to tell us.  Under Section 23; subsection 2(a); the Chairman is saying that, the Council during the Financial Year, shall have the financial statement which shall comprise of a Balance Sheet, a statement of Income and Expenditure and a statement of Assets and Liabilities.’  

When you speak of a Balance Sheet; a Balance Sheet is  a statement of Assets and Liabilities.  Once you make a Balance Sheet, you have already made a statement of assets and liabilities.  Either you have the Balance Sheet or you have a statement of assets and liabilities.  I think when we come to the Committee Stage, one has to go and we remain with the other.  Going further on under Section 24; ‘the Minister is proposing that, there will be an auditor appointed by the Auditor General or by the Council.’  I actually accept this because it was before our new Constitution came into force.  According to the new Constitution, it is only the Auditor General who can audit.  Now, he has a chance to delegate.  But the Council has no powers whatsoever to appoint and I think it should not be either here, because that is a constitutional matter which I think is well catered for.

Finally, well if it is the Auditor General and he has the powers from the Constitution, the Minister should just become a spectator.  He has no powers whatsoever in the appointment of the Auditor General.  

Lastly, there is something which is puzzling me under Section 8(4); ‘the Minister may in writing remove a Chairman from the office as chairman, if he is requested to do so by Resolution of the Council supported by not less than two thirds.’  Now, what happens in the Council, if less than two thirds but more than the majority do not want the Chairman and they say No, No! you can be removed by two thirds.  Then when we are more than 50 percent, we say we do not want him; what happens when we come to the House?  We say we do not want you.  You say no, No! You do not have two-thirds majority. Then we move out, there is no quorum; and even if there is a quorum, we vote against whatever is being debated.  I seek clarification from the Minister why he thinks that, where the majority does not want the Chairman, you have to come to two-thirds majority before we can remove the Chairman.  Otherwise, if you loose confidence of the majority, he should leave.  Otherwise, the Council will not work.  Otherwise it will be a deadlock all the time, no business, no nothing.  Once you lose the confidence of the majority, you should leave, you do not have to wait to look for the two-thirds majority.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much. (Applause)

MRS MATEMBE (Woman Representative, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am glad to support this Bill establishing the National Council for Children.  In my view, this is a big step forward, towards our democratization process.  I this country I think one category of a person has been having the right to be heard.  But since 1986, quite a number of the quiet ones have been heard.  Women did not have a voice, until they got the voice; since 1986.  The youth did not have a voice until of course 1986 and the establishment of the Women’s Councils and the Youth Councils Act.  Now, finally the silence majority, the children, are going to get a voice through this Council.  So to me, the establishment of this Council is a very big step towards our democratization process. You will agree with me that, since the one time voiceless have been heard in particular the women, quite a lot has been done to bring the attention of people to their issues and concerns.  

Being heard does not necessarily mean that your problems will be solved.  But at least it gives comfort that you receive attention.  And of course the youth since especially they were in Parliament and in CA, they have been heard and as a result, they concern has been incorporated into the laws that we are making.  Of course the disabled; people with disability.  People who were in CA, could have seen how hon. Mazima really articulated on the interests of people with disability which people although are concerned and interested and even live with those people, could not be able to articulate on, simply because it was from the vote’s mouth.  So, it is so important that the children who have been kept silent all this time can be heard through this Body.  Mr Chairman, I have been particularly  -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  The Member is making a very good point; but I would like here to clarify where in this Bill, the children are given a voice to speak? (Laughter)  Because I see even in the Council, there is no representative from any children to organisation itself.  So, I would like her to tell us where in this Bill, the voice of the  children are represented.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, I wish to draw the attention of the hon. Member to Article 4, ‘the object of the Council’ and in particular Clause 8.  To act as a Body through which the need and problems of children can be communicated to government and other decision-making institutions and agencies in Uganda.  If the hon. Member does not understanding the English as written here and he may need the Advanced Learners Dictionary to get the proper meaning of the provision.  But in my own opinion, and interruption, Mr Chairman (Interruption)

HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for a Member to imply that, I did not understand the English?  When in fact she spoke of the children being given a voice to talk and yet here we only talk about representation of the children.  It is not a voice given to them.  This is representation through the Council, not being given a voice to speak.  I think it is the Member who really does not understand the English here.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Matembe Miria is in order, if she believes that, you do not understand what is written there.

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for that intelligent ruling.  Mr Chairman, I am particularly happy for the establishment of this Council.  Because I personally have been very, very much bothered and infringed by the way the affairs of children are handled.  I think hon. Members know that leave alone these children they call children on the street, but even children in homes.  Children in homes have been suffering, have been bartered by also mothers and fathers; but particularly by stepmothers and step fathers.  They really mistreat these children so badly, the burning of hands, the psychological torture in homes, they have been suffering.  And they have nowhere to go.  At times they run to the street.  

Since NRM came to power and people like us started talking on behalf of children, many children ran to us even their parents, those children who are defiled, those who are bartered by teachers and parents.  But you know, you get involved; but you reach a stage when you are stuck.  You drive all the way for instance to Masaka; to that school you remember the boy who was tortured, you cannot go there many times, and there is nobody else to handle the matter and you get stuck.  

There is, for instance, a case in Jinja where this Nsube Girls Secondary, where this girl is now in a wheel chair.  In fact we had to contribute together with another institution to get a wheel chair for this girl who was 10 years old and was tortured by the teacher.  We tried to take the case to court, but the medical evidence disappeared from Jinja Hospital, even Mulago here.  These case are there, and they are so many Mr Chairman, and children have been having no voice.

MRS MUGARURA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Matembe that if she really cared for that point she is stressing.  There is definitely a need to include on this composition of the Council at least two representatives from the School Council.  Because the definition of children is those people below 18 years.  And among the children population, there are enough mouthpieces, say people who could talk for themselves.  So, I feel that, this composition of the Members on the Council is too much dominated by other people rather than the children; and yet she emphasized the fact that, hon. Mazima was able to stress his case because he was there physically.  

So, there is a need Mr Chairman, and the Chairman of the Committee and the hon. Minister to include children from say School Councils or any other recognised institution so that we have children on this Council to talk for themselves. (Applause)  Thank you, Mr Chairman. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Because the definition of children is those people below 18 and among the children population, there are enough mouthpieces, people who could talk for themselves.  So, I feel that this composition of the members on the council is too much dominated by other people rather than the children, and yet she emphasized the fact that - hon. Mazima was able to stress his case because he was there physically.  So, there is a need, and the Chairman of the committee and the hon. Minister to include children from say school councils or any other recognised institution so that we have children on this Council to talk for them.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

MRS MATEMBE:  I thank the hon. Member for that point certainly.  When it comes to composition of the Council, I think many other considerations should be taken into account because you may find, like the cases I am raising here, even the people who are categorised here may not be in a position to come up with all these cases.  So, when it comes to composition, I think the hon. Minister may need to liaise more to see how we can cater for such a situation; because as you know Mr Chairman, these days, there is management by participation and you find workers participating in the bodies created for them, you find teachers also participating in bodies created and even I remember when I was at Makerere University, at one time I was the students representative on the law faculty board so that I could air the views of the students to these lecturers who were at times malicing  us.  So maybe we may find a need to put that big child there or some two big children of 17 years who can understand those issues so that they can be heard directly from there.  Mr Chairman, if I may proceed to –(Interruption)

MR OPIO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, the hon. Member on the Floor has made a statement that she had to be on the committee so as to take interest of some of the students who were being maliced by some of the lecturers.  Can she possibly give us more on that since it is a very serious allegation?  Can she substantiate?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Matembe, please substantiate.

MRS MATEMBE:  The point I was raising here is a very serious point.  I did not even say I was representing some.  I was a full representative of the law faculty board, on the board to represent and articulate on the interests of students and I said also to look into those cases where there was some kind of malicing.  What does he want now?  Does he not know that even right now in Makerere malicing goes on?  Does he not know that even right now in Makerere there are cases of sexual harassment by lecturers of students?  Does he not know?  (Laughter)  Mr Chairman –(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give privileged information to hon. Matembe who is holding the Floor that as far as Makerere University is concerned, there are systems in place to deal with those people who sexually or otherwise mistreat or mismanage the students and these systems have been known to take decisive action; and therefore if the hon. Member has any cases that have credible evidence, the systems are in place to handle these cases decisively Mr Chairman.

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, the reason why those systems are there are to handle those cases I am talking about.  So if I may proceed with my contribution on the bill now. (Interruptions) 

Mr Chairman, I was looking at the objectives of this Council.  I wonder whether they can thing about representation in court for these children because when these children are defiled, they are bartered and some of them are denied their prepare, some of them their parents throw them on the streets; there are so many fathers because mothers come to me - Mr Chairman, it is mothers who have come to me to accuse fathers.  If fathers come to me, I shall bring it to this House but what I know is that there are so many cases of mothers who come to me to tell me that the fathers are neglecting the children, the fathers are refusing to pay fees.  There are those who deny that, one, the court can decide, but there are those very ones who are fathers but they say I want children to be in my house.  If they are not in my house, I am not going to care for them.  

HON. MEMBERS:  Yes.

MRS MATEMBE:  Mr Chairman, have you heard?  What I am saying is true.  Mr Chairman, that response seems to suggest that hon. Members here also may be involved because they seem to support the idea which is wrong.  (Laughter)  The issue of a husband and wife and their misunderstanding should be completely separated from the issue of care of children.  I do not care whether you have lost love for your wife or whether you have lost love for your husband.  But you brought children into this earth without them asking you to do that and therefore, for goodness sake, such children should be cared for unconditionally Mr Chairman.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, it is very, very disappointing to note that even Members of this House are supporting the children being removed from their mothers.  There is a case of a father who insisted that a child be taken to his home.  This very man turned the ten-year old girl into his wife.  (Interjections) Yes.  But when we are talking about individual cases, some of these things do happen.  So we are here to protect -(Interruption)

MR KALULE SENGO:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to ashame men as if they are animals.  Again, may I request that this Lady can substantiate what she is talking about.  And is it also in order for her to give us the impression that women are so perfect that they do not do anything wrong?  Because some of these things she is talking about are also done by women.  But then the problem is, the ladies tend to over blow the mistakes of the men and then they forget all the mistakes that the women are committing day and night.  So, Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member to talk the way she is talking?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, order, hon. Members, some of these incidents are very painful to mothers and I think they are in order to express what they think.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman because I am not making up a story and if hon. Sengo has a case in place, he had better say it against women because this case is still on and it is in front of FIDA.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.

MRS MATEMBE:  Yes Mr Chairman, you can see the need for this council to really look into these matters.  We are no rebuking men, we are not being disrespectful but we are talking from experience.  We have seen these cases and if you have also women who are behaving like that, you also condemn them here because for me, when I am talking in defence of children; I condemn both men and women who violate the rights of children.  

So, I am concerned about the -(Interruptions)- Mr Chairman, I was talking about representation, I was talking about the council’s need to represent these children as a friend of the children in court when these cases come up.  Because these cases by the way are so embarrassing, they are so shameful that -(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Matembe, proceed please and wind up.

MRS MATEMBE:  Okay now that one, I think the Minister has heard and he will tell us.  In fact the Minister of Labour knows many, many things of incest and defilement that goes on in homes.  Those cases are there because complaints go there.  So the council should consider - 

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for hon. Miria Matembe to imply that the Minister of Labour Dr Chebrot knows incest matters more than many of us?  (Laughter)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  She is out of order.

MRS MATEMBE:  Okay, Mr Chairman, really when I said the Minister, at one time when we were handing these cases, I had an opportunity to discuss with Mrs Betty Okwir in detail about numerous cases within the Ministry because they report them there.  I was saying it in good faith Mr Chairman.  If I may proceed and conclude Mr Chairman, when it comes to composition of the council, I would like to see the following criteria for followed.  Of course the numbers are just too many but one of the criteria that should be followed is that person’s interest in children.  I can assure you whether you put a person, if he has no interest in matters relating to children, they will not do much.  So, I would like the particular interest of a person in the children’s affairs to be taken into consideration.  

Number two, let us do research into these people because if this is a man or woman who has abandoned children, who has neglected children, who is defiling children, he should find his or her way on this council.  I do not want to see her or him there.  So let us look into the qualifications.  I am certainly glad that the girl child is particularly mentioned in this bill because you will all agree with me that the discrimination and insubordination of the girl child has led to misery for the girl children because these girl children have become mothers at tender age, they have become wives, they are the people who throw children in the dustbins, they have abandoned children.  Okay, he is saying it is criminal but she has been forced to become a criminal by a bigger man, or sugar daddy or sugar mummy.  

So, Mr Chairman, I am glad that the issue of the girl child is given particular attention.  I would like to see it in action in the development programme; in the plan itself and I would like to also agree with my Colleague hon. Mwandha that the disabled child should also be given particular attention.  When we do this, we shall have really gone a long way in caring for our children.  I thank you Mr Chairman for listening.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, it appears the time has been over monopolised by Members of the fairer sex.  Nevertheless, I want to start by saying that there is a well-known statement in England that if you do not want to do anything about a problem, you appoint a royal commission.  Mr Chairman, this bill seems to be to be almost a clear indication that the government is not willing, ready or prepared to deal with the problems itself of the children.  It is trying to pass them over to somebody else with the result that it is proposing the creation of a national council for children to take away the responsibility from the shoulders of the Minister responsible for children.  As though that was not bad enough, they have taken away the responsibility from the National Council for Children and given it to committees of the Council.  Now after doing that, then they take away the responsibility from the committees and give it to the secretariat.  You will find that it is the secretariat which will propose policies.  

So, this question of dealing with the children will fall between so many stools with result that in the end, nothing will be done.  That is the point I want to point out to the House.  I am worried Mr Chairman, because having held responsibilities that I have held in the past some of which involved - for example in this sector like making orders for children who have committed crime and cannot be imprisoned in the normal case, I know that there is a terrible need of just a few institutions.  How many remand homes do we have for children in this country?  And how many children can they accommodate?  How many approved schools?  Even in Kampala, you will find that children aged 12 or 14, when they are arrested they go and they are detained or imprisoned along with old men or women.  They learn bad habits, they are sodomised.  I beg your pardon but these things happen to them.  You know it, they are taken and they are cohabited with hardened criminals because we have no facilities.  We are going to spend - If I am any judge, a long of money on running this Council.  The money which should be spent on the welfare of the children will be spent on the Chairman, the what -(Applause)- and the result, the welfare of the children will not be looked at.  

So, I very humbly appeal to the government that instead of spending this money which is going to be spent on this semi-autonomous or self accounting or whatever Council, whichever way you will describe it, and instead of - as we did in the parent bill - pushing the work to district councils and other local councils, let the government itself agree that it has a responsibility for the welfare of the children of this country; because as somebody said - was it Shakespeare?  The child and the father or the man. The professor of English tells me it was so and I am grateful to him.  Mr Chairman, that I think was the most important point.  This bill is going to be passed -

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, hon. Abu Mayanja has looked at his watch as if to warn me that information should be short.  Mr Chairman, I want to remind the hon. Member of the usual complaint which this House raised that some of these things were drafted when he was in the office of the Attorney General.  How did he allow them to pass Mr Chairman?  This is the information I wanted to pass to him and probably he might apologise to us.  (Laughter)

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, when hon. Mayanja brought a bill here for Resistance Council Statute, I moved an amendment and it was passed unanimously by the House that all vice-chairmen in the Resistance Council will be vice-chairman/children’s welfare including the Vice-President and I suppose this is why the Minister for Labour lost this assignment to the Vice-President’s Office because it was in line with that law which hon. Abu Mayanja actually spearheaded in the House.  Has he forgotten?

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, I have not forgotten and this capping on former Ministers on what they did or failed to do when they were Ministers, they are performing a different function and hon. Mayengo does not seem really to understand what are the responsibilities of the Attorney General of Uganda and since the matter is rather long, if he need enlightenment, he can come and consult me outside of these Chambers.  (Laughter)  

The second point which I want to talk about relates to finance and I see that the council has been given or is being given power to raise funds by contracting loans.  I have not been able to read far but I do not know whether the council - I am speaking under correction.  I will welcome information - whether it is intended that the council shall engage in money generating activities or whether it shall be a trading council; because if it is not intended that it should be a trading council, how shall it repay the money that it borrows? (Interruption) Mr Chairman, I have great respect for hon. Ongora Atwai but I would rather get information from a Minister or not at all.  

This is serious because it says that if the loans have been approved, they become a charge on the consolidated fund.  I would like to know whether this council - how it is intended, is it just to wait?  Because they have said that its money shall come from the grants from the government and loans from government, then things from donors and so on and how you can even provide for donors in a law!  You do not know whether they shall continue, what they will be from donors and that kind of thing.  Again this just sort of defeats me a little bit.  But if the council is not going to be engaged in income generating activities, it may be doing little things like issuing birth certificates where they can get very, very tiny revenue but it is not going to be engaged in big money making activities, then I think it should not be allowed to borrow money and put it as a source of its income.  

I think the children of this country are in a very bad plight as I have said.  There are so many things which are taken for granted in other countries that they do not have and I would beg that if it is - because really the question of resources, since we do not have an abundance of resources, let us utilise the little we have of actual welfare of the children.  

Let us spend the money on constructing a second remand home in the country.  Let us use money in constructing another reform school or doing whatever other things that are necessary instead of spending it on a council and be waiting for advice which will be generated from the secretariat to the committees, to the council, to the Minister, to the what.  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.

MR ELLY KARUHANGA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I have a few points I would like to make.  One of them is the way the functions have been enumerated.  I am not happy with it.  I would like the House to enumerate the functions of this council more precisely than general; that this council will take care of the problems of the orphans.  We have an orphan situation.  We have an emergency situation in the country about orphans.  Every time I wake up in my house, in my constituency, outside I have a small house, I find so many of these orphans asking me to pay school fees.  I want this council to be charged with the duty to specifically look at the welfare of the orphans in this country who have been brought up by the scourge of AIDS and I want it to be spelt out clearly in this bill; that these guys do not go and sit there in these meetings and go away without addressing a specific issue which we instruct him to do now namely the issue of the orphans in Uganda.  Otherwise, this bill makes no meaning to me.  

I would like us to address the issue of the disabled child, the abused child, the neglected child, the hidden child in homes because by custom a disabled child is shame, he has a stigma, they hide this child.  The National Council of Children must address the issue of the disabled child in our homes who is suffering under neglect and torture of the parents and relatives. We must put that and spell it out, not just write word, the Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture will come and attend a meeting.  We must specifically say that this Council will take care of the torturing of the children in our schools; that the children have direct access to this Council to say, we are under torture by our teachers, we are being raped by our teachers, we are being harassed by our teachers, we are being beaten, brutalised.  There is no point in this council just saying writing the way we do.  This was written in 1994 by hon. Ejalu under the auspices of direction and State assistance, Abu Mayanja.  These guys are not there.  Let us write new things please.  (Laughter)

Baguma Isoke, we know you very well.  Let us be more specific, please, bring more concrete proposals for these people to do.  The torture of children in schools, the leakage in exams is a nuisance to children forever and ever. These are impossible things which children find themselves caught up.  They are writing exams, over there, there is another child copying exams. I saw in today’s papers that last year’s P.7 exams were a big joke; that they should be cancelled, that there was shame, that even when they brought a second paper, it was photocopied by a car which drove it to the printing press and, therefore, the people were hiding.  These are tortures of children.  A year is gone.  

This National Council of Children is a useless organisation.  I am not going to vote this bill unless we have become very clear and specifically give them assignments to do and we know that the children can ask their Members of Parliament what is happening there.  That we can vote money to say, National Council of Children, they are addressing this issue.  Even children are not participating in sports, they are not, it is true.  When you look at the corruption in my district and in other districts, you find the Chairman of youths receiving six million shillings to entertain sportsmen and children.  These people never see even soda, nothing.  

This National Council of Children has to address specific issues, not general issues.  I appeal to you hon. Baguma, you have always been revolutionary.  Take this bill, look at it, and do not worry whether the sectoral committee has looked at it or not.  Come up as a revolutionary Minister and save the child of Uganda from the eminent torture that he is going through.  (Applause)  

Who is better qualified to address the question of school fees for these children?  I wake up this morning, I go out and find young children crying, they cannot pay school fees because their fathers are so poor.  They cannot afford it.  Children who are abandoned on the street.  Kefa Sempangi, thank you very much, Sanyu Babies Home, thank you very much, Lottery Club, thank you very much, UWESO thank you very much.  Is that all?  The government must take responsibility for this action.  It is not enough for hon. Abu Mayanja who is a wonderful debater, who is a great backbencher in history to criticise this after writing it.  It is okay and he is right.  Surely we are going to spend a lot of money paying my Friend hon. Bwanika Bbaale, Chairman of the National Council of Children, allowances.  When I talk this, I am being friendly to you.  We are going to buy a car for you, we are going to buy this, we are going to get a Pajero, we are going to furnish the offices, we are going to put up the secretariat, a secretary will come from a man’s constituency.  There will be war between the big Ministers and the big man who has been appointed to eat what job. Their Permanent Secretaries will claim this or that and he has a point.  Do not just ignore hon. Abu Mayanja.  He is not just merely politicking.  He is also raising valid points; yes, we can create these but they must be assigned, yes we can pay for those allowances, yes we can buy the Pajeros, we can ask NGOs to come and look after these, we can pay all these things but they better do something that can be seen tangibly on the ground and those things must be written specifically, clearly and spelt out and assigned to these people in this bill.  Otherwise hold the bill back.  

I have another little problem.  Let us keep some democratic standard and transparency and accountability. As the President said, we are doing brick by brick towards the building of democracy.  It is certainly wrong for the Chairman of our sectoral committee to be the Chairman of the National Council of Children and steer this bill through the House.  It is not correct.  It does not give us that transparency and therefore I find it difficult to know how much is personal interest in this and how much is official interest in this and how much genuineness in this.  Apparently it could all be absolutely genuine but then it cast a shadow on it.  It is not right.  Then also nobody - maybe it was explained why this bill was moved from the Minister for Gender Affairs and then the stories we were reading in the newspapers between hon. Pulkol and hon. Chebrot and hon. this and that.  

Also this thing should be brought out and explained now because the public was fed on so much information about the wrangles in the National Council for Children.  So much nonsense was written about the people who are in that office now or before or after or this or that.  Now if you do not take this opportunity to clear the air, when will you do it?  Even our Chairman was involved.  You must take advantage of this forum and clear the air so that when we go to our constituencies, we are going to be asking for votes.  They say, aha! you are a useless organisation, they brought a bill for National Council of Children, you know what Chebrot was -(Interruption)

DR CHEBROT: Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would like to thank my Friend hon. Elly Karuhanga for asking me to clarify on the issues which had been raised regarding the National Council of Children.  Mr Chairman, when I took over as the Minister for Labour, I did find that the secretary general for National Council of Children was hon. David Pulkol.  He was actually acting.  At that time, Cabinet had made a decision that no Minister was required to be either a chairman or a member of any board.  This was a Cabinet decision which I had to implement and as you do recall Mr Chairman, you were Prime Minister at that time and that issue was minuted.  When I took over office, I did remind my Colleague at that time of that Cabinet decision to make a choice between being the secretary general of National Council of Children and being a Minister of State, he opted for the latter.  Mr Chairman, I was under obligation.  It is unfortunate that when one person is appointed from a small district, right now I am the only man who is a Minister here.  There is no other person from Kapchorwa District who is in government.  

When we take opportunity to identify credible, intelligent people who have been forgotten in small districts, the whole world cries foul.  The issue is this, Mr Stephen Anan who is now the acting secretary general is a graduate of Dar-es-Salaam University with honours degree.  He has been headmaster for 18 years.  He has been a member of the council, he is an active member.  I know no person who knows more about children than Mr Anan.  He is intelligent, he is credible, he is not corrupt and he has demonstrated himself as an able person.  Instead of getting support - I think Members of this House should give him support. 

 Mr Chairman, let me just clarify.  Hon. Matembe, you will agree with me that the minorities should also be looked after when the need arises.  The issue is this, we did make interim arrangements to appoint Mr Anan as the interim acting secretary general pending the passing of this law.  There was therefore nothing irregular in doing that.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order Mr Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, the hon. Minister has been asked to give a statement.  Could you listen?  Please proceed. (Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister to tell us stories when we know that it is the Non-Governmental Organisation that got this bill to come before us after a long time.  More importantly is that some members in our government, unless there is something to eat, they will not get something on the Floor.  So is it in order for the hon. Minister to confuse us by all sorts of stories.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Wanendeya, you are yourself out of order for being irrelevant.  Please proceed.

DR CHEBROT:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I do not know whether to respond to hon. Wanendeya’s allegation or not.  I think it is not necessary.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  No, proceed.

DR CHEBROT:  So Mr Chairman, I did indicate that interim administrative arrangements were made at that time.  Not only did I appoint Mr Anan but also we re-appointed the Chairman at that time because that time, hon. Ejalu had appointed him.  So I had to re-confirm him as a Chairman.  So there was no truth in what was being said in the press in connection with Mr Anan.  Mr Anan even if he sits for that interview, he can be able to pass to become the secretary general of National Council of Children. Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR BAGUMA ISOKE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I thank my Friend yonder and others before him for raising very fundamental questions about this bill.  First the overwhelming support for the Council, that the Council should be there to care for the needs of our children.  But the crucial issues brought are one, that although this council is for children, children are not represented.  Two, this was raised by hon. Karuhanga and hon. Loy of Kabale that the council should have been constituted by the 39 districts like the youth councils constitute the National Youth Council and the women constitute their national council. Another issue was that this is a body of bureaucrats and not representatives of children.  

Mr Chairman, these are fundamental issues.  They all point to one thing, support for the council. Given our programme, you will guide us Mr Chairman, how we should proceed.  Hon. Karuhanga should come up with amendments to specify explicitly what functions of this council now should be.  Hon. Mugarura should as well bring up an amendment to specify that the children should be represented in their representative bodies.  I do not know whether school councils are that representative.  How about the vulnerable children who do not go to school and who are not in secondary schools?  I am bringing this up at this stage Mr Chairman, because I am aware of the programme of this House.  I am aware that the interim period we are having as a legislature should be devoted to making electoral laws; Presidential, Parliamentary and local government elections laws and given the constraint of time, Mr Chairman, you will advise how we should proceed.

MR KARUHANGA:  Mr Chairman, I am very pleased with hon. Baguma Isoke’s information to me.  Indeed I had described him as one of the revolutionary Ministers we have and to whom we look forward.  I am happy that he has taken in the points raised by the Back-Benchers and he is actually prepared to receive them if appropriate amendments are made.  What I had wanted myself was that because already they have an organisation there, and they have listened to us, I was thinking that they could synthesize these general views since he has also proposed so many amendments so that the amendments come when they have received the backing of the bureaucracy in his Ministry, in the National Council of Children which has been running so that they come as Ministerial amendments other than back-bench amendments which when they get here and somebody sits there and says this and that and this type of thing.  So, it would be better that he takes in what - because some of these points we are raising now, for example, I have particularly an interest in diet for children.  I would like that primary schools through this council which are either boarding or day, during some day when they are being given food, the diet is analyzed to be a nutritious diet; that they have at least half a pint of milk.  (Interjections) Yes, very important for me also.   So items of this nature could come out having been looked and it will be much more beneficial.  I would like to claim the credit but it would be better if the matter was brought out like that.  

Now, in light of this, this is a fundamental point we are raising and I would really like to appeal to the Minister, after all, this is Christmas season, Jesus was born.  Now, we are discussing the thing of the child.  Since 1993, it waited for 1994, 1995 has passed, we are in 1996.  Let us make a good law. Let us not rush things the way we have always done.  It means going back to the sectoral committee, let us do it.  If it means coming up with amendments in time tomorrow and burn the candle, it is well and good.  But let us pass a good law.  

Lastly, I would like the women council to be represented on this council.  Women are the mothers of the nation and really they take primary responsibility towards the care of children. I would like the council of women to be responsible and to be represented adequately in good measure, in good numbers more than permanent secretaries.  I would like the youth council, it is so closely related to the children, the constitution has described the child to be 16 years old.  Now the youth is 18 years old up to 30.  These people can easily have a wonderful communication and they can bring a lot of very good information.  In any case, an 18-year-old youth has got fresh wounds of torture.  So, we need also a good doze of the youth council on the National Council of Children and also talking about the youths, I am not happy that the youths have not held their delegates conference for the last two years and that their chairman has been appointed secretary general such that now they no longer have a voice; and I hope that this should not have happened.  It has happened and I think redress measures should be taken because the youths in my district are very unhappy with this choice that they come two years ago, they elect a chairman, he gets there, then you appoint him as government secretary general, giving him a car.  It is not fair.  Now they no longer have a voice.  

So the organisation of the youth movement is dead because there is no leader any more. It is like we, going and electing our President, when we get him there, then the next day you hear that he has become the Permanent Secretary of the President’s Office.  This is a big shame to the youth movement and it was a big - I do not know who did it, which Minister did it but they must account to the youth movement and I am speaking now for the youths because I do not see the youth for Western Province here.  (Interjections)

HON. MEMBERS:  He is here.

MR KARUHANGA:  Oh! yes, here he is.  With those few words, I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  With that we come to the end of today’s session and we adjourn the Council until tomorrow, starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 4th January, 1995)

 
 



