Tuesday, 4 January 2011

Parliament met at 10.48 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I take this opportunity to welcome you to this first sitting in the year of our Lord, 2011. I congratulate you for having successfully ended 2010 and I wish you the best in 2011. I wish you a better year than the previous one and I wish you every success in all your undertakings. 

I know this is now the fifth year since we resumed a multi-party system and this is the first Parliament in the last 20 years that is successfully handling that system. The multi-party system was started but the first one after independence collapsed after about two or three years. There was another attempt some other time but it did not last for more than three years. But with your dedication, I think we are now succeeding to have a multi-party system go beyond four years, and I hope we shall be able to hand over a multi-party system to another duly elected Parliament, the Ninth Parliament. I, therefore, think it is proper for me to thank all of you for the maturity and understanding that you have exhibited that has enabled us to do so.

I want to apologise for interrupting your activities – this is not being insensitive to the critical moment you are undergoing – but due to very urgent business that we were not able to handle last year, I found it compelling for me to request you to come and re-convene and clear that business. 

I have been impressed by what I have heard that in your campaigns there has not been any violence. You have handled your campaigns maturely and I pray that it continues that way. Political differences should not strain your relationship; you should be able to interrelate with each other without a problem. So thank you very much, hon. Members on both sides. 

To the Leader of Opposition, I am happy to see you after a long time and I wish you success. I think you have read in newspapers that our colleague, hon. Dr Chrispus Kiyonga, lost his dear son, Samora Machel Asingya, on Sunday in Mweya Safari Lodge and that is why he is not here. But I think we should observe a minute of silence for the late Samora Machel Asingya.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

10.54
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Adolf Mwesige represented His Excellency the President and the Government at the burial of hon. Kiyonga’s son. He gave amabugo (commiseration money) of Shs 3 million and some of us also made some donations, which I would not like to reveal. And if other Members would like to do so, please hand the money to hon. Migereko.

Mr Speaker, allow me to take this opportunity to welcome you and my colleagues to this Chamber and I look forward to working very closely with you as we handle intricate matters. Whatever we do, whatever we say, we should enhance national integration. We should also enhance institutionalisation of good governance and multi-party democracy. Thank you.

10.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker, the Leader of Government and my colleagues. I rise on behalf of the Opposition to welcome you into 2011 and to also express our congratulations to you, the Deputy Speaker and the entire Parliament upon entering 2011, which we all hope will be a peaceful and positive year.

I would also like to express my sincere condolences at the loss of hon. Kiyonga’s son. In the villages, we rarely look at e-mail and so I only got to know some of the happenings this morning when I was going through my e-mail. And amongst the events that took place while we were away was the loss of hon. Amuriat’s mother. I also saw it in the e-mail this morning although it happened last year. And I would also like to express our regrets. 

Otherwise, we take note of the fact that this year’s campaigns are not as bad as the previous ones. But we would like to honestly regret and put on record the things that have been happening where owners of some radio stations have refused to host our candidate. The most recent one was in Nakaseke, even when the owners of the radio station were paid, but they locked him out. 

It doesn’t serve the purpose for any organisation in Uganda to treat Ugandans who are legitimate candidates for the highest office in this land as if they were common criminals or really terrible elements that should not be entertained. 

It is my appeal to Government to come out very clearly on this and probably issue a statement or a directive that this should not happen because the Electoral Commission does not seem to have the capacity to do anything about it. But it is really regrettable and doesn’t portray any positive value in these processes. It merely degenerates into resentment, which could spill over into anger which is totally unnecessary. Otherwise, we look forward to going back to our constituencies after today’s meeting. Thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, very much. 

10.59
MR GODI AKBAR (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter of national importance concerning the concurrent use of the old and new Uganda currency shilling notes recently issued by Bank of Uganda. 

Up to now the finance experts in this country have not come out to explain to us how much money is in circulation and, therefore, we are unable to tell its effect on inflation. We need an explanation on the two currency notes that are being used in this country. Thank you.  

11.00
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I rise on a matter that concerns the proposed Bill on traditional and cultural leaders; as you may well be aware that there has been a lot of concern over the content and procedure of that Bill. 

I am however, pleased to note that there was a meeting in which you, Mr Speaker, were reportedly present yesterday. But my urge of standing is to get a proper clarification from the Prime Minister as to the status of this Bill so that we would be able to move smoothly as he has promised. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, I need to make a correction in the statement I made about hon. Amuriat’s mother because when I saw the e-mail this morning, I called him and he switched off the phone. So, I assumed that this was about the loss but I am being informed by my colleague that that mail of hon. Amuriat was in relation to the death of hon. Banyenzaki’s mother. So, I was actually extremely surprised because hon. Amuriat’s mother is more less my sister; she comes from my region and I would have expected to be informed. So, it has been corrected.  

11.01
MR SAMUEL ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I came from the village yesterday where I have also been having a total black out on the national media and the print media. But last evening when I was in a health club, I was watching NTV and I saw one of the news anchors talking about some money which I saw as either sort of misplaced or defamatory news. I think someone here should come out clearly and tell the whole world the status of this so called NAADS money because it is really mounting pressure on MPs in the constituencies. 

For others even when you are using your legitimate savings, our opponents are already making some statements. So, I felt that we may not get another opportunity since we are time barred - but I felt that someone needs to comment about it and it relieves us either positively or negatively of the kind of news we are seeing in the national media. I have seen the minister in charge around; we need a clarification so that when we get back to the constituency, people know the position. And Mr Speaker, this is very important; I don’t expect him to sit and it just passes. So, I beg to have the Minister of State for Finance, hon. Fred Omach to make a comment. 

11.04
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt hon. Speaker of Parliament, hon. Members of Parliament, I was asked to clarify on the status of the Bill concerning traditional and cultural leaders. As you know, this Bill is before two committees, the one of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs and that of Gender, who are handling it. I have urged people who would like to improve it to make their statements to these committees.  

I wish to take this opportunity to point out that yesterday we had a meeting where we agreed on amendments which will be made to that Bill. Those amendments will, however, be made at an appropriate time because consultations are going on and His Excellency will be privy to those amendments. And normally when a minister in charge of a Bill makes important amendments, that person has to go back to Cabinet for approval. But because people are in their political trenches, it is not really possible to have regular Cabinet meetings. 

So, under the circumstances, His Excellency the President can approve those matters using Article 99 of the Constitution and the Minister, hon. Gabriel Opio will make those amendments to the Bill. So, that is the status of the Bill. 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, the Bill was tabled in this House by the Minister in charge of culture. Therefore, it received its first reading and I must say that personally that was the first time that I got to know the contents of this Bill. There was immediate reaction to this Bill because of its contents. 

It is not because the Bill was presented and constitutions are not self enforcing; they need other laws to enforce them and that is the law. Immediately there were reactions and in fact in my office as the Speaker, I received official reaction from the Buganda Kingdom in writing and other people were saying on radio that it should be rejected. 

The process of rejecting a Bill by Parliament arises when a process has taken place. Since this Bill was sent to the committee, the committee could come out with a recommendation that, “We have seen the Bill; it is useless, it is badly drafted and the Bill should be rejected”.

The other process is for the minister to withdraw the Bill but the withdrawal of the Bill by the minister – he simply cannot sit in his office and write to the Speaker that he is withdrawing the Bill. He has to come here, make an application for you to grant him to withdraw it. So this has been the mix up and yesterday the Executive, headed by the Prime Minister, also came to seek my guidance as the Mengo ministers also came to seek my guidance.

What they said is that they had realised that certain provisions should be removed because of certain reasons. So what should they do? Should they go and publish another amended Bill? I asked them, “Is there a procedure of having an amended Bill published?” The best thing is to take whatever is said to the committee so that they can say what they want.

My recollection is that there were a number of amendments that were being considered to be dropped out of that Bill and that is the position and as he has said, the minister in charge of the Bill will give us the details.

I must assure you that we have every right to reject or improve the Bill because our oath is to uphold the Constitution. If the Bill is contravening the Constitution, we are free to point it out and reject those provisions contravening the Constitution.

I must say that we have had controversial Bills here. One of them was the Land (Amendment) Bill but those who have now seen the Bill, which eventually passed into law, will definitely see that it is different from the Bill as originally published.

Therefore, we are capable of handling this Bill. I must say that recently we had a Bill; the Kampala Capital Bill. The Bill, which eventually passed is not the same as the Bill, which was published. First of all, we did not include Entebbe, we did not include Kajjansi and we did not include Kira in the Bill because of certain reasons. So I am confident that we shall be able to bring out an acceptable Bill for the purpose that is duly authorised under the Constitution.

But should the minister think that he has to withdraw, on the day we sit he can come and make an application. I will allow the minister to make an application and you will consider the application. If it is for withdrawing, he can withdraw and he can tender in another acceptable Bill. However, you should give an impression to the people that we are able to handle that Bill. That Bill also contains some positive things for instance the security of our cultural leaders. We need to know that they have to be given security. There are things also, that are not necessary and you will be able to handle this. Anything unconstitutional will be rejected.

11.12
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Mr Speaker, I thank you for the clarification you have given us on this controversial Bill. But I believe that these two processes may not solve the problem. Yes, the Land (Amendment) Bill was controversial and the process that we went through to enact it won’t be the same process we are going to use in this one. The Prime Minister has stated that people are busy so there will not be wide consultations.

Mr Speaker, what is in the public? The public is already biased and they are angry because some people have gone out and even misinterpreted some sections. Others have stated what is clear in the Bill and people have completely said, “We don’t want that Bill especially in Buganda. The Buganda caucus gave you our position that we do not accept any clause in this Bill, that we want a total halt of the Bill. It has become more controversial -

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, this is a Bill for cultural leaders. It is not only Buganda that has a cultural leader. Therefore, what is not good for the Buganda cultural leader is not also good to a Munyoro or a Mutoro. Therefore, you as national leaders please, handle this matter nationally rather than regionally and by handling it nationally, you will have co-operation and more strength rather than singling this out as a Buganda thing. That is my advice but I am confident we shall be able to get out the good and remove the bad parts in this law.

11.15
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to seek clarification from Government regarding a matter that is now causing anxiety in the public domain.

Whereas the Electoral Commission directed that no political party should recruit anything to do with youth brigades for any purpose, some activities that are ongoing in the villages are causing lot of anxiety and a lot of questions to politicians.

Of late, a total of 100 youths are being recruited per village ostensibly to act as volunteer crime controllers or preventers and yet the Electoral Commission is not aware of any such move. Could we seek clarification from the Minister of Internal Affairs? What is the purpose of these youth and who is going to handle their welfare? Where are they going to be trained? What exactly is going on because our interpretation is that this is yet another clandestine youth brigade recruitment by the ruling party. Can we seek clarification, Mr Speaker, because the youth are all confused as to what is going on in the country?

THE SPEAKER: I think to finalise the other matter, because I understand that the committees to which the Bill was committed are busy working on it, and I have got an outcry from other Members who say they are busy campaigning and they want to participate in the process of the committee when considering – I would rather advise that you wait for the current process of campaigns going on so that people don’t say we were excluded. They were in constituencies when they brought this. I think the leadership of the committees should do that and wait. 

11.17
MR LATIF SEBAGGALA (DP, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. That is exactly what I wanted to raise as the vice chairperson, Buganda caucus.

We wrote to you and I think what you have decided or what you have requested will really go a long way in ensuring that all members can participate and bring in other views and ideas of what we want to do in line with what Article 246 commands. 

And in the spirit of brotherhood, I will request the Leader of Government Business to direct his minister - when you look at the various clauses that we hinted on, especially the petition that you have from the Mengo Government, it clearly indicates that right from the word “go”, the Bill is unconstitutional. So, it would be wise for the Prime Minister, through his minister, to come here and withdraw the Bill and go back to the drawing board so that they can really see how best to bring a Bill that will be operationalised by Article 246. Mr Speaker, that is my request. 

11.19
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I thank you, Mr Speaker. Considering the importance of this Bill and considering the fact that everybody is now actively involved in campaigns - Members of Parliament are away from Kampala - and considering that within another four to five months, this Parliament will expire, isn’t it reasonable for Government to consider holding on to this Bill until when we get a new Parliament – 

THE SPEAKER: No, hon. Kawanga. Let it be made clear to the entire country that the mandate of this Parliament will go up to May, even after the elections and even after some of you have lost the contest; you will have the mandate to come and fully deal with the affairs of this country. 

MR KAWANGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker, for that guidance but the public – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Kawanga, people think that your mandate ends on 18 February but our Constitution says that there is never a vacuum until another Parliament takes over. 

MR KAWANGA: I thank you, Mr Speaker. The question is not about the mandate; the question is about the credibility of the Members who will be trying to exercise that mandate and the way in which the public will perceive this idea. I suggest to the Leader of Government Business that for the sake of credibility of this legislation, it is better that people who are known to have been fully endorsed as new members of Parliament consider this Bill and then the Bill will have more credibility than under this situation. 

THE SPEAKER: I think we are in this debate. 

11.21
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Godi raised an issue about the withdrawal of what he called the old currency. When we issued the new currency notes, it was clearly stated that the two currency notes would run concurrently and all denominations would be withdrawn systematically in accordance with the cash flow in the economy. So, that is what is happening. 

There was also an issue raised by hon. Odonga Otto. Parliament is a statutory vote and is handled very effectively by a Parliamentary Commission and they are competent to deal with issues affecting Parliament. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

11.23
THE MINISTER OF HEALTH (Dr Stephen Mallinga): Mr Speaker, I think it is misleading the House to think that we have two types of currencies running now in the country. We do not have two currencies; we have two kinds of papers in the country but we have one currency and it still is the shilling. So, we should not mislead the public by saying that we have two types of currencies in the country. 

MR DOMBO: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. When the Minister of Health took the Floor, I expected him to brief the country and the nation about the state of the Yellow Fever in the country and the level of risk, and to advise the population on what we should be doing. May I get clarification from him when he is likely to do this, given the level of risk that has been reported in the media? 

THE SPEAKER: That will require a ministerial statement, which he can maybe prepare for tomorrow. 

11.25
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, I beg your indulgence. While a ministerial statement would be an appropriate process, my constituency of Agago is actually a central constituency in this Yellow Fever outbreak. Kalongo Hospital has been handling so many of these cases and when a matter like this comes, even an off-the-cuff update from the minister would really help to calm the situation. 

THE SPEAKER: I will accommodate him tomorrow for a ministerial statement. I think it is better. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: But Mr Speaker, the Order Paper that I have talks of adjournment after we have considered the business for the day. 

THE SPEAKER: No, I do not think we can finish this business and the code of conduct because they are two items. So, I see that we will definitely sit tomorrow. But if you think we are going to finish today, then later in the day if he can prepare a ministerial statement, I will also accommodate him. But I think it should be a ministerial statement rather than an off-the-cuff statement. 

11.26
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I just want to understand from the hon. Prime Minister on the issues that regard my constituency. In July, we passed a budget here for rural electrification and Kasilo County was one of those but the Minister for Energy, hon. Hilary Onek, is writing to stop the project from going on. May I know of what interest or lack of interest hon. Onek has or does not have in Kasilo? 

He wrote a letter to the Executive Director, Rural Electrification Agency on 14 September 2010: “RE: POWER EXTENSION TO KOBUIN - SERERE DISTRICT…”- there is even no place in Serere District called Kobuin - “As stated above, it is important to give priority to the above electricity station due to its urgency. This should take precedence to the one to Kasilo. Signed, hon. Hilary Onek.” 

Is this how the Minister of Energy is marginalising, or is attempting to marginalise the people of Kasilo? Mr Speaker, I want to lay this on the Table. The letter that I want to lay on the Table is the one that comes from the Office of the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development. It is dated, 14th – (Interjections)– may the good Lord protect you – and addressed to the Executive Director. As I have stated, it is signed by hon. Hillary Onek; we passed a budget here for the power extension for 55 kilometres with Bukedea being covered, which is about 80km, but the minister is being used by my opponent to try to stop it.

I want to ask the Rt Hon. Prime Minister to bring the minister to order. I am even shocked that he is trying to sabotage what is in the manifesto of the Movement because I also read about it in that manifesto; it talked of Kasilo, Apapai; the village that I come from. So, is the minister in order to issue such letters trying to sabotage rural electrification to Kasilo County? Thank you, Mr Speaker.

11.29
THE PRIME MINISTER (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): The Rt Hon. Speaker of Parliament and hon. Members of Parliament, according to the law of natural justice, I cannot pronounce myself on that matter until I have got the story from the concerned minister. Clearly, I cannot pronounce myself on that matter. Therefore, I shall handle it after hearing what hon. Onek has to say. But since there is the minister of state from that ministry, hon. D’Ujanga, I request him to make a statement, just in case he has all the facts. I thank you.

11.30
MINISTER OF STATE FOR ENERGY AND MINERAL DEVELOPMENT (ENERGY) (MR Simon D’Ujanga): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. It is unfortunate that this matter has not been brought to my attention, but I know the line to Kasilo has a contractor on site. The contract was signed and it should be built. But like the Prime Minister said – that line, I think is also in this manifesto – we will need to study the circumstances under which that letter was written. Otherwise, I know that there is a contractor working on that line now. Thank you, Sir.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE SCHEDULE NO.1 FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011

11.32
THE CHAIRPERSON, BUDGET COMMITTEE (Ms Rose Akol): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Honourable colleagues, I am here to present the report of the Budget Committee on Supplementary Schedule No. 1 for the Financial Year 2010/2011. I am sure you have already read through the introduction, the methodology and the framework. I am not going to waste time on those. Let me move to page 4. I also request that we all get there so that I can take you through the overview of the supplementary schedule.

A total Shs 605.648 billion is being applied for as supplementary expenditure under Schedule No. 1. I would like to report that an item was introduced at committee level; the item is Mulago Hospital where an additional amount of Shs 3.934 billion to cater for arrears on drugs and sundries arising from an audit of 2009, was brought to the committee. So, the total of 605.648 includes that item.

I would like to report that recurrent expenditure attracts Shs 64,028,428.259 billion, development expenditure - Shs 53.608 billion while statutory revisions stand at Shs 123.781 billion. The table below shows the composition and proportion of the supplementary expenditure categories. I want to implore members to go through it.

Supplementary Schedule No.1 for the Financial Year 2010/2011 amounting to Shs 605.648 billion represents 7.67 percent of the approved budget and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development has already issued supplementary expenditure of Shs 184.632 billion that constitutes 2.338 percent of the approved budget, in accordance with Section 12(1) of the Budget Act.

This section provides that the total supplementary expenditure that requires additional resources over and above what is appropriated by Parliament shall not exceed 3 percent of the total approved budget for the financial year, without prior approval of Parliament. The supplementary expenditure of Shs 605.648 billion brings the total supplementary expenditure required to 7.67 percent of the approved budget, which requires prior approval of Parliament as provided for by the relevant section of the Budget Act.

Sources of Funding

Mr Speaker, according to the minister, the sources of funding are:
a)	The supplementary request for Shs 496.38 billion will be funded from a drawdown from Bank of Uganda.
b)	The supplementary request of Shs 17.295 billion will be funded from the suppression of the budget – that is budget cuts.
c)	A total of Shs 0.304 billion is additional resource – we received an Irish grant of that amount.
d)	A total of Shs 3.03 billion supplementary expenditure request will be funded through non-tax revenue.
e)	The supplementary of Shs 6.27 billion will be funded from utilisation of unspent balances remitted to the Consolidated Fund as at 30 June.
f)	A total of Shs 80.364 billion supplementary expenditure will be funded from reallocation within the Wage Bill.
g)	The supplementary request of Shs 2.2 billion will be funded from, non-tax resource.

Observations and Recommendations

Sources of Funding
Honourable colleagues, the committee has on various occasions recommended that drawdown from Bank of Uganda to fund supplementary expenditures that are not of emergence nature, be discouraged; it disorganises micro-economic stability. Sources of funding like budget cuts also distort budget operations for the spending agencies. 

The request by the committee to be availed, by Ministry of Finance, a schedule of votes and activities affected by the budget cuts were not honoured. The committee could not, therefore, establish the activities that are going to be affected by these cuts yet these could be critical activities that directly affect the welfare of Ugandans. 

Without the required information, the committee found it very difficult to allow any suppressions of the budget as a source of funding for this supplementary. The committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed funding through suppression of budget of Shs 17.29 billion be disallowed, and we recommend to the Minister of Finance to find alternative means or measures to fill that gap.

State House - Vote 002

The total approved budget for State House is Shs 57.773 billion for recurrent expenditure while Shs 7.097 billion is for development. 

The committee observed that allowances, utility bills and entertainment cannot be unforeseen activities that require supplementary expenditure. 

The committee, however, learnt that State House had a lot of priority activities that were either unfunded or under-funded during the normal budgeting process hence the request for additional funding through supplementary.

The committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development indicates or sets realistic budgetary ceilings to State House so as to minimise supplementary requests for State House, year in year out.  

Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development – Vote 008 -

THE SPEAKER: Excuse me. Now, what is your recommendation?

MS AKOL: Oh, this recommendation - [HON. MEMBERS: “Read it to the House!”] Let me conclude - the Speaker had raised a question, let me conclude. We do not want to deny the fact that, of course, State House has always requested for supplementary, but the truth is that they are either unfunded or under-funded sometimes, which is a cause of the supplementary. 

The committee recommends that Parliament approves this supplementary since it is already part of the amount that has been issued by Ministry of Finance which is within the provisions of the Budget Act.

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Phoenix Logistics – 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Just a clarification – 

THE SPEAKER: I think what she is saying is that the committee made that observation so that in future, to prevent having supplementary, there should be realistic budgeting for State House – but this time, I think this is what you are saying –

MS AKOL: Yes. It is okay. I thank you, Mr Speaker.   

Vote 008 - Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; Phoenix Logistics Uganda Limited: hon. Members, additional funding to the development budget of Shs 3 billion is required for capitalisation of Phoenix Logistics Uganda Limited. Members will recall that Parliament has pronounced itself over Phoenix Logistics Uganda Limited on several occasions. 

The Ministry of Finance committed itself to report on the status of Phoenix Logistics to this House but to date, no such report has been presented.

The committee is, therefore, unable to recommend a further Shs 3 billion to Phoenix Logistics until the Ministry of Finance addresses issues raised by this House on Phoenix Logistics. (Applause) 

Vote 102 – Electoral Commission

The committee notes that Shs 83 billion is being requested to cater for the new expenditure requirements for the 2011 general election arising from the increase in the number of candidates, district staff and the requirement that the commission provides copies of the registers to all political parties. 

The committee further notes that some electoral laws were enacted after the budget was appropriated. The committee was also informed by the Electoral Commission that funds amounting to Shs 28.8 billion to cater for youth elections were not provided for in this supplementary schedule No. 1. 

The youth elections are due to take place before March 2011 and in order to ensure that these youth elections take place without delay, the committee recommends that the Ministry of Finance finds resources to address this crucial matter.

The committee observes that every Ugandan and observers the world over would love to see a free and fair election for the 2011 general election. The committee, therefore, supports the supplementary expenditure request to the Electoral Commission.  

In conclusion, the committee recommends that this House approves the request for supplementary expenditure schedule one for the Financial Year 2010/11 as follows: recurrent supplementary expenditure, Shs 428,258,566,000; development supplementary expenditure, Shs 50,608,434,000. Please, take note that this amount does not include Phoenix Logistics. 

This statutory revision is for information of Parliament and not appropriation because it is a direct charge to the Consolidated Fund but it is to the tune of Shs 123,781,000,000. The total amount, therefore, is Shs 602,648,000,000.

However, before I end this presentation, Mr Speaker, I received in my office – this was after the committee sat and I am presenting this one to the House and I am only doing it because it is to do with a regional referral hospital –(Interjections)– yes, others are already in the schedule. This was presented and it is to do with Hoima Regional Referral Hospital.

There is a request for an additional Shs 850 million which the minister should justify before the House and if the House accepts, then it will be up to the House to approve and accept this adjustment and a new adjustment to these totals that I have presented. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much, chairperson and members of the committee for the report.

DR JOHN ARAPKISSA (Independent, Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like clarification for the Ministry of Finance or the committee because when I refer to the bigger document which came from the Ministry of Finance on the summary of supplementary expenditure of funds for recurrent expenditure, Kween District is missing in this schedule.

On vote 612 for salaries for secondary school teachers and salaries for health workers – when you see this document, you can go to annex one on wage supplementary. One page 4, the primary school teachers on vote 612 is present but when you go to page 6, there is no vote 612 which is Kween District and similarly when you go page 10, there is no vote 612 as it stops on Agago district. Kween district is vote 612 and Agago is 611. So, the clarification, I am asking is what is going to happen to these secondary school teachers and health workers since we have them in the district? That is the clarification I am seeking from the Ministry of Finance. I think there is either a deliberate – it is a human error or what but Kween district is omitted in those two categories. Thank you.

11.48
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, Persons with Disabilities Central): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the supplementary request but with only two observations. One is a procedural concern in relation to Hoima Referral Hospital. This request for Hoima Referral Hospital, if we may agree and according to our Rules of Procedure has just been smuggled into the report of the committee. Under our Rules of Procedure, the request must first come in this august House transmitted to the Budget Committee and then the committee reports on the request. 

Right now the request is not reflected in the report of the committee which is duly signed by the relevant number of Members. Unless we want to be sympathetic with the chairperson, there is no way we can consider the request from Hoima Referral Hospital without the risk of violating our own rules that we ourselves made.

MR MUKITALE: Thank you very much for giving way. Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I would like to seek the indulgence of this House. The state in which Hoima Referral Hospital is, is quite appalling and I think the chairperson of the committee has been fair by saying that this request came late and her plea to the House was that we sympathetically look at this critical case. I think we should not just look at the procedural – what I would like to request is that let us kindly -if the Ministry of Health can further clarify, so that the critical state in which Hoima Hospital is in can be addressed. Every time you have a patient you would not even want to step in. Children are on the floor; the situation is quite appalling and I would like to request that Hoima is given this treatment. I thank you.

MR OKUPA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was a bit uncomfortable with the words my honourable colleague was using that it has been smuggled in the report. I think let us use parliamentary language. First of all, I have just got a copy of this letter. It is dated 23 December 2010 to the Permanent Secretary and Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development requesting for a supplementary of Shs 850 million and it is referring to the letter of 27 September 2010 putting their request for the referral hospital. Why did the Ministry of Finance leave it out in this supplementary?

I think the chairperson and the committee have been fair to the people of Bunyoro -(Applause)- by bringing it here. Let us not deny the people of that region. We have just heard that yellow fever has attacked the region. If the situation is that bad in the hospital, how will they be able to handle it?

I wish the chairperson could read this letter fully to the House such that the House debates from an informed position. Otherwise, I support the issue of giving supplementary expenditure to the regional hospital of Hoima. There are others which have been taken care of but I think let us be fair to this country. Let us talk as nationalists. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I think, for future purposes, there should be proper communication of this kind of requests. The Permanent Secretary has no right to directly deal with a committee of Parliament. I think what he should have done - I am not saying we should not consider it but in the future - I think the Permanent Secretary should have communicated to proper authorities in Parliament; Office of the Speaker or Office of the Clerk and because Parliament is not - this should have been routed through here because committees get instructions to do work from the House not from the Permanent Secretary’s office.

I think this was an oversight which we can ignore but in future, this is what should be done so that in the absence of Parliament sitting, the Speaker can send it to the committee and say, “Please, consider this.” 

MR NDEEZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for your very wise guidance regarding the Hoima Referral Hospital. I support the request from Hoima but I am concerned about the procedural aspect as well as the precedent we are setting. We are the ones who make Rules of Procedure and it should be us to adopt these rules.

My last point, on page 8, is relating to youth elections. I am deeply concerned. The situation regarding youth elections, if you go by this report, remains ambiguous.

According to this report, we are told that the Electoral Commission requires Shs 28 billion to carry out these elections. In this report, we are also told that the committee is wisely recommending that funds be provided. We all know that youth are an important element of our community; they constitute more than 50 percent of our population. It is very important for them to participate in this exercise.

It is now clear that we have less than two months from now to March and what we are doing right now is not to appropriate Shs 28 billion but to recommend. I beg to ask the honourable Minister of Finance to tell us when he will be able to provide this required Shs 28 billion because without being sure and without being certain of how these funds will be provided, it is very difficult to tell the youth of this country that their elections will take place in March this year. Thank you very much and I support the motion.

11.57
MR ODONGA OTTO (FDC, Aruu County, Pader): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker for giving me this opportunity and I thank you for convening Parliament at such an important time for such an important issue. I also wish to thank the committee for a good and concise report.

I have only three concerns; one, on Vote 102 the Electoral Commission, I think I support this although I want to say it is very unfair to be giving the Electoral Commission money at such a critical moment. I do not know where the lack of foresight came from but I would really want to appeal to Parliament that without any single delay, we should pass the money for Vote 102 to the Electoral Commission of Shs 83 billion because we made some of the laws late and I would pray that when the money gets to the Electoral Commission, it serves the purpose it is sent for. So, I unconditionally support Vote 102 to the Electoral Commission and I urge Members to support it too. 

Mr Speaker, I think someone should give this Parliament a brief on the issue of Phoenix Logistics. Time and again, some money is requested for Phoenix Logistics; maybe it is someone’s trick of getting money from the Consolidated Fund to go and campaign. 

As of now, Phoenix Logistics is in a very sorry state and it is not helping Ugandans in any way – (Interjections) – yes, I know, it is printing T-Shirts for some party in huge numbers, we have seen many yellow T-Shirts around. But where it is now, we should swallow our pride and say whatever we invested in Phoenix Logistics was lost and stop putting even one more coin in that venture. 

On the issue of Shs 850 million for Hoima Hospital, when I heard the submission of hon. Mukitale – I think there is no need for kindness to the people of Bulisa in this particular venture. All hospitals in the country are in a sorry state and on that basis, I stand to oppose that Shs 850 million goes to Hoima Hospital unless I am told what it is going to do specifically. If it is painting or roofing, we are not time barred. As I talk now, the only health centre IV in my district lacks a transformer of Shs 60 million. So, to me even that Shs 60 million for the transformer would be more urgent than giving money to people to go and start procurement process which will take four or five months. The status of all hospitals in the country is bad. For the Chairman of Finance Committee to tell us that people are sleeping on the floor, which is happening everywhere in the country, is not news. In fact, for your information, in my constituency, patients sleep in the mortuary. I see you are far better compared to our people.

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you, hon. Otto, for giving way. The information I would like to give is that even our National Referral Hospital, Mulago Hospital, two patients sleep on the same bed and others sleep on the floor. So, my request is that we reduce on the supplementary budget expenditure for State House and allocate it to Mulago Hospital which is our National Referral Hospital. 

MR ODONGA OTTO: Lastly, Mr Speaker, my understanding of a supplementary budget is that there could have arisen some situation far beyond what we budgeted for. But honestly speaking, why should I drive all the way from Pader to come here and give an additional Shs 55 billion to State House? I must be convinced specifically what they want that money for because I know the President is moving all round the country with a huge convoy ferrying people from every trading centre using yellow buses. Someone should tell us, why does State House need an additional Shs 55 billion over and above what we budgeted for? 

I would say that this money is meant to facilitate the incumbent president to run all around the country. Where does the request for Shs 55 billion come from? This is outrageous; in fact, it is even a basis – when other colleagues like hon. Beti Kamya, hon. Norbert Mao and Dr Kiiza Besigye have probably been given only Shs 12 million by the Electoral Commission and as I talk now some of them have even run out of fuel to traverse the whole country. (Laughter) Others are on leave, in fact, without mentioning names; I even found one in a bank negotiating a mortgage. (Laughter)

So, if a whole State House can run out of money and they ask for Shs 55 billion, why can’t we be fair to the other presidential candidates and give them an additional Shs 20 million for fuel; because it is not their personal venture, they are offering this country a chance to elect a president? So, at an appropriate stage, I will request that we become fair. Even for a Member of Parliament, Shs 12 million is not enough to run round your constituency; how do you expect a presidential candidate who has been mandatorily given police escorts and additional government vehicles to run all over 111 districts with that money?

Much as we want to feed the guinea fowl, let us not forget the hen at home. At an appropriate time, I will beg for adjustment. Thank you very much for this opportunity. 

12.04
MR HUSSEIN KYANJO (JEEMA, Makindye Division West, Kampala): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am grateful for the report from the Budget Committee. I will start with State House. There has been concern raised by the committee to the effect that State House is many times underfunded; but this is common to all sectors across the board. There is no single sector in our entire budget cycle that gets money and says they are fully satisfied. If State House needed money, then Ministry of Internal Affairs where I serve as Shadow Minister needs it ten times more. It is shameful that a whole Parliament can come to approve money to State House at this time. 

State House has many privileges and has the advantage of an entire chain of offices in the office of the President. And as my colleague, hon. Otto hinted, giving this money to State House when we are running an election is itself suspected. So, I beg that Members disallow this supplementary request.

Allow me also to comment on the Electoral Commission, Vote 102. If there were planners in the Electoral Commission, they ought to have known to a great extent what was supposed to happen in the country because these researchers were paid all the way through their tenure as officers in the commission to foresee what was supposed to happen. To invite us as if matters in the Electoral Commission appeared like a desert storm is also unrealistic. 

I want to give an example to support my argument. How can the Electoral Commission say they did not know the number of candidates was going to be many? They should have known that if the benchmark for candidates was senior six that was enough to indicate that the candidates were going to be many. 

Mr Speaker, just last week, information available indicated that the officer in charge of procurement in the Electoral Commission stopped the process of tendering where there was a requirement to supply tamper–evident envelopes, which were supposed to be used as a requirement to display the results at every polling station. In the meantime, they are here demanding for extra money; what are they going to do with it?

Mr Speaker, in my own constituency - I have for a long time been coming to this floor – and you one time directed that the Minister of Local Government comes here to explain. I told this House there were illegal electoral areas in the form of new villages created in Makindye Division. The minister was unable to explain. I told the Electoral Commission that this matter was being carried out through the office of the RDC. 

In the end, when the process for youth elections was being kicked off, they brought in new electoral areas; at least in Makindye West. I have evidence to this effect. I have written to the Electoral Commission and I have given a copy to you, Mr Speaker. A Commission that is going ahead to create new electoral areas is here telling you they do not have the money. They just do not know what they are doing. So, we must be here to help them.

My last point regarding the Electoral Commission and probably my very last is that we were promised and this House was stampeded into approving monies for electronic voter cards. Everybody was convinced they were going to work. I remember then; the Chairperson of the Committee on Internal Affairs, the hon. Kamba Saleh, insisted that we get a commitment from the Ministry of Internal Affairs that the cards were going to work. Indeed, they confirmed the cards were going to work. Today, the cards are not going to be used according to what we have heard and we are here to approve money; really! I have a fear that since we have membership with other parliaments and they use international standards to measure our way of doing business; we would be playing below standards if we allowed this supplementary to the Electoral Commission. I thank you. 

12.09
MRS RUTH KAVUMA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kalangala): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to wish everybody a happy new year. 

I support the supplementary but with a lot of reservation and concern regarding Hoima Referral Hospital. We have just passed a loan for the Ministry of Health, which we all looked at and we discussed all the hospitals that needed help; moreover, the person behind this is the chair of the committee that brought this loan to us and defended it and we are saying it is not possible. This is very bad. Did it happen overnight? I have never seen a hospital that has been in place for 40 years or even 30 – overnight – we have not had a disaster in that area. Maybe, there was an earthquake last night and we did not know that it went through only Hoima Hospital.

Some of us have been here talking about hospitals in the islands, – you know, so many things. We do not even have a theatre. We have argued and argued for very many years, 10 years. Coming to this point and I must confess one of the reasons why I have decided to retire from Parliament is not being listened to. I have fought for my people. My people are still dying like the ones in Hoima but some children are more children than others, it seems. How can I be in a Parliament where my people cannot be served and there is no good reason given but one’s hospital is collapsing? You know, there is no hope and the health ministry goes to the waters and finds out, “Oh, this is terrible!”  The Director-General was there one time. “All the islands are so badly off. It is such a bad situation. We will do something.” Thanks a lot. That was about three years ago. Up to today, nothing has been done. Are we going to talk ourselves hoarse in order for us to be heard, in order for the islanders to appreciate that they are part of Uganda or should we start going to vote in Tanzania?
  
I think we need to be more considerate. Let things go through the right procedures. We are not saying that the people in that region should not have the services; but we have a procedure and we cannot work like children who come in the morning and say, “Mummy, I would like a sweet, no, I would like a biscuit.” Not at this level. Thank you very much.

12.13
MR STEPHEN MUKITALE BIRAAHWA (NRM, Buliisa County, Buliisa): Thank you Mr Speaker and honourable colleague. First of all, I would like to support the committee report and more so, the stand on the issue of Phenix Logistics. Let me also make some clarification because it is being imputed that I am the source of the Hoima Regional Referral supplementary request -(Interjections)- the letter, which the chairperson and members have, is from the Permanent Secretary and the accounting officer of the Ministry of Health, to the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance, copied to the hon. Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. The Budget Committee got a copy. It is referring to a challenge they raised way back on 27 September 2010. So, it is a technical concern by the Ministry of Health and the details are actually given; both in the schedule and on the second page of the letter including lack of supplies. Hoima lacked supplies in September worth Shs 300 million. So, I want it to be understood. (Interjections)

The regional referral hospital, which handles Kiboga, Kibaale, Masindi, Kiryandongo, Hoima and Buliisa is a matter which I would ask Parliament to look at in a patriotic manner and not just as a Hoima issue. The reason the minister raised this is because they realised that at the point of the release of their finances, they already had a problem. Also, it is not anyhow related to the loan we passed of strengthening health systems. The loan we passed for strengthening health systems was looking at the whole country with different components of infrastructure, repair and actually, what is there is Masindi Hospital and not Hoima. It is important that we understand that financing of a loan is just a percentage of the budget component which we do not raise using our own money. So, it would be unfair for anybody to impute that the loan has anything to do with this. I would like to beg that -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The clarification I am seeking from the MP of the area – 

THE SPEAKER: No, there is a point of procedure, why don’t we listen? 

MR ODONGA OTTO: I am sorry.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I have been compelled to rise on a point of procedure regarding the matter that has just been put before the House or rather the submission by my hon. Mukitale regarding Hoima Referral Hospital. 

The point of procedure I raise is based on the fact that this House has a good practice and procedure through which we handle supplementaries, be it anything on budgeting. I am really surprised that whereas we are being called upon to observe patriotism and pay some attention to this issue; I think on a matter of procedure, we would be wrong. 

Mr Speaker, you have attempted to tell this House that it is okay. Really, let it be okay for now, but in the future – because I want to observe that anything that we pronounce ourselves on here sets a precedent. 

If this matter from Hoima has come and the Ministry of Finance, which should have ordinarily submitted corrigenda to this House, has not done it, I am really afraid that it would be wrong for us to proceed to consider this issue of Hoima. We have good practices: the sources of funding should have been identified. 

You will see in the report that the committee was very concerned on the identification of sources of funding and almost for every item requested for, they had attempted but for Hoima there is nothing indicated. It has not passed through the channels. So, really, on a point of procedure, I beg that this House does not consider the issue of Hoima. Thank you very much. (Applause) 

THE SPEAKER: In considering this, is it a luxury? Are they asking for money for luxuries? They made a mistake and I am the one who pointed it out. But you have been told the plight of these people and you are requested to be merciful. It is not going to set a precedent because I have said in future such things should pass through the House and then to the committee. 

12.19
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Now that the matter has been raised by my honourable colleague, I was debating as to what to ultimately do. We are acting as if this is the end of this Parliament; that we cannot meet in a month’s time to consider that particular supplementary. And you have reassured us and the whole country that this Parliament will be there until May. What is this absolute urgency that we must breach our own procedures in order to accommodate a request that can be resubmitted and considered? 

MR WAMBUZI: I apologise for interrupting the Leader of the Opposition but is he in order to start blocking money for Bunyoro, a region which suffered under colonial rule? A region, which when you look at the budget, there is nothing allocated to it? Is he in order to block money going to Bunyoro when he knows that the people who have been suffering in the North have been taking sanctuary in Bunyoro region? Is he really being fair to even his own people who live in Bunyoro and need this money for treatment? Is the Leader of the Opposition being fair to the people of Bulamogi who also live in that area?

THE SPEAKER: I realise that you are now playing on sentiments. He is insisting that procedure should be followed and you are now bringing in sentiments of Bunyoro Kingdom having suffered. (Laughter) But is this a lot of money? 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, everybody knows that principles are never quantified, they are merely established. And when you establish principles for handling things, you stick to them. Because you will find a situation where somebody will then rise up, like my brother engineer Gagawala, to raise sentiments that have absolutely no value. I do my politics in Agago and outside this House. When I am here, I serve the country called Uganda and everybody. If you set a rule, abide by it. 

One of the biggest failures of our country is people waiving rules that allow individuals to usurp institutional powers to become individual powers. It is very dangerous. It is not about the amount of money that goes to Bunyoro. I would accept if Shs 2 billion is requested for instead of Shs 800 million but in the right procedure with the right justification. I would not accept that Shs 10 goes to Bunyoro because it is too small not to follow procedure. That is why I have risen and it has nothing to do with hon. Gagawala’s politics, which is very cheap.

THE SPEAKER: But I think we should end this debate.  

MS AMONGI LAGADA: Thank you. I want to beg this House to support this request for Hoima referral hospital. (Applause) My reasoning is that maybe some technocrat did not do his job when he should have done so. I am imagining it is a “he”. (Laughter) Because “she”, the female, is usually careful especially in matters of health; we are caregivers. Now, somebody somewhere did not do his work and because that person did not do his work, this House is appearing to want to punish very many Ugandans. 

We are here saying Mulago needs this and that but the reason Mulago is overwhelmed is because the referral hospitals are not equipped to do the work they should do. Many of the cases that come to Mulago ought to be handled at the regional hospitals. 

Mr Speaker, it is true – 

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, it is not this or the other that we detected the procedural error that came in considering the Hoima supplementary. But, of course, there is a way we can go about it because Rule 171 provides as follows: “Subject to any instructions by the House, the deliberations of every Committee shall be confined to the matter referred to it by the House and, in the case of a Committee on a Bill, to the Bill committed to it and any relevant amendments.” This is the general rule but something has come here and if we are to procedurally consider it, we may have to suspend this rule to consider it. 

I think that is how we should move otherwise we will be bound to stay with the matters that were considered by the committee, which were referred by the House to the committee. But you have to be merciful because of those people’s plight. So, it is really up to you.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. If we have to go by that provision, then the only possible stage at which we can do that is when we have the committee of the whole House. We can, in this general debate, probably agree that the committee of the whole House considers the Hoima request. And we will disregard what came out of the other committee because the process was flawed. In that way, we would not be in breach of any of our procedures. 

THE SPEAKER: Then I should put the question whether we should consider the Hoima subject now otherwise we are taking a lot of time. 

MR OLENY: Probably before you put the question, the letter, as we all have rightly noted, is addressed to the Permanent Secretary, Secretary to the Treasury, Ministry of Finance. And I can presume that probably no response yet has been made for reasons unknown to this House. Now, we are acting to say, “We need to take action.” 

I would wish you to interest yourself in the allocation of the money. The letter talks of the description and amount: general supply is 300 million - non specific; specialised meals and drinks, 100 million; stationery and printing, 120 million; fuel and oil, 140 million; maintenance - well, I hope that somebody from Health should make a comment on this. There must be a reason why there has been no response to this letter -(Interruption)

MR ODONGA OTTO: The information I am giving is that in the letter, it does not say Hoima Hospital does not have anything. This Parliament allocated Shs 500 million just like they budgeted for other hospitals all over the country. So, they are now asking for a separate Shs 850 million other than the Shs 500 million which this Parliament gave to them. Please, let us not give people campaign money.

THE SPEAKER: So, I think, in a nutshell, what you are saying is that let the proper procedure be followed in submitting this supplementary and then we shall consider it, right?

HON. MEMBERS: Yes.

MS ROSE AKOL: Mr Speaker, I would like to explain. I think I explained myself clearly as to the circumstances under which I presented this letter. I admit the procedure was wrong but this letter was copied to me and when I saw it was to do with a hospital I thought I should bring it to the attention of Parliament -(Interjections)- now, honourable colleagues please listen to me. Yes, you will have your time to speak. 

I also want to draw your attention to annex 3, page 1, where there are other referral hospitals. There are other referral hospitals and I want to add that Mulago was also a corrigendum that was brought to the committee and Mulago has Shs 3.934 billion that we have put in our reports. So, hon. Members, it is the reason I said perhaps we could also bring in Hoima. So, it is up to this House. I have only brought it to the attention of the House but it is up to this House to take the right action. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

MR BYANYIMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am a member of this committee. We took a bit of time to go through this supplementary. These issues of somebody getting a letter to the chairperson and then you bring it here - I think the chairperson has no authority whatsoever to bring a document that does not concern the committee. We all know what it means, really. (Applause) We never got to know about it. We went through all this together. If a letter came by, of course, we are still here as the Speaker put it. We shall handle it. But we cannot go -

THE SPEAKER: OK. I think let us do this. The Minister of Finance is advised to look into this matter - and properly - if he wants our support, bring it to the House for proper consideration.

HON. MEMBERS: Yes!

THE SPEAKER: But for how long are we going to take on the other matter? 

12.32
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Committee on Budget for the precise and concise report. I will go to page 6. The committee made several observations. One, they said that accessing draw-downs from Bank of Uganda to fund supplementary expenditure would disorganise the macroeconomic stability. When you look at the break down of the amount of sources of funding for financing this supplementary budget, a bulk of the money is actually from the draw downs from Bank of Uganda. So, in my view, whereas the committee observed rightly that macro-economic stability would be disorganised, we still proceed to pass the supplementary even at the risk of the macroeconomic stability getting disorganised.

On the issue of budget cuts that some of the activities to be financed are from budget cuts, the committee demanded from the Ministry of Finance to state exactly which votes and activities we are targeting to cut in order to finance the supplementary. The committee cries foul that the ministry did not honour their demand to get a detailed breakdown of where we expect to have cuts to finance the budget. Up to now, in fact talking of a total of Shs 17.295 billion to be disallowed because the budget cuts have not been –(Mr Omach rose_)- how I wish you could take note.

MR FRED OMACH: Thank you very much, colleague, for giving way. Mr Speaker, on the issue of a total of Shs 17.3 billion funding through budget cuts, we apologise for the delay in the submission of the total schedule explaining the cuts. We have cut from areas which are not really going to affect the implementation of the budget. We have cut from workshops, Shs 3.9 billion; travel abroad, Shs 2 billion; travel inland, Shs 5.8 billion and allowances to various ministries, Shs 5.4 billion. The total comes to Shs 17.3 billion which, with your permission Sir, I would like to lay on Table now and I have also given a copy to the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. I beg to lay, Mr Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: I thank the Minister of Finance for the clarification he has given. But I am completely at a loss now because in the same supplementary, elsewhere, we are providing for travel abroad and for inland travel which you have cut. What are we trying to say here, really? 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I have just laid this on Table and it is a very long schedule which gives the amount as it is being cut - the percentages. It leaves something reasonable for these travels abroad but Members would have to restrain on certain travels which may not be extremely critical. This is being done to be able to finance areas which we believe are more critical than just this travelling. 

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Mr Speaker, if you can allow me, the Minister of Finance is not helping us. If you look at page 7 of the schedule you have a whole list of travel abroad in the Office of the President.  You go to the Office of the Vice President and there is a whole list of travel abroad and yet you are cutting travel abroad from other ministries and providing additional supplementary. If it is a priority then I understand.

12.38
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): I think we need detailed information to be given to this House on time for us to scrutinise it.

I would like to react to Vote 002 - State House; the total approved budget to State House was Shs 57.773 billion. I invite Members to look at the summary of supplementary funds for recurrent expenditure page 2. Vote 002 is talking about the approved provision. The supplementary schedule now being demanded is actually not Shs 57 billion but Shs 79.141 billion. Giving me the impression that the supplementary for State House is over 100 percent of what was originally approved. It is actually about 130 percent. The committee is saying that State House had a lot of priority activities that were unfunded or under funded.

MRS OGWAL: The information I want to give is that the procedure for arriving at supplementary budget is very clear and we keep giving that information to the House every year. What we have made very clear is that we should only have unforeseeable expenditure in the supplementary. Emergencies that could not have been foreseen at the time the budget was being drawn.

You also recall that when we considered supplementary last year, it was in February. I am actually surprised that the supplementary for this year has become so urgent that it has to be done in January. Ministry of Finance has to be honest to all of us who are Members because we shall be blamed as we are dealing with public funds. There is no way you can convince us that more than 100 percent of the budget for State House was not foreseen. What is the emergency in State House? We have to define what the emergency is before we can agree on the supplementary.

MR SEBULIBA: If you look at the supplementary schedule of the Office the President and State House, the increment comes to Shs 91 billion for both State House and Office of the President. They should give us the breakdown of these emergencies such that Parliament can pronounce itself on each of them.

DR EPETAIT: I am proceeding to find out a list of the priority activities that were either unfunded or underfunded. We want to know what disaster has befallen our State House of late to the extent of demanding for over 130 percent of the approved provision as a supplementary.

MR MUTULUUZA: When we go to page 7 of the breakdown of the budget, there is an item on donations. These donations come to almost Shs 19 billion. During this period we are not even allowed to donate as candidates but the funny thing with our leaders is that the law does not apply to them. Can you imagine that within these remaining six months they are going to donate 19 billion! How will the President, who is the NRM flag bearer, compete with Besigye who has nothing? 

Travel abroad has been allocated Shs 10 billion within this remaining time!

DR EPETAIT: I would like to thank my colleague hon. Mutuluuza for giving that enriching information.

MR MIGEREKO: I think it is important to clarify on something which did not appear to be clear to hon. Mutuluuza. The monies he is talking about on page 7, the Shs 18.6 billion for donations, has been spent already under the three percent. For him to try and inform the House that this is money that State House is trying to procure to be used during campaign times is really to mislead the House. I think as leaders we need to act clear on premises particularly when we are handling important state matters.

DR EPETAIT: The fact of the matter is that a supplementary of Shs 77 billion for State House is before this Parliament. When we get those breakdowns, it is very difficult to buy the argument of the Government Chief Whip that it is already spent within the three percent. 

So, I was proceeding on the issue of Vote 008. Hon. Member, I think we should rest our ears from this monster called “Phenix Logistics.” Right from the Seventh Parliament, whatever we passed to Phenix Logistics – that company is like a sponge: you pour water into it but it cannot hold any. At this point in time, I would like to agree with the committee’s recommendation that we block the Shs 3.0 billion being requested for by Phenix Logistics and in fact, further, state that we should stop entertaining ourselves to any matter to do with Phenix Logistics until some forensic audit to it is duly done.

On the Electoral Commission’s Shs 83 billion, I would also like to concur with the committee that we pass it without any hesitation. However, the state of the youth elections is not clear. Before we proceed to pass the budget, we would like the Minister of Finance to unequivocally tell us whether the youth elections slated for March will take place in the absence of the Shs 28.8 billion. Whereas we need the elections to take place, where are we going to get the money from? If it is not readily available, are we going to re-visit these particular supplementaries to enable the Electoral Commission to carry on with these elections?

Then there is a matter that I raised yet Government has not yet responded to: about the 100 youth per village who are being recruited –(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: I am sorry to interrupt the shadow minister. But when I hear a Member of Parliament insinuating that Phenix Logistics should be blocked from accessing funds – and I happen to be a minister of state for trade – it is a pity. Moreover the Member comes from Teso, an area that grows cotton and needs us to put affirmative action by ensuring that we buy uniforms and T-shirts made from cotton in Uganda. Phenix is the only factory we have which can make first class T-shirts for our children for sports.

Is the shadow minister, therefore, in order to suggest that Phenix Logistics be blocked at this when he is wearing a T-shirt which was made by Phoenix? Is he really in order to close a factory which is employing thousands of people? (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: I thought the shadow minister was just endorsing the recommendations of the committee –(Applause)– which rejected the request for the supplementary. One of the reasons given was that the ministry in charge of this sector has so far failed to give a necessary explanation as demanded. (Dr Epetait rose_) But hon. Member, can’t we end his debate and go because we have another urgent matter, that is, code of conduct? I would have liked to consider that after the break. If we fail to dispose of it today, we shall do it tomorrow. Isn’t it time that I put the question?

DR EPETAIT: Mr Speaker, I want to thank you for the ruling that you have given. I also wish my colleague, hon. Gagawala, a Happy New Year. However, I request him not to stop at points of order in the House but rather to make meaningful contributions sometimes. (Laughter)

I was demanding for a response from Government regarding the 100 youth per village who are being recruited as volunteer crime preventers. Up to now, I have not got any response and yet recruitment is going on in very many districts. This is about electioneering and since we are talking about appropriation to the Electoral Commission, this is a matter connected to electioneering. What are those youth and how are they going to be handled? Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Let us have the next person.

12.54
MR AKBAR GODI (FDC, Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the committee for their report. I also want to add my voice on Vote 102 of the Electoral Commission. Indeed this is an urgent matter but I want to seek a clarification: Two weeks ago, I was at the Electoral Commission and I got a chance to meet Dr Badru Kiggundu. I posed a question in a joking way that: “What is the status of the voters’ cards?” He said: “Ideally, we would need close to Shs 8 or 9 billion to print them.”

Now that we are going to give them Shs 83 billion, can we be guaranteed that the voters’ cards will be there so that the process of elections is not abused?

The other thing is that when we come for a special sitting like the one of today, we should take it very seriously. I would expect the whole government minister to pay keen attention when a report has been presented. For example, the reason that Phoenix Logistics has been blocked from getting the money is so that they can explain and show cause why they need it. But when the minister continues to interrupt the sitting with points of order, I suggest that the House forgets him like a missed call and we proceed.

12.56
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The issue of approval of supplementaries is the responsibility of our Parliament and therefore, there is no doubt that where it is necessary, it is our duty to do it. However, when the report of the committee does not help the House substantially and where deviation from the original budget are huge and are not questioned by the committee, you begin to wonder whether the committee is doing justice to the work they are assigned.

I grapple with the fundamental question that the committee could have put in their report. Under the Budget Act, we know that Government is free to spend over and above the approved budget by up to three percent and normally, as hon. Migereko has alluded, by the time he comes here, there are indications that Shs 18.66 billion has been spent under the three percent. But if you ask yourselves whether you have looked at the schedule indicating how much three percent over and above the budget has been used – I bet none of you has seen it! 

In other words, even with the flexibility that Government has been allowed, we as an oversight body cannot scrutinise how the three percent is spent. When I consulted with you, Mr Speaker, you suggested that maybe the seven-point-something percent supplementary includes that three percent. But if they have already spent the three percent, which is allowed, it is extremely important that it is tabled so that we know that we are not approving something, which we do not want under the guise of a verbal statement from a cabinet minister that it has already been spent while we are actually approving money, which has not yet been spent.    

Secondly, if the three percent had been spent and the records were brought as to what it was spent on, I would then be able to scrutinise what is proposed here and to ask myself what is urgent that needs immediate approval and what is not urgent that needs clarification as to why there is such a huge deviation. Again, I am not able to do that. And so, while we want to help Government, it becomes extremely difficult - of course, the concerns that Members have expressed are very blatant. 

Page 7, non-wage recurrent; the same item 227001 inland travels appears twice and totals to 18 billion; classified expenditure totals to 5.0 billion. 

If you go to page 9 under UPDF, short term consultancy services, 15 billion basically; classified expenditure – 50 billion. And the explanation on the side says that 9.895 billion is preparation activities to beef up the Police during and after the general elections of 2011. You ask yourself what this anxiety where you need so much money to prepare UPDF to beef up the Police is coming from. 

If you go below – and it is under micro-finance that these expenditures for vendors and whatever are; they are obviously not urgent considering the amount of money that we put in agriculture. Vendors are people who are already of some means. If they need to be supported, we would need a clear policy on how to do it and an institutional framework to channel the funds so that the money is not abused.
 
By just approving this supplementary, we end up even approving the fact that there should be no procedure in how state funds are spent. But the one item that really shocked me and for which I really don’t know whether the committee was aware is on page 24. Here they said: “Details of supplementary statutory expenditure.” And the first one there 007 is Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs. I don’t know when that ministry became a statutory body and yet it has the Judiciary, Electoral Commission, the Inspectorate of Government et cetera. How come that provision is covered under expenditure? 

And when you look at the expenditure, you really get worried because a total of Shs 39.455 billion was required of which 37.72 was to cater for the compensation of Dura Cement Limited. I don’t know whether Parliament has received any report on Dura Cement to approve a supplementary of 37 billion to pay a cement company whose contracts you have not seen and you have not debated the activities that led to this cost that you have not debated. Where will the country put us if we continue like that? 

My view is that if we knew how much the three percent that has been - and we looked at those sectors that needed additional expenditure, we could then look at them, agree on a figure to allow those institutions whether it is Office of the President or what to function. But if you continue and approve this in a blanket manner like this, I can guarantee you would end up with a CHOGM fund situation because we have a problem. And that is why I thought Members should really draw their attention to it. 

Lastly, if the committee recommends that the source of funding of 17.29 billion on page 6 is disallowed - if you disallow it, do you again reflect it as supplementary? Because the only deduction from the overall request is the 3.0 billion for Phoenix and yet you are saying, “Let us disallow it.”

MS AKOL: Thank you, hon. Leader of Opposition, for giving way. I would like to clarify on the 17 point something billion as a source of funding. We are disallowing that money to be removed from other ministries to be used to fund the supplementary. And in our recommendations when we said that the Ministry of Finance should look for other sources, we were not disallowing the 17 point something billion as a supplementary but the source of funding for the supplementary. Thank you. 

PROF OGENGA-LATIGO: No, I understood that. But once they don’t give you the source of funding, you take it back to them and say, “Clarify on the source of funding,” and then we will consider. To just tell them to spend without telling them the source of funding, makes you end up in a blank cheque situation. 

Really, I would like the Budget Committee to help this House because the budget process tends to be a very technical thing. It is incumbent on that committee to do the right thing so that when we speak and include our politics in it so that our hospitals are rehabilitated et cetera, we don’t end up blowing up our national budget and we end up with economic distortions that have undermined the development of our country. Because it is not the money that is a problem in this country; it is how we spend it. And until we really correct how we spend the money, oil money will come and it will still be blown. 

This is the concern which every Member of Parliament ought to bear in mind and that is the concern that I raised. Because once it is disallowed, you will say, “We cannot approve that; go and look for it.” So, let us not make this supplementary look like it is under our rules somewhere that you can only bring one supplementary. We know of the Ministry of Finance having brought three to four supplementaries in a row and we have dealt with them. So, it would be good that procedures are followed and they are reminded that there we are watching them rather than allowing them to always make deliberate mistakes and we distort things. 

MR OMACH: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I just want to give one clarification to the Leader of the Opposition in regards to Justice and Constitutional Affairs appearing under the statutory vote. When we have court awards under the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, it is treated under statutory and that is why this is appearing under there. And as you are aware, we do not debate statutory votes here. I just wanted to give that clarification.
 
MRS OGWAL: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Could the Minister of Finance clarify to us and to the Leader of Opposition whether the revised schedule which has been tabled before the committee and this House actually went through the due process of arriving at the revised schedule? It is my suspicion, and I think it is correct that this document was authored by the Ministry of Finance and was taken as a final document. It never went through the due process of looking through all these figures and all the demands and the work plan. 

So I think let us be honest because I am standing up to defend the committee. I know the Leader of the Opposition has been very upset about the presentation of the committee but I want to remind him that there are some responsible people in that committee and we would not have -(Interruption)

MR GAGAWALA: Is the hon. Member of Parliament in order to abuse the integrity of the committee and the integrity –(Interruption)

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I think we should apply the rules so that he should not be heard in the House.

MR GAGAWALA: Is the honourable in order to abuse the integrity of the honourable committee of this Parliament and the integrity of the Ministry of Finance that they smuggled in something and she is so suspicious about it? Is she in order to be so suspicious against this committee, which is presented? 

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I am moving a motion that this honourable member should not be heard. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: It was a fair comment. Proceed.

MS AKOL: Thank you, honourable colleague. Hon. Ogwal is a Member of the Budget Committee and she should have participated in the process that went on at committee level. It is okay, she has not signed because she wasn’t around. I am giving information because she is a Member of the committee. She is supposed to have been party to this committee. To come up and say that a document was smuggled to this House and that the committee participated in that process, I think is very unfortunate because the adjusted document only has one item that has been added and that is Mulago Hospital Complex. That is why at committee level, the Ministry of Finance had to give us an adjusted schedule, which included Mulago Hospital and the amount is Shs 3.934 billion.

So, I want to make it clear to the House that there is no document that was smuggled through the committee to this House and hon. Ogwal should have been party to this. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, can we seriously proceed with the business?

MRS OGWAL: Mr Speaker, I want to put this matter in the right perspective. I have made reference to this document’s revised schedule and really the Chairperson to the Budget Committee should be honest to this House. You know very well that this document has not gone through the processes of the department participating and the institution participating. These figures were cooked by the Ministry of Finance and were brought to you and you know very well that this was not the due process which should have been followed so please don’t lie to the House and you are calling me a liar.

MS AKOL: Mr Speaker, is it in order for hon. Ogwal to make serious allegations here and yet she had the priority even before coming to the House to look at the original document and also the revised document and make a comparison and ascertain as to whether there was any item that was smuggled? Is it in order for her to make such allegations?

THE SPEAKER: I would advise that since hon. Ogwal is a Member of your committee, you should have internally settled this matter rather than bringing it before us.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. The concern I raised is very important and if it is not clear in our procedure, I think we need to establish it very clearly. The common thing I have seen is that Supplementary Schedule No. 1 usually presents to Parliament how the three percent has been spent and then any supplementary is then brought over and above the three percent for us to approve.

My deep concern is lumping this together because it can easily turn out that we have already spent more than three percent, the single approval clarifies or regularises what has been done. Please, I don’t know the anxiety of hon. engineer. Gagawala. Since I am not contesting with you, I don’t know why you are anxious when I am presenting. Obviously you would have been very anxious if I were contesting with you.

That is the point that I will want clarified and lastly, while hon. Omach says that we normally treat compensation court awards as statutory, under what provision of the law do we treat court awards as statutory expenditures? Under what provisions because the statutory institutions that do not have to bring their budgets for approval are spelt out and it does not include the Ministry of Justice. 

Therefore, to treat it without the legal provision is illegal and in fact this is the first time you are drawing my attention to the claim that you treat court awards as a statutory expenditure not subject to review and approval by Parliament because that is not correct. I have not been in this House as long as the Speaker, maybe the Speaker will help us on this but if it is maintained, I would ask that that particular provision is struck off and you bring it as a proper supplementary to the Ministry of Justice and then we approve it otherwise it is placed where it cannot be touched.

MR OLENY: Thank you very much, the Leader of the Opposition. Mr Speaker, the clarification I would like to draw the attention of the House to and more so to the issue the hon. Leader of the Opposition is presenting on is the fact that if there is a court ruling that Government of Uganda is to pay a certain amount of money to party x and it is known that it is usually the Ministry of Justice that undertakes to process the approval of this money - from that perspective I think that the Minister of Finance is then justified to say this amount of money is really not something that is negotiable but must be paid to party x. Maybe from that point of view it now becomes a statutory expenditure. I was just seeking that clarification.

Mr Speaker, if we go and look at the records of court awards, there are thousands of Ugandans who have been awarded costs in court, again from Government. Many of them have even died without receiving those awards. Who is this company anyway, to be awarded over Shs 30 billion? This is not small money, honourable members. For us to sit here and approve it without even knowing what the company is and what the cause of those costs is, I think we should all be condemned to hell because politically, any punishment would not be enough. This is criminal and it is religiously sinful and I think we should not allow it. Thank you, Mr Speaker. 

1.19
MR MATHIUS NSUBUGA (DP, Bukoto County South, Masaka): Mr Speaker, I want to draw your attention to Vote No. 102, just like my colleague hon. Godi said, about the Electoral Commission. I also interacted with the chairman of the Electoral Commission and as we speak, there are some political parties which have gone to court on this issue of voters’ cards and the chairman of the Electoral Commission said he requires about Shs 8 billion to be able to produce the voter’s cards. He said that since the Ministry of Internal Affairs is going to issue national identity cards, there was no need of issuing voters cards. But since it has become a concern for political parties that are participating in these elections - and our wish is to have a free and fair election - I would like the Minister of Finance to tag this money. If we approve this money, the voters’ cards must be catered for. We indeed said that we need a free and fair election whereby each and everybody will produce a voter’s card; can we support this on condition that the voters’ cards will be included. 

Secondly, as my colleagues have said, here we are just approving a blanket figure and as representatives of the people, we should be able to –(Interjection)- for example the State House, I expected the committee, even though they did not give us the details, to show and say, “Look, for electricity, we need this.” But for you to bring a blanket figure of Shs 79 billion –(Ms Akol rose_)– you have been accused, Madam Chairperson, of having no original documents from which you have a revised edition. This is your colleague in the same committee. We are now here before the House. Can you lay that on the Table so that all of us can have a look? 

Lastly, it is about the money for the missions abroad. Last year, I had a chance of visiting several missions in our Public Accounts Committee and one of them was the Riyadh Mission in Saudi Arabia. This mission is in a rented premise. Their policy in Saudi Arabia is that embassies are put in a certain area and most of them have been given free land. This Ugandan mission was given a plot of land during Idi Amin’s days and they have kept it for Uganda and we were told by the ambassador that the Government of Saudi Arabia is about to withdraw the offer they gave to the Ugandan mission. I have seen the amount of money given to the Riyadh Mission and yet this mission cannot even cover their rent. I want to ask the government, are we ready to forfeit this offer that was given to Uganda by the Saudi Arabian Government? 

1.23
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT, IN CHARGE OF SECURITY (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. First, may I wish you a Happy New Year and successful elections! I just have two points to make. The practise with regard to committee reports and rules is that when a Member of a committee does not agree with a committee report, then they write and file minority reports. It is unprecedented and not in accordance with our Rules of Procedure for committee Members to engage in altercations and the level of debate that I have witnessed here today and I think the Leader of the Opposition was raising good points. But I imagine that again the practise here is that details are provided to the committee and all of us are free to participate in the deliberations of the committee and to look at the details so that then if we have questions, we can raise them there. We surely must have some faith in our committees to do a proper job which, in terms of scrutinising figures, one hopes they have done. 

This question of court awards, a court award is a court award and I think when we apply the principle that is in our Constitution about separation of powers, I do not think we would be doing the right thing for Parliament to say, do not realise a decision, do not implement a decision of another arm of government especially the judiciary. So, whereas I think the Leader of the Opposition may have had a good point about the nomenclature –(Interruption)

MS ANYWAR: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and thank you honourable minister for giving way. Happy New Year to you, dear colleagues! I am seeking clarification from the minister as he talks about the court awards. It is true that as a country, we must maintain the separation of powers which unfortunately, we are not practicing to its best. But I would like you to clarify on the procedure of choosing which court award should be paid before the other because as we are aware, honourable members, we have a heap of court awards which, as my Leader of the Opposition said, many Members have even died before getting the awards. What was the procedure of particularly referring to this one or the three cases vis-à-vis others where the owners have even died without receiving the awards? 

MR MBABAZI: Mr Speaker, as usual, I am not about to engage in debate on speculation. I simply addressed my mind to a case in point and this is what has been presented to us. I do not know those thousands of court awards that have not been fulfilled. I do not have that information -(Interruption)

MR OKUPA: Let me give you information. There are Members of this House that your Government took to court on trumped-up charges of murder, hon. Ocula and hon. Reagan Okumu. There are court awards which were given to them and six years down the road, they have not been given those awards.

MR MBABAZI: I was just looking to my teacher who was saying something and I hoped he would rise and say it – my professor there; not you of course.

It may be true that there are many cases that have not been handled - I am simply saying that that information is not known to me, but we can raise and talk about it at an appropriate time. Right now we are addressing a case that had been presented and of an award by court of so much money and they are only asking this House to pass a supplementary to meet that particular award. I don’t think it would be appropriate to say that since they have not paid others – because the others can also be brought up; there is no problem.

Secondly, just on State House, I would like to assure the Members, especially of the Opposition, that the NRM and its candidates, and especially its candidate for the president, have sufficient resources of their own to conduct the campaigns. I want you to be assured that we certainly do not expect to use any money from any Government resources to support the campaigns of NRM; we have enough of it. So, the question of the Shs 18 billion that hon. Claveri Mutuluuza was raising – as it has been pointed out in the committee report itself at page 4 - is expenditure that has already been incurred. Even if it had not, surely the insinuation that because the incumbent is also a candidate, so any money that goes to State House would go towards his campaigns, is without foundation. You see, as you all know, the President remains the President until May 3 even if he was not elected; that is a fact and the nation must run.

Also as we all know, the President is the head of state, head of government and the Commander-in-Chief and all the executive authority of Uganda is vested in him. Anyone else who performs any executive functions is just delegated to perform such a function. Therefore, for the State House to be engaged in activities that require so much resource should not surprise anyone. I would like to assure this House that the NRM absolutely has no intentions of encroaching on state funds –(Interruptions)

MRS OGWAL: I don’t think anybody is contesting the financial power of the NRM-O Party; what we are contesting is: if the funds requested are really necessary to finance the activities of the President during this period, which is outside the budget; that should be detailed. So, can we know those emergency activities, which have suddenly become so important that he is given more than the budgetary provision? That is what we are questioning. We think that emergency cannot definitely be 100 percent.

We are not contesting the financial power of the party – and while I seek this clarification, can you go to page 9; you will find that what was requested for to fund the activities of our team in Congo, if you remember – just go down to the second last; it was there in the last supplementary budget.

THE SPEAKER: A point of procedure has been raised.

LT COL (RTD) RWAMIRAMA: Mr Speaker, is it procedurally right for the Member of the committee to debate the report to which she should have contributed?

THE SPEAKER: I think honourable members, for the details that you are asking, just look at this document and look at the itemized areas. And if you add, for instance, to get this 79 – you look at the allowances and the breakdown – those are the details. Please, proceed.

MR MBABAZI: Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. That is the answer -(Laughter)– and I am sure that my good friend, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, will now look at the document –(Interjections)– she is my friend and I must insist on it. She always tells me she is my friend –(Laughter)– I want her to deny it now.

Anyway, I just want to assure colleagues that: one, as you heard from the committee report itself, this expenditure has already been incurred and even if it had not, please be assured and comforted by the information I have given to you that certainly this money cannot possibly be meant to support the presidential candidate of NRM because NRM does not need such a vote. We are self-sufficient and as you know and have noticed, we are moving on and gaining momentum as we get nearer to the D-day. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we have spent about four hours dealing with this subject; we have to go to the Committee of Supply. So, I now put question in respect of the report of the Budget Committee.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I don’t know whether we should immediately move to the Committee of Supply or we first go for lunch – we move on immediately? Okay.

THE SUPPLEMENTARY EXPENDITURE FOR FINANCIAL YEAR 2010/2011

COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

Recurrent Supplementary Expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I put the question that a total sum of Shs 428,258,566,000, be provided for as recurrent supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2010/2011.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Development Supplementary Expenditure:

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I propose that a total sum Shs 5,608,434,000 be provided for as development supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2010/2011. I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

1.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg to move that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the House do resume and the Committee of Supply reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding_)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY 

1.39
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered Supplementary Schedule I for Financial Year 2010/2011 and has supplied, with amendments, a total of Shs 428,258,566,000 as recurrent supplementary expenditure and Shs 5,608,434,000 as development supplementary expenditure for the Financial Year 2010/2011. I would like to report that the Shs 5,608,434,000 is statutory.

MRS OGWAL: I am wondering why we are moving in an omnibus manner. There are certain items where we have very strong objections but now the way we are passing this is as if we have approved everything in a blanket form. I think we need to be conscious about this, Mr Speaker. Our conscience tells some of us that there are some items in the supplementary which ought to be passed by this House. So, I am wondering why we are moving in an omnibus manner.

THE SPEAKER: Well, that is the report your committee made. It had two items and this is what we are following. Your committee had only two items namely, on recurrent supplementary totalling 428 billion and it also has development supplementary. Those are the figures we have read following the report which you adopted. 

DR ARAPKISSA YEKO: I do not know what the fate is of the districts that are missing from the supplementary wages. There are certain districts which are missing like Kween, Manafwa and Kabale. What do we do with them? 

THE SPEAKER: Well, I suggest if they are missing, the case is made to the Minister of Finance and he can bring another supplementary. I think that is what we can do. We only dealt with what was presented. We rejected Hoima, for instance, because it was not presented to us but it is not barred from bringing another supplementary request to us.

MR KYANJO: I want to be guided. There are areas we mentioned over which we had objections and we had thought they were going to be given sufficient explanation before we proceed. Now it looks like it was just irrelevant. I want your guidance on this.

THE SPEAKER: Of course the report is adopted with reservations, which I expressed, and they are on record.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF SUPPLY

1.43
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach): I beg to move that the report from the Committee of Supply be adopted.

1.43
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): I thank you. Things happened very fast and we did not have time to consult but there are genuine concerns and I seek your guidance at this stage whether I can move for recommittal so that some specific items are examined.

If you look at the compensation for this Dura Cement, there was no explanation that was satisfactory at all; even the Minister of Finance did not clarify. He only clarified on the placement of that compensation in justice and yet we do not know anything about this problem. Can we – 

THE SPEAKER: I think they are calling these court awards statutory. It means that once the court has pronounced itself and awarded damages, there is no question of negotiation; you cannot say, “We are going to cut this and the other”, it becomes payable. You cannot say, “This is too much, reduce it”; it becomes payable. 

You also know that the Ministry of Justice is responsible for settling these awards; even the awards of the Uganda Human Rights Commission are taken to the Ministry of Justice as statutory. Here there is no negotiation. You cannot say it is too much, unless there is an appeal. An appellant court can reduce but once it is final, it is final. I think that is why they did it like that.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Well, I was perfectly aware of the fact that court decisions cannot be reversed by this House and it was not my concern that the amounts were too big or small. My concern was that the country needed to know what went on that allowed this to happen. When I raised the matter, Government should have been fair to this country if they explained the circumstances under which the country is incurring Shs 34 billion as costs on something that the country does not know. 

THE SPEAKER: I think what we can do is to request the Attorney-General and Minister of Justice – there is no harm because we are entitled to information – to give us a breakdown in writing so that all of us are privy to what is happening. I think that can be done. He can say, “Decree so and so or court order so and so gets so much”. He can even give the parties concerned so that we get to know. 

I request the Minister of Justice – is he there? Attorney-General, please give us the breakdown so that hon. Members are privy to what is happening. I think that will be done. So, I put the question that we adopt the report of the Committee of Supply. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Report adopted.)

THE SPEAKER: I thank you very much.

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS CODE OF CONDUCT REGULATIONS

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I imagine that you have read the contents of this report on our code of conduct. For those who have not, I think we should have a break for an hour so that we come back and consider it. If you cannot finish today, we proceed tomorrow. Tomorrow we are also expecting a statement from the Ministry of Health on yellow fever in the North. So, we have a break for an hour and we come back at 3.00 p.m.

MR KYANJO: Mr Speaker, I seek for your indulgence; if it is not so painful for members, we proceed and conclude this matter. It is going to be painful on the side of some of us -

THE SPEAKER: Conclude it today without a break?

MR KYANJO: Yes, to complete this code of conduct before we go for the break so that we go once and for all. Otherwise, it might be difficult raising the quorum again.

THE SPEAKER: I do not know what the medical advice would be on this, whether it will not cause physical injury to the members. Please, come because if we finish this matter, definitely I will not call you again until the elections are over. So, please sacrifice. You have given your time, you travelled from very far to be here, so bear with us and we finish this matter.

(The House was suspended at 1.49 p.m.)

 (On resumption at 3.22 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT OF THE SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS ON THE POLITICAL PARTIES AND ORGANISATIONS CODE OF CONDUCT REGULATIONS, 2010

THE SPEAKER: You are welcome, hon. Members, and thank you for your time. 

3.23
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese, on behalf of the Inter-Religious Council, has requested to have prayers with hon. Members of Parliament on 14th January at 4.00 p.m. in the Conference Hall. So I wanted to pick your brains. 

I request all of you to come for prayers, even if you are a Muslim like hon. Madada, or a Christian. It is next Friday at 4.00 p.m. in the conference hall of Parliament. That is the request, hon. Members of Parliament. I request hon. Members to respond to this request.

3.25
MR AKBAR GODI (Arua Municipality, Arua): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Prime Minister for that message. All of us have been waiting for that moment. Bishop Cyprian Lwanga and his other colleagues under the umbrella of the Inter-Religious Council have been interfacing with presidential candidates and other stakeholders and all of us have been asking ourselves when the moment of truth will come on our side. Mine is an assurance to you; I will mobilise the Muslim community in this Parliament and I will be part of that congregation on that day.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much.

3.26
MR KAWANGA JOHN BAPTIST (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): The invitation is most welcome. I only request the Prime Minister to make sure that it is disseminated to all Members of Parliament because as you can see, not many of us are here today. I request you to use your good office to notify the members well in advance so that they can prepare to be around. 

LT COL (RTD) BRIGHT RWAMIRAMA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for that message and also the Bishop for thinking about Parliament. I must say that this is timely because we have always prayed together during Christmas but we were not able to do so this time because of the very intensive campaigns which we were involved in. So I urge members that it is time we get together before we go for the final lap of our election campaign. Thank you very much.

3.28
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me also add my voice and thank the Prime Minister for the invitation. As a member who is not participating in the elections, I want to help you. Give me all the information so that I can invite every Member of Parliament so that we can have time to pray for each other so that we can have peaceful elections and have 80 percent of the Members of Parliament returned. 

3.28
MS ANN AURU (Independent, Woman Representative, Moyo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want to thank the Prime Minister for the information. Uganda is a God-fearing nation and as we go into this very important election, it is important for us to pray. What I would like to know from him is whether the other religious denominations or organisations will also be in attendance. 

3.28
MR ELIJAH OKUPA (FDC, Kasilo County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr Speaker and Prime Minister. The invitation is very welcome. However, it is also my prayer that by that time the Government would have come out with a position regarding homosexuality issues so that when the time comes to pray, we will be very clear and be able to walk the talk. 

I can see the Prime Minister has not heard me properly; I was asking about the issue of homosexuality. Definitely we need prayers and Government should come out with a clear position by the time we come for prayers. 

I would also like to register my apologies. Rt. Hon. Prime Minister, you know very well that I am a member of that congregation and I would have loved to be there, but I will not be able to attend because the party president will be in my constituency on that day. However, I will be with you in spirit. Thank you.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I would like to inform the House following the observation made by hon. Okupa. He demands that at an appropriate time, Government should come out with its position on the matter of homosexuality. I think the position and that of the state has not changed, namely that our laws prohibit homosexuality. 

Section 145 of the Penal Code is very clear and explicit; whoever engages in carnal knowledge with the same sex or with an animal commits an offense and the punishment is very grave - life imprisonment. It is a felony. What hon. Bahati’s Bill sought to do was to improve on the existing legal framework in terms of its implementation. Otherwise, the position of Government is very clear because our laws are still in the statute books. (Applause) 

3.31
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Prof. Apolo Nsibambi): I am most comforted. Prof. Latigo came late but I am sure he will be here on Friday at 4.00 p.m. for prayers as requested by the Inter-Religious Council, and the prayer was made by His Grace the Archbishop of Kampala Archdiocese. 

A question was raised as to whether other religious leaders will be here. Certainly they will be here

With regard to publicity, I do not have the powers to direct the Speaker under Article 98 but I request the Rt Hon. Speaker to convey to those who are not here through his system, it being a parliamentary matter. I thank you. 

THE SPEAKER: Regarding the question of other leaders, this initiative was on behalf of the Inter-Religious Council. The Inter-Religious Council has all leaders of Christian religions and Muslims. So, it is a comprehensive arrangement. 

3.32
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Morris Ogenga-Latigo): Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank the Prime Minister for his communication. I assure him that he should not worry; unless some extreme emergency arises, I will always be there.

Mr Speaker, I rose to seek guidance from you before we deal with the code of conduct. This is something I thought I would really request because the party code of conduct is something that is extremely important. 

I observed elections for the African Union in Ethiopia last year. One of the things that stabilised Ethiopian politics and elections was that the parties were allowed, under what should have been our inter-party forum, to sit down and consider what they think is the best regulation in terms of how they conduct themselves as parties in that country. When they did that, they then forwarded it to government to introduce it as a Bill in Parliament. When it was introduced, Parliament adopted it - how do you call it in your legal terms - as is or in total. It was without amendments because the parties were involved from the first stage. 

My information is that this code of conduct was introduced but not through that process. Some of the parties were invited to make submissions on the code of conduct and many of them did not even appear.

Secondly, we are so few and preoccupied with our elections. I propose that rather than us receiving this and pronouncing ourselves, we should be allowed to dialogue. This code of conduct will serve for many years, long beyond the elections; it would be good if we allowed parties to dialogue and talk about what they want to see govern them rather than us, Parliament, pronouncing ourselves. So, I want to make an appeal that we defer this matter and let that process take place. It would serve this country much better than if we passed it now. This is the appeal I am making.

3.36
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS/DEPUTY ATTORNEY-GENERAL (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, the observations made by the Leader of the Opposition are very important - the need for consultation with relevant stakeholders. However, he may recall that the code of conduct was introduced in the end year of the end month of the Seventh Parliament here on the Floor of the House. 

The matter was deferred for further consultations but as you may recall, we were permeating from a Movement system of governance into a multi-party democracy or dispensation. The people who had been consulted were individuals. So when the country metamorphosed into a multi-party dispensation, there was need to consult parties as parties. Who would write, for instance, to the secretaries-general of the respective parties and organisations? You had charged the Minister of Justice to undertake that assignment but of course, naturally, the body that carried out this process because of its impartiality was the Electoral Commission on behalf of the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs.

I want to assure you, hon. Leader of the Opposition, beyond what has been done I do not see much more that can be done. Many meetings were held and reference was made to them. I may even lay on the Table, if need be, the consultations that were made. I have a report on the consultative workshop with political parties and other stakeholders held from 10 to 11 September 2008 at the Imperial Royale Hotel, Nakasero. A total of 36 parties were invited and out of that, 29 of them turned up. The proceedings are here. Even the people who attended by signature are here. 

To a great extent possible, and even when I presented these regulations to the committee, I pointed it out to them that the best we can do is to change for purposes of creating legal effect or stylistic consistency. The substance remained as was recommended by the political parties and organisations.  

Mr Speaker, it is therefore my humble opinion and request that since these regulations are going to guide the Electoral Commission in this one month or so, we oblige and approve these regulations so that the Minister of Justice makes them by way of statutory instrument as required by the law. If at a later stage there is need for any amendment, we can come back here and effect that amendment.

I do not see another opportunity if we were to adjourn now. We are talking in terms of the next Parliament yet these are critical regulations. The parties have responded very well. The response was extremely good. They made their proposals so why should we let them down? Thank you so much, Mr Speaker.

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, Rt Hon. Speaker, and I thank the Attorney-General for his exposition on the matter. The consultative meeting you referred to that was in 2008 tells you the problem I am talking about. This was a consultative meeting of 2008 and since you drafted the regulations, a consultative workshop would have worked better. However, the argument you are presenting is precisely the misconception that is driving this process - that we are making regulations about elections. This is about political parties. The issues of elections are governed by the various election Acts, whether it is presidential elections, parliamentary elections, etc. This is about regulating the conduct of parties, not during elections but in their existence. 

There is absolutely no reason why we should really hurry with these regulations. Even now most headquarters are closed. It is the campaign headquarters that are active because that is where events are until after elections. So, we do not serve any purpose in pushing for this when the minds of people are elsewhere. 

If we want to help the parties, my suggestion would be that hon. Ruhindi and his office of the Attorney-General find money after these elections, put parties in workshops and let them go through this in a two-day workshop. They can then make proposals as to whether what is proposed in the regulations is okay and make amendments. That would find a basis for bringing a regulation that satisfies everybody. 

I am just appealing because we are focusing on the wrong thing. These regulations are not about the elections; they are about how parties conduct themselves. Right now the electoral laws are in place and they will deal with you if you abuse any process in the elections. So I appeal to the learned Attorney-General; I see your desire but I would like to convince you that it is misplaced and that you should allow space for us to consult. 

In fact, I would have loved to see the inter-party forum work so that this thing goes through it. That is how we build the institutions of parties in our country. Other countries have done that. In Rwanda the forum works very well. In Malawi it works very well. I observed elections in those places. The same is true in Ethiopia. We have made advances in our democratic journey and some of these things will help to further that growth. That is my appeal.

MR RUHINDI: I just want to state one thing. I really do not think that I was properly understood, Mr Speaker. In pointing out this period of elections, I did not mean that these regulations will be applying only during elections. They are very clear and they speak for themselves - before, during and after elections except for independent candidates, and of course that one is explained and will be further explained. 

Let us not contradict ourselves. You made one important observation. You said what would ordinarily happen would be that after parties have been consulted and they have made their proposals, what Parliament only needs to do is to adopt as is. This means that we would actually make very minimal input. 

Assuming that position is still maintained, these parties and organisations have made their proposals. By the way, the consultations never stopped only in 2008. Those were the days of the workshops but for any further clarifications and input, the Electoral Commission would always communicate and get feedback, hence this position that we have now. I would find it very difficult - anyway, it is the House - to make a decision. Thank you.

3.46
MR JOHN BAPTIST KAWANGA (DP, Masaka Municipality, Masaka): I can see the Attorney-General’s predicament but I want to be very frank. I have just seen this code of conduct today and I have run through it very fast. I do not remember being part of the 2008 deliberations –(Interruption)

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, I moved a motion for the approval of these regulations on Friday, 3rd  December last year –(Interjection)- yes, just last month; one month away from now –

THE SPEAKER: When you say last year, it seems like a long time ago. (Laughter)  

MR RUHINDI: I agree that it sends the impression that it was a long time ago but it was just four weeks ago. In the motion I moved, the regulations were attached. So, honourable, either you check your pigeon hole or something.

MR KAWANGA: I accept the Attorney-General’s information but I want to inform him that I am being very candid. I was not here when this was done and the information I have is that there were very few Members of Parliament then and that is why the whole matter was adjourned. I am being candid. I have only seen them today and I have perused through them. 

I think the intention was that these regulations are used during these elections. In fact, they are specifically intended to be applied during elections. Regulation 3 says that, “These regulations apply to political parties and organisations and they apply also to independent candidates during elections notwithstanding anything in these regulations”. So they are intended to be used during –(Interjection)- so, you see, that is another debate that we are going to get into now. 

We are remaining with about 45 days of this application. These regulations create bodies which are supposed to be functional. They create institutions like liaison committees and other committees which are supposed to function during elections. So, even if we passed it today, I do not see the Electoral Commission setting up these committees and these committees carrying out any function during this forthcoming election. That is what this thing is about. 

There are several committees to do this and that. There are also certain things which I am questioning, for example the Electoral Commission is supposed to arbitrate and make decisions in matters of dispute. The regulations say so but they do not even tell you how this is supposed to be done. This is something which we have to debate. 

If we want these regulations to be used during these elections, they have come too late. Let us be fair; even if they were passed today, I do not see the Electoral Commission implementing them meaningfully during this coming election and yet they are very important. If we want to do a good job, I would rather members slept over the matter and then we look at it. Otherwise, we would be rushing something which will not be of any use during this election, and there would be no reason why we would have rushed this whole exercise. 

For those reasons, I am begging the Attorney-General to reconsider because if we are to go regulation by regulation, so many amendments may be required and the debate may take longer.

3.51
MR SULEIMAN MADADA (NRM, Bbaale County, Kayunga): Mr Speaker, the debate on the code of conduct of political parties and organisations is long overdue. It should have been discussed even yesterday. 

If I can remind my colleagues, when this country was preparing for the return of multi-party politics, there was a committee instituted by Government to consult political parties on how to run the political parties arrangement. I remember I was part of the Dr Kiyonga committee and part of the products of that discussion was the code of conduct for the political parties. 

The process of consultation has been on for a long time and we believe that if we are going to really have a strong political system in this country, we should discuss the code of conduct for political parties -(Interruption)

PROF. OGENGA-LATIGO: Thank you, hon. Madada, for giving way. The information I want to give you is that the hon. Kiyonga committee had a major workshop in Jinja which some of us attended but the invitation to that workshop was not meant for political parties; it was meant for individuals. I was there, hon. Jacob Oulanyah was there and a few others who by our known positions were considered the Opposition. We were never invited as members of particular parties. 

The point that we have raised is that let the parties - because it is their conduct - disagree that this provision hurts them or does not hurt them, and let them agree on it themselves. They are the ones who are going to conduct themselves; by the time it comes to Parliament, our job would more or less be done. 

If we continue - and this is the information from our perspective - it makes the ownership of that code of conduct belong to the governments and yet it should belong to the parties and not governments. Governments are only formed by parties that are mandated to form governments but they are never political parties. Governments are governments of a country. So, let the parties deal with this and then we as Parliament just regularise. It would be much better. That is the information. I was there in that consultation and it was not about political parties. Individuals attended that consultation. 

MR MADADA: If I can recollect, I believe this was not for individuals. There are some political parties that boycotted saying that this was dealing with small political parties. Others said, “We cannot join because the parties you are dealing with are a creation of government”.

All that put aside, I believe that all of us are aware that the situation that is happening today in our political parties deserves some bit of regulation. If we continue operating this way, we may have to kill the political party system. So, at least let us begin the debate and if we have views to continue, we can continue later. At least we could begin the debate. Thank you very much. 

3.50
MRS CECILIA OGWAL (Independent, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I have two observations to make, but more specifically I would like to ask the Attorney-General to clarify concerning this Bill. 

First of all, you and I know the process of arriving at the Political Parties Act. It started from the Seventh Parliament. I do recall a letter from His Excellency the President dated 10 April 2001 where he objected, or he declined to assent to the decision of Parliament regarding operations of political parties.

I would like to remind the Attorney-General that the Political Parties Act was passed in 2005. It was very important that at the time we were making this Bill an Act, we ought to have known that we were operating under a monolithic political system and therefore we needed to soften the ground by putting in place mechanisms to discipline the various parties that are in operation or that have been registered. I am wondering why the Attorney-General did not think of the importance of that at that time. 

My second concern is contained on page 294 where the national consultative forum shall be composed of one representative from every registered political party. This definitely should also cause concern to the Attorney-General. How many political parties have been registered in this country, how many are active and how many are genuine? 

You can imagine a situation where you have one representative of the Movement political party, one representative of the FDC, one representative of UPC, DP and so on - these are known operational parties which are entrenched in the ground - sitting with a multitude of other political parties that you do not even know where their members are and so on. You will find that in the House you will be having about 200 members with only four genuine political parties deciding on the fate of the serious political parties. I think let the Attorney-General just address that point.

The third point I would like to raise is that looking at section 20, which talks about the national consultative forum, this particular forum which is a very important forum is supposed to be funded by the state. In other words, the political parties are not going to raise the money to run this forum but Parliament must approve money to run this forum. You also know that we cannot deal with matters which require parliamentary approval now. Why do we want to pass this law now, knowing very well that Parliament may not be willing and by law should not be passing the budget for this particular forum? Why decide on formation of this forum if it is not going to be operational? 

Looking at the composition itself, it is embarrassing. I just want the minister to look at it again. One is the representative of the political parties, then the Attorney-General who is seated here with us, then the Secretary of the Electoral Commission whom we know very well where he belongs politically. Of course you are talking about other matters and what they are supposed to be doing, and the definition of their activities is all based on electoral matters. So, I really do not know what the functional reason for creating this forum would be in the absence of elections. So, I just feel that it is a good idea for a wrong time for the wrong forum and it needs to be redone. 

The idea is good, Attorney-General. The idea is very good. We all have been pleading for it. We have been asking you to come up with this Bill so that we know how parties can relate with each other, but you delayed to come up with this thing. Now we are coming to the end of the term of this Parliament and all political party leaders are out and about looking for votes and these political leaders must be consulted when we are going to decide on this. You may be lucky to find your president because he is still using the party apparatus, but what about small parties who cannot easily reach their party leaders and who need to be consulted on this? 

So, I think let us be realistic. The timing is wrong. The idea is good and I would really want to support you so that we have a good code of conduct so that these political parties should act responsibly. Some of them are already misusing the powers that are given to them. 

Above all the people to benefit, and why these laws should have come earlier, are the Movement. So many of their cadres are now using sticks and beating up people. People in my constituency were beaten on the 25th, they have been arrested and they in police cells. They are misusing the name of the political party when actually these are mere criminals. This code conduct is important but this is the wrong time.

THE SPEAKER: Can we have a small interparty committee to liaise with the Attorney-General and the chairman of the committee to discuss this matter and report to us tomorrow to see how we move? You can come tomorrow and advise us on what to do.

MR RUHINDI: I am a bit worried about that proposal because these regulations went to the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee. There is a report from the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and the committee is here to report. They must have invited all the stakeholders including political parties and organisations. 

THE SPEAKER: Look at page 1; they say Ministry of Justice, Electoral Commission, NRM, Uganda Federal Alliance were met but FDC, UPC, DP, CP, PDP, Justice Forum did not appear. Can’t we find a consensus so that the code we pass is acceptable to all? 

4.05
MR THEODORE SEKIKUUBO (NRM, Lwemiyaga County, Ssembabule): I find your proposal more workable because at the end of the day, these regulations are for everybody. The committee chairman was telling us that some did not appear before the proceedings. This is an opportunity to bring them on board. The Speaker is making your work easier; I do not think that you should resist that proposal. What you failed to achieve then can be got now. 

The hon. Minister stated that this is an opportune moment because once Parliament goes back it will be difficult to reconvene. So you should take the opportunity offered by the Speaker and then you harmonise your positions.

MR RUHINDI: Mr Speaker, we have consulted and we oblige to your proposal to consult and then report tomorrow.

THE SPEAKER: The Leader of the Opposition should select leaders of various parties and consult together with the Attorney-General. The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 4.08 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5 January 2011 at 11.00 a.m.)

