Tuesday 4th January, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair)

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I wish to take this opportunity to welcome you back from your recess. (Applause)  During this Second Meeting of the Seventh Session, there will be a lot of activities to attend to.  If we are, therefore, going to do our legislative work fast enough, we are going to have longer sittings than has been the case before.  I appeal to Members to turn up for the meetings and stay on so that we do not experience problems of quorum as in the past.  I wish to caution those Members who do not regularly attend the meetings or attend but leave early, that their names will be compiled and reported to their constituencies for their electorate to note (Laughter)  

Hon. Members, we are getting to advanced stages of events leading to the CA elections.  Many of you have already indicated your intentions to contest the forthcoming CA elections.  I wish to appeal to you that during your consultations with the electorate, you conduct yourselves honourably as hon. Members of this august House -(Applause)- and desist from facts and talks that are likely to undermine your image and the dignity of this august House.  So, please, I beg you to stop involving innocent people’s names as scapegoats in your campaigns. (Applause)  It is important that if you win, you do so honourably and should you lose, you equally do so honourably. (Applause) 

On a sad note, it is with deep regret that I have to formally inform you that the Council lost one of its Member, the late hon. Teddy Kagwa Nsubuga, Women Representative for Mpigi District.  She died in the morning of Saturday, 1st January 1994, and was buried yesterday the 3rd January 1994, at her home in Mpigi.  The Council, Mpigi District and the country at large will miss her dedicated services at this material time when they should be needed most.  Let us stand up and observe a minute of silence in her honour.  (Minute of silence observed) That is the end of the message.
BILLS
FIRST READING

THE REFERENDUM BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Mayanja K.A):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Referendum Bill, 1993 be read the First Time. (Applause)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE REFERENDUM BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR JUSTICE/ATTORNEY GENERAL (Mr. Abu K. Mayanja):  Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, I rise on a point of order.  The hon. Minister has read the Bill for the First Time and proceeded to read the Bill for the Second Time without moving a Motion to waive the 14 days Notice.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  According to our rules of procedure, the hon. Attorney General is in order.  According to Rule 55.

MR. MAYANJA:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, just to refresh the memory of the hon. Member for Rwampara, the relevant Standing Order is Order No. 55. (Interruption)

Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that The Referendum Bill, 1993 be read a Second Time.  This Bill has been with hon. Members since July of last year.  It is a short Bill.  It is a non-controversial Bill.  The Bill provides machinery whereby at any time whenever it may appear necessary to the government or indeed to this House to test the opinion of the people of Uganda, either nationally or in any area of the country, to do so by holding a Referendum.  It has been a ‘lacoona’ in our law that we now take the opportunity to remedy.  It is a sort of law that one should always have around.  In our case, the measure is doubly necessary because under the provisions of the Constituent Assembly Statute with which hon. Members should now be very familiar, there is a mandatory provision for referring certain issues to be settled by referendum.  

I refer, to Section 17 of the Constituent Assembly Statute which provides for the way decisions of the Assembly shall be taken and for the - if I may be allowed to refresh the memory of hon. Members, it says that every decision of the Assembly shall as far as possible be by consensus.  Then it goes to provide for situations where consensus is reached that is where consensus means everybody is agreed and it is quite clear, but if there is no consensus then the Chairman shall decide or a Member can move that the matter be decided by vote.  Now, (d) says that, ‘the Motion shall be carried if it obtains the support of not less than two thirds of the delegates voting.  (e), the Motion shall be lost if it is supported by less than the votes of the majority of the delegates voting and (f) and this is where I come in now.  ‘The matter shall be regarded as contentious if the Motion is supported by the votes of the majority of the delegates voting, but does not obtain the support of two thirds of the delegates voting.’. 

Now, in such a case, whenever in the Constituent Assembly there is a vote on an issue and it receives 50 per cent of those voting but receives less than two thirds, then that issue becomes contentious and must be decided by referendum.  Therefore, it is necessary to have a referendum in place before we go into the Constituent Assembly.  Again there are situations - because the law is general it is not geared only to the situations that are envisaged by the Constituent Assembly Statute.  It can be used whenever - as I said, it is necessary to test the views or opinions of the people of Uganda or any section of the people of Uganda by vote.  

Let me start by saying also that for that reason, any Minister of the government can cause a referendum to be taken.  The Minister for Local Government may want something determined.  The Minister for Health, the Minister for Agriculture.  Now, ‘minister’, therefore, in the Statute has been defined - and this is the only thing to which I wish to draw attention; everything else is straightforward.  ‘Minister’ means, the Minister to whom the functions of Minister under this Statute have for the time being been assigned by the President -(Interruption).  There is no ‘aha’ it is very straightforward.  It means that if the Minister for Information wishes to carry out a referenda to find out whether certain broadcasts or languages shall continue on Radio Uganda or be taken off, he can hold a referendum when this law has been passed.  (Interruption)

So, it is important hon. Members to appreciate that the law is entirely general.  It provides for the holding of referenda to test the opinions of the people of Uganda on any matter on which it may, at any time, be necessary to find out what they feel about it.  If I may now come to explain, at present, as I said, there is no law under which a referendum can be held. (Applause).  I think, as the Member holding the Floor of the House has said that is a general expression of the consensus of the House in welcoming our dear friends the hon. Jones and the hon. Lady Sekiziyivu. (Laughter) 

The only laws that relate to elections, apart from the Constituent Assembly Statute are irrelevant to the holding of a referendum.  These are, (1) The Resistance Councils and Committee Electoral regulations 1989 enacted in Statutory instrument No. 3 of 1989 and made under Section 26 of the Resistance Councils and Committees Statute, Statute No. 9 of 1987; (2) The National Assembly Election Act, Chapter (131); and (3) The District Councils Elections Act, Chapter 132 of the Laws of Uganda.  The Constituent Assembly Statute in Section 18 required the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly to refer to the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs on contentious matters of a National character for the Minister to present to the nation for resolution through a national referendum.  The same Section also empowers the President, upon the advise of the cabinet, to direct particular issues to be resolved by referendum.  

The Constituent Assembly Statute further in Section 22 - 1 (g) authorise the Commissioner appointed under Section 21, that is Mr. Steven Akabway - of the Statute, to organise, administer and conduct any referendum required under that Statute.  Now, apart from those provisions - there are provisions of who can vote in a referendum when declared and so on.  In fact, all things that relate to the holding of referendum are not provided for.  

So, we have provided for them in this Bill.  It provides that a referendum may be held throughout the country or in any particular area of the country specified in the Order.  The persons entitled to vote in a referendum are the persons, for the time being, on the register of electors for public elections.  The questions to be determined at a referendum are required by the Bill to be framed so as to require no answer other than yes or no.  Under the Bill, unless a greater majority is required by any enactment, but the question submitted to the referendum is to be determined by a simple majority of the persons voting in the referendum.  

The Bill empowers the Minister to make regulations prescribing the manner in which referenda are to be held and authorizes him in the regulations to apply to referenda any enactments relating to elections with or without modifications including election offenses.  The regulations are required to be read before the legislature within 21 days after they are published in the gazette and may be annulled by the legislature within 21 days after they are so read without prejudice, however, to anything lawful done there under before they were annulled.  The Bill also provides that the expenses of the referendum are to be met from the consolidated fund, I think - yes, but I see somebody has indicated that he wishes to move an amendment that they may be provided by the Parliament.  

So this is briefly the Referendum Bill.  We need it for the Constituent Assembly, in order to make it possible for issues to be settled in the Assembly.  We also need it for anything; we may need to join the common market.  Hon. Members may remember that referenda have just been held in Europe to determine whether certain countries shall or shall not continue as members of the enlarged European Economic Union.  

So, apart from technical matters, I really do not think that I need to take up the time of the House much further.  The issue is whether we need to have machinery for holding referendum, and that is what this Bill provides.  If we agree, then we can consider any particular provisions that I think are straightforward.  I wish to join you, from the process of consultation with their electorate.  I wish also to add my voice, if I may, with great respect to yours, in the words of wisdom that the exercise which we have just told the House, the exercise we have engaged on is very important, is historic and it should not be marred by any unseemly activity.  Let us go through this thing so that our descendants will like the Americans today - refer to us as their God light predecessors.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

MR. KAWANGA JOHN (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As the Attorney General has said, this is a general statute, but because he has come at this point in time, some people have attached to it a special purpose.  The reason is because there is a Constituent Assembly coming up, and there is a provision for a Referendum there - in that is why some people feel there has been need to bring this Bill.  But this is something that should have been on our Statute book for a long time in the past, because that is the essence of democracy.  The idea is of consulting the whole population on the matter that is of interest to the nation.  But because we had given up on democracy, this kind of Statute should not have come earlier than it has come today. (Applause)

But having come, there are a few questions one would wish to ask; the way it means suggests that the Minister together with Cabinet can make a decision to call upon a nation to vote on an issue.  

One cannot avoid noticing the presence of hon. Wandira, who has been absent in this House for such a long time.  We welcome him back.  I feel that if you have got a House that represents people, it should only be appropriate to consult them before you submit matters to a National Referendum.  So, I suggest that the idea of consulting Cabinet and the Minister alone should be abandoned and that we should not go for a referendum unless the House has also felt that there is need.  Since these are people’s representatives, they should be consulted, it is only when they feel they cannot resolve a matter that it should be referred to the whole public.  Because a referendum is a very expensive affair anyway so, it should not be taken without consulting the public. 

Another small point which I wish to add s about how this referendum is going to be conducted - to be conducted in a manner that will ensure that it is not rigged one way or the other.  This is extremely important.  The question -(Interjection and Laughter)- apparently even at this point in time it is not possible to avoid the presence of hon. Kafumbe Mukasa in the House. (Laughter)  

But as I was saying, the referendum Bill provides for a situation where you go out to the population and ask them to answer ‘yes’ or ‘no’ on an issue.  The question is, how do you introduce this issue to them for them to understand the complexities of it, to be able to answer ‘yes’ or ‘no?’  How do you go canvassing for one side or the other in a manner which is permissible enough but doesn’t cause confusion in the population; that is where the whole problem lies.  And I am sorry the Bill as it stands here does not answer that fear of mine!  

We have a problem of illiteracy, and a problem of people who do not take time off to understand real issues even when they affect them.  Some of you who have known about the Constituent Assembly Elections now know that actually the population does not understand them as well as you do.  They do not even understand the implications as much as you do, but they are so crucial.  Now, if they do not understand this major matter which has been discussed for so long, how will they be able to understand an issue which may be of interest unless it is properly canvassed before them one way or the other.  That is one of the biggest challenges because it means, therefore, that you have to line up sets of people who are in support of the issue or who are against to go out into the population to explain so that the population can decide one way or the other, and to me unless that is clearly resolved it can be the basis of great confusion or even misunderstanding.  The ayes can go to the throats of the nays and the problem is never solved.  

So, I feel that when it comes to making out regulations to guide this Bill, that issue should be very clearly articulated.  Moreso to give sufficient public time on the media and every facility to people who want to explain on this issues, to give them the freedom to operate without being affected.  But I believe that the people who will be smart enough to bring up these things will go into the regulations to ensure that, that fairness is there.  Because if that is not done, then the purpose of this Bill will be defeated.  

Finally, I feel that the question of a referendum is so crucial, although it should be initiated by a Minister on any particular issue.  The question of knowing that Government generally has agreed that the matter should be referred to referendum should be brought up before the matter is brought to the House.  With these few remarks, I support this Bill in its general purpose.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, before we proceed, I think it is quite fitting to welcome back hon. Wandira from his illness. (Applause)  Hon. Wandira you are most welcome.

MR. MAYENGO ISRAEL (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I have about five small points on this Bill.  (Interjection)- I join the hon. Members in welcoming the hon. Babu into the House at the same time we welcome the other Member who has just walked in.  

As I was saying at the beginning, I have some five little points on this small Bill.  One, concerns the causers, who causes the referendum to take place.  Two, how to handle the results of the referendum.  Three, the purposes of the referendum.  Four, the possible abuse of the referendum.  Let me reserve the last one, let me start with who might cause.  The Bill as it stands, almost exclusively leaves the Government that is the cabinet, to cause a referendum.  

But in the explanation that the Attorney General just gave us, he indicated that other bodies too might cause a referendum.  I only wonder why that was not indicated in the Bill.  He says he did not say so. Okay, if he did not, let me put it this way, that some referenda might be compulsory, that is, when they are required let us say by the Constitution.  If you look at this draft, we are looking at lately Article No. 98, specifically requires that a referendum be carried out on the political system to be adopted in the country.  It is possible also that a House like this one, may pass a Motion to carry out a referendum and I see no reason why it could not, in it’s capacity as the Representative House of the people of Uganda.  

Also, it is possible to have local bodies pass resolutions for carrying out referenda in their areas.  But that is not all, there is a political device called the ‘initiative’; that is when a certain number, a portion of the population puts in a petition that a referendum be carried out.  The intention may be to have a new law enacted or to have an old one repealed to have an amendment in the Constitution.  All these are possible causes of a referendum, and I will not initiate initiators of referendum, and I see no reason why we have restricted the Bill only to the cabinet when all these ones are possible.  

I said that the second point I would touch are the possible abuses of a referendum.  I am not going to go into the order in which I put them in the beginning.  The hon. Kawanga touched a bit of the abuses, but let me use some old examples.  At least, there are three easily identifiable ways of abusing a referendum.  Intimidation is one, the wording of the question is another, the timing is yet another.  Let me start with the timing, it is most interesting.  You might recall, in 1934 when Hitler took over power in Germany, as soon as he took over, he called a referendum to see if he was supported, and at that participate moment, he got enormous support.  He was not the only one, 1851 Napoleon stages a coup in France immediately after the coup, he called for a referendum and he got enormous support.  Later they found out that there was something wrong with Napoleon.  If - this is imaginary - if in 1971, Idi Amin had asked for a referendum immediately after taking over power here, chances are, he might have got enormous support for his actions.  So, Mr. Chairman, the timing matters -(Interjection)

MR. KIWAGAMA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, even at the time NRM took power here, if they had held a referendum, the support would have been overwhelming. (Laughter)

MRS. RHODA KALEMA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member who has just left the Floor, who was giving information, that even now support for NRM is still overwhelming -(laughter)- may I just add that the remark of the former President, General Tito Okello who visited Gulu and was surprised to find that the people in Gulu were still there, they had not been killed.  That shows you that he found that yes -(Interjection)

MR. MAYENGO:  The questions which are normally put to a referendum are controversial questions on which the community sharply disagree.  I do not know whether the two pieces of information given by the hon. Members were questions with disagreement in the community.  In any case, I was going to mention the possible abuses using threats or intimidation.  I will give one imaginary example and one real one.  Let me start with a real one.  I think it was 1962 when Charles De Gaul was President of France and there was a referendum which he carried out that since at that time, he was generally speaking in France almost as much as his Predecessor, Luis the 14th used to say,  ‘let semua’ that ‘I am the state’, and he put a referendum and kept on saying if you do not support me on this, I will resign; and the Frenchmen could not afford to see France without Charles De Gaul.  So, they elected him, the question was whether to elect the President directly or not. 

An imaginary example; if I became President of Uganda in the coming year and decided from my Islands that we should carry out a referendum to find out if the Islands of Kome should get out of Mukono District and be part of Ssese District, and I even threaten at that time that if you do not support me on this one, I will go to the bush oh no, -(Laughter)- he says, I should go to the waters - that I should go to the high seas and become a pirate.  Chances are -(Interjections)- but I said if I were the President and I do not know how the Attorney General would manage to put me in prison, knowing what the Constitution says about taking the President to the courts.  

The last method of abusing is in the wording of the question.  It is possible to ask a question the way the Bill suggests.  A leading question is possible, but fortunately the Bill says you will only ask for an answer of ‘yes’ or ‘no’. But suppose I put the question this way, that the Kome island become part of Ssese District, and I want the population to say yes or no.  Or if I put it, would it not be beneficial if Kome Islands extricated itself from the hold of Mukono District and joined the Ssese Islands District.  These twisting of the language are also a possible way of abusing referendum.  

I do not know how the Attorney General can avoid this entire one.  I said, I would say something about the result of a referendum. They can be two ways -(Interjection)- I know the Attorney General is listening, that is why I am saying some of these things.  The referendum can have - I mean seeing that there are possible abuses, a referendum therefore, may have two types of results.  It may be that the results are intended to be binding and it maybe, that the results are intended to be advisory.  If they are binding, you know the results, wrong or right, they are binding, and a population being asked on a question of sharp disagreement as I said, does not have the time to be given a full explanation, as hon. Kawanga was saying, as to what the matter is all that you are required to answer is ‘yes’ or ‘no’.  

So, that is why it might be probably wise to say that sometimes the results may be binding and on certain issues the results may be advisory, and that is the advice goes, I think to the Government, that it acts in this way or it uses its discretion at that time.  The advice may also be to a Parliament like this one, that the population advice the Parliament to act in this way or the other.  I wish that this device could be somehow put in.

I mentioned that I will say something about the purposes.  The purposes can range the press here, jumped the gun and went on making guesses that the Referendum Bill is being brought to kill the Kingdom of Ankole or to bring to an end the political parties in Uganda.  It is not that referendums are always only on political issues.  They maybe on social issues.  The famous referendum which was carried out in Italy was on more less moral questions, the Italians were sharply divided between the Vatican and the rest on the questions of divorce and abortion, a referendum was carried out, one would not call that political, whereas the example the hon. Attorney General was going, I think this was 1975, the referendum Act of 1975 in England was asking the British people, are you willing to stay in the EEC or not?  And that was a purely different matter.  The matters of the Greek one, a referendum was carried out to find out whether to maintain the Monarch after the restoration of democracy or not, and the results were given to the population.

Let me now move to the question of relativity, localising the referendum.  This is a statute because here now the Bill says, the Minister may decide to hold a referendum in the whole country or in any part of it, but there is no limitation that he must not do certain things.  For example, if we were to carry out a referendum, which concerns only the people in Bugisu, I think it would be as a ridiculous as it would be absurd to go and ask the people in Ssese Islands about it.  The matter is only in Bugisu and the people in Ssese Islands know hardly anything about the matter.  It is not a new move, 1919 after the First World War, European countries there held several referenda to determine the boarders of the different nations.  It was not that all the people of the nation would be asked about the border that was in question; it was a referendum as to the borders between Rwanda and Uganda. It would be absurd to go to Karamoja and ask the Karimojong about this boarder.  

When a referendum is held in New York, the people in other cities have no business with it, when it is in Texas, those in Tenesse have nothing to do with it.  So, it must be specific to the area where it is, Mr. Chairman, since I am running out of time, I would like to thank you very much.

MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The introduction of this Bill is not in itself very bad, because we need at sometime in our history to refer matters to the whole nation and this proper.  We have already had one referendum about lost counties as they were known then, a referendum was carried out, if the purpose is to resolve issues, it is necessary at times to use the general population to reflect on matters of that nature.  So, on that purpose, and for that reason, the Bill is necessary or welcome, if it makes a provision for us to have a way of doing things.  

Having said that, the problem comes to main ones, one is the timing of the present Bill, two the purpose, three, the formulation of the problems of the issues to be vital referendum.  Let me start with the timing. The timing now, is a bit sensitive.  Well, I remember when we were discussing the ‘Ebyaffe Bill’, I think the hon. Adonia Tiberondwa had wanted a referendum in case of ‘ebyaffe or 'ebyabo’ inc. in case of ebyabo, they were at a bit of a problem, the problem was that people -(Interjection)- theirs is what I mean by ‘ebyabo’, their things, so it became a bit sensitive at that time and it was thought improper at the moment, I think the sensitivity some of us may have is that it is coming at the time when people are reflecting on two main issues; one, is the fundamental right of association which is a sensitive issue in this country.  Two, is the question of local nature of ‘ebyabo’ in particular in the place like the former Kingdom of Ankole that is also very sensitive.  So, it brings a bit of uneasiness when a Bill like this is introduced, it makes people sensitive.  

The other aspect, is the purpose also connected with the time.  Here we are, being told we do not have enough resources to use on certain things, and as hon. Kawanga has just said, referendums are very expensive things to carry out, it is like general elections, we have been told the Constituent Assembly alone may cost us Shs. 20 billion.  People are being asked to pay tax so much to the extent that they are not sure whether to pay tax this year or send their kids to school, there is a problem, and in this problem, we need to address our selves to.  Resources of this nature are very scarce and I am sure if we are to carry out even one on a single issue, like the freedom of association being tested in a referendum, it would cost us another Shs. 20 billion, and I am saying or Shs. 10 billion or anything like that, even if it is Shs. 1 billion, do we not have alternative uses for this money?  

I know democracy is very expensive, but there are issues of this nature which do not need even to go to referendum.  There is the issue of who initiates it as the Bill has presented, who initiates a referendum?  There are issues of constitutional nature or if there is a provision that there is a controversy, the Constitution provides for a referendum to be carried out, that that one is acceptable.  

In the present Bill, as put to us, the initiative is only left to Government and I am saying, a referendum or referenda should be a subject if we have a National Assembly as we have now, it should be the National Assembly by resolution to decide on such issues.  Why?  Because there is the element of taxation and use of resources and it should be the House to decide on an issue like that.  Money is going to be spent, it should be us or the National Assembly to decide whether money should be spent that way, instead of the other alternative problems that we have.

Point number three, the local issues, the local issues can always be carried out only in normal general elections, if there is a problem in Kalangala, on the vote for Parliament, they can add it on and it is carried out that way and the issue is resolved, in that case, we do not need to spend a lot of money.  Now, let me see the history of referendum.  My other two Colleagues touched them, but who has used them in most cases, and how do we use them?  

In some cases, issues have been of national interest and people have used them, but there are other cases of abuse where people - if I am in power, want to use this referenda to decide, because you see an emotive issue, you throw it to referendum and there is no time to reflect on it.  History is there, there is Napoleon, there is Musolini, there is Hitler, there are so many of them, when they saw problems coming - I am not saying that we are going to use that way - when they saw problems coming instead of throwing them or discussing them coolly in their Parliament, and if they thought the Parliament were not going to conform, they jumped the Parliament.  I want us to be guided that this nation is not going to fall into that category, where referenda are used as an alternative to discussing issues and analysing them, because the referendum are like instant spot checks.  Instant spots have an advantage, but they also have overwhelming disadvantage, you act impassively and then after you have dome the thing, you reflect that this should not have been done.  I want to ask you to try and avoid that aspect.  

Furthermore, you see the formulation of the problem being presented, I had a problem for example, when the guidelines of the Constitution Commission went out.  They are asking us for example, here, if they came and asked us, do we not think the powers of the National Assembly should be increased?  What would be the answer?  In most cases, it would be ‘yes’ because they are affected parties, you can formulate the question in such a way that you always get a positive answer and I am saying this that, I can see a problem also with the level of education and literacy and the level of communication that we have in this country, I can see those who monopolise the means of communication, actually, making a decision for the rest of the nation and it is a danger.  So, I want us also to take care of that so that alternative thoughts or alternative views are allowed to be articulated before a referendum is carried out. There is a question of interpretation.  There is the binding interpretation that people have decided upon; I want to reflect on it. 

For example, down in Tanzania, they did not carry a referendum, but they had an issue of sampling about political parties of multi-partyism and mono-party or mono-movement or mono-anything or mono-legal or mono-Chama.  When they did this scientific sampling, they ended up with two positions, 80 per cent going mono, 20 per cent going multi, and they had a problem of interpretation. They ended up saying well even that 20 per cent have a case to make to the general population, so we allow multi instead of mono.  If you were to insist on freedoms and you were subjecting them to a referendum and you interpreted the referendum results in a rigid manner, you are bound to get into problem of infringing the rights of the minority who might not have decided with you, and I am saying, the nature of the subject you are presenting to the people for a referendum, must be such that it is not a controversial issue which touches on the fundamental rights of human beings.  That one, I think we need to be guided.  

If for example a referendum was brought to the people of Uganda to decide whether we should join COMESA or we should start East African Community, then the interpretations are easier, those are easy, we can implement them, because the people would have decided, they are easier, they do not affect the fundamental rights of us as human beings in a free state.  So, I would like also to avoid an issue that touches on the rights of the individual that contravenes those conventions that we have signed, so as to interpret the results of the referendum.  I will take the information.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Go on, go on please, do not waste time.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Oh, okay.  I had allowed but the Chairman has ruled, I abide by the Chairman.  I want to finalise my presentation, that in the Bill as presently represented for example, Article 3, has got to be modified to reflect that we have a National Assembly sitting in Kampala overwhelmingly in most cases, directly elected by RCs and supported by Historical Members and we agree that both now and in future, it will be the National Assembly which will, by resolution, agree on a referendum being carried out.  There are other Articles, further on, we need also to examine very carefully the regulations under Article 5 and also add on to that, the way the questions are going to be presented and that these questions should be discussed here before they are put to the nation.  Three, we want also, we should also provide for alternatives to whatever comes out so that others are allowed access to the communication through the mass media, so that both parties are heard -(Interjection)

Sanyu Radio does not allow you to air views of political parties.  The Minister of Education is an educated man, and he should have known that, Sanyu Radio only takes adverts.  So, I want us to use those national assets that we all pay for to allow the articulation of these ideas to come out before the issues of this nature are allowed.  In principle, I accept that a referendum or referenda are necessary for issues of that nature - of general nature which we need to decide on and it is not new except that the law was not in place, except in case of the lost counties.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ZABASAIJA (Buhaguzi County, Hoima):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I beg your indulgence to wish my Colleagues the hon. Members a happy and prosperous new year.  While I do so, I would like to express at the same time my concern over the traveling expenses.  At the moment, transport is extremely expensive and this is in spite of the fact that fuel prices have gone down, so really I do not know what the Minister for Transport has to tell us about this.  

I stand to support the Bill since it is already in the law, it is only proper and fitting and in order that we find a mechanism of how a referendum can be handled.  But, in his opening remarks, the Attorney General said that we can apply a referendum to determine the opinion of the electorate.  Now, to test the opinion of the electorate which opinion, unless the electorate is well educated on the particular subject, it is difficult to find their correct opinion.  Today, we are experiencing the same, many, many members of the electorate have not been sufficiently educated as to make a difference between Parliament and the CA, and there we are in the field trying to ask for their opinion.  It is very important that when we go out for a referendum, we are sure that the masses know exactly the purpose of the referendum. (Laughter)

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the simple information I would like to give to the hon. Member is that, this House has been on recess and hon. Members were given time to go and educate people about -(Interjection)- yes, about the difference between CA and a CM, now if the hon. Member has not been doing this duty, whom does he expect to educate those people whom the hon. Member represents in this House, Mr. Chairman?  Let them go and do their duty by educating the people -(Interjection)

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, when I went in the field, Mr. Chairman, I tried very much to avoid going and pretending to teach the people, there is a category of people to teach the masses - the civil educators.  It was very difficult and it is unfair indeed for very interested parties like ourselves to go and educate the people on a subject like this one.  So, I would like to inform my informant that in my constituency, I only advise people to go and listen to the civic educators who were educated to teach the masses.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, Order, please.  Proceed please.

MR. ZABASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, while I support the existence of referendum and application of referendum, I would like to warn about the culture which is developing now, that is a culture of taking decisions before thoroughly studying them, thinking hard about them and making exhaustive and wide consultations.  The case in point, is the CA elections.  What we have seen in the field teaches us that if we had been making serious consultations and honest consultations, maybe, we would have ended by mending the existing Constitution or by asking this very House to make it, because what is in the field there is terrible -(Laughter)- I am very sure, I am convinced that neither the President nor this hon. House envisaged what you are seeing now.  The exercise is extremely expensive to the aspirants, the exercise is causing a lot of disunity, it is causing division and I am telling you if we had foreseen this before, maybe we should have decided for another method.  

A Clause here stipulates that those people who will have been registered voters will participate in the referendum.  I would like to observe that many qualifying voters - people qualified to vote, have not been registered for the CA, mainly because many of them really refuse to register because they did not understand the whole exercise, and I would suggest that any time there is going to be a referendum, additional registration should be made so that those people who were misled as not to register can register, and those people for any reason who were not able to register can register.  We have discovered that in certain areas during this exercise that some people have been misguided as not to register deliberately.  Therefore, there should always be an opportunity to give a chance to those people who are not registered voters to register.

I would like to emphasise the fact that, it must be us to take a decision as to whether there should be a referendum or not because, if we leave it as it is in the proposed Bill, there can be a lot of abuse of this provision.  I would like to end by commenting on your remarks at the beginning of this session. You have appealed to us to attend regularly and to attend for longer hours than we have been doing.  I would like, however, to say that some of us cannot sit for long, long hours before a break or before we get a cup of tea, I would like to suggest, That if we must sit here for very long hours, then the National Assembly should facilitate for long hours.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NEKYON (Maruzi County, Apac):  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for this opportunity.  I would like to say that the idea of having a referendum is a new introduction into our Constitution.  In some countries they have a referendum as the final decision making body, but in some Constitutions, we do not have that provision.  In 1962, at the London Constituency Conference, only limited provision was made for referendum concerning lost counties.  But no general provision was made for holding or referendum on various matters, it was considered but found unnecessary.  So the final decision was left to the National Assembly provided that when thy amended the Constitution, two-thirds majority was to be obtained by physically counting the members.  Now that we are trying to introduce this new idea into our Constitution, i want to say that the introduction of this Bill is premature.  It is premature because, this matter is going to be considered by the Constituent Assembly and it is included in the draft. I, therefore, see no point in the Attorney General coming here with a Bill to pre-empt the considerations that are going to be made by the Constituent Assembly.  Then I want to say that if you are to run this country smoothly as we have been seen to be doing, we must stick to the rule of law and the rule of law implies that we shall make all the general laws applicable to everybody, not discriminatory.  So, if it is concerning the only referendum in Ankole to determine whether they have a King or no King after we have allowed some other areas to have Kings, then such a law will be discriminatory, and therefore, unconstitutional.  Yes. (Laughter)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that as we deliberate in this House, the hon. John Barigye is no longer in this House, he has already assumed the office of the King of Ankole. (Laughter)  What I was saying is that, that rule of law can only operate if we passed laws that do not discriminate against one section or another.  If a law turns out to be discriminatory, then the individual, who is targeted by the law, by nature of justice, is entitled to disobey the law and, therefore, can refuse to have the law applied against him.  That is why I am saying, we want laws that are applicable generally and not discriminating.  The hon. Kayonde says that the Press jumped the gun by claiming that this Bill is being brought in order to hold a referendum in Ankole, and also to try to eliminate political parties, but this is not true, the press was not jumping the gun -(Interjection)- Mayengo -(Laughter)- I mean the one who comes from Kasese not from Kigali. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, order please.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  Mr. Chairman, the press did not jump the gun, the press came to this conclusion because President Museveni is reported to have told the Press that if a court decides that Kingship be established in Ankole, he will come to Parliament and a law will be passed, and he is also reported to have said that if the High Court rules the restrictions of political parties to be lifted, he will come to this House and a law will definitely be passed to ban the political parties.  This is how the press came to the conclusion, it was not jumping gun.  Therefore, having said that, I say we must make provisions in this Bill and I will be bringing in amendments to the effect that where -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  I would like to inform my hon. friend who is holding the Floor of the House that the talk - I want to say within - outside this House, this is the intention of Uganda, by any person or authority that they will be no political parties, is just not right, it is stupidity because feelings of the people are in their hearts.  How can you make an absurd law or statement to say that, anybody can come here into this House to make - to misuse the power of the law to make this House make a law; and that there will be no political parties and, therefore, there will be no freedom?  How can you?  How can it be?

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  My answer to that question is, it cannot be. (Laughter)  I am going to bring an amendment to the effect that where a referendum is being held which has the effect of amending the Constitution, then the results will be determined by two-thirds majority.  This is because, in 1962 Constitution that the whole country agreed to, we gave provisions that in amending a Constitution, we have to have a two-thirds majority or members being counted physically.  So this one must be transferred to a referendum, this is because, if you are going to go by simple majority with intimidation -(Interruption)- What is the clarification?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please, order please.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  The Minister has nothing to do I think. Mr. Chairman, I am saying, in holding a referendum, you must have a level ground, you must have free cumbersome, you must have everybody openly campaigning for each issue.  But in this case, we know simple majority will not really be indicative.  Suppose you have one vote on one side and you count that as being a decision of the majority of the people to campaign, do you really feel you can proceed on that basis?  Instead of going to the National Assembly and having the two-thirds majority as of now?  Therefore, I will insist, even if defeated in the vote, that we must have two-thirds majority as a result of the referendum.  

MR. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Thank you.  I am grateful to the hon. Member for giving me way.  I would like to inform him that, if any referendum had the effect of amending the Constitution such a result would be unconstitutional, and would be declared null and void by the Court.  You cannot amend the Constitution within the Constitution itself.

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Additional information. Over-ruling the advise from the legal advisor, I would like to see more information, if then that is the case, issues which we touched on like freedom of association, are they issues which can be subject to referendum?

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  Mr. Chairman, I am pleased that the Attorney General had stood up to inform me.  Now, I want to inform him and the rest of Uganda through you, Sir, that what has been in the air is all Constitutional issues; the abolition of Kingship in Uganda was done constitutionally according to the Constitutional provision, in the Constitution of 1962, two thirds majority was passed, by the National Assembly.  Two-thirds vote was obtained in abolishing Kingship and now we have resorted it and the Attorney General was one of the voters, and I was one of the voters, it was voted constitutionally with two-thirds majority.  Members were counted physically and it is on record, it is in the Hansard.  Therefore, if you are talking about going now to Ankole to hold a referendum, that is a Constitutional amendment obviously.  And I am saying, if you are going tomorrow to hold a referendum as to whether there will be political parties or not, you are going for a Constitutional amendment.  Therefore, what is the Attorney General talking about?  Unless it is nonsense. (Laughter) 

I want to say that this Bill should have provided the entire procedure for the holding of the referendum spelt out in the Bill itself.  The entire what - they call it Clauses to be - should be included in this Bill.  Because I am not prepared to give a blank cheque to the Attorney General who will give it to the Minister for Information, Minister for Health, Minister for who to write his own - what kind of country are we running?  Are we pigs or goats? We want the referendum - this Bill to contain all; the whole procedure of holding a referendum then we approve it once and for all as Parliament.  It was started very well by the Attorney General in Clause; he says, you look at Clause 4, ‘the persons entitled to vote in a referendum under this Statute are; (a) persons registered to vote as electors for public election on the date when the voting in the referendum will take place.’  Fine, but when you go to (5), he changes, he now wants to give other provisions.  I am saying the referendum should be held under the existing electoral law so that we know the law is this and the law must be passed by the Council controlling all elections including referendum, and then we can have a provision for saying yes and no.  That is the difference between a referendum and elections because in a referendum you are voting for issues, in election you are voting for persons, this is the only difference. So, I want a referendum to be held under existing electoral laws passed by Parliament.

Then I come to the point where the Bill says, in a referendum there will be only saying of yes and no, we had a referendum in 1964 but they were three positions, one do you want to remain in Buganda?  Two, do you want to go back to Bunyoro?  Three, do you want to become a separate district?  Those were the three positions being given to the people who were residents of the lost counties -(Interjections)- at that time.  Now, if you said yes and no only, how would they be voting?  I am just giving as example what would have happened in 1964.  Now, if you are tomorrow to hold a referendum on Political Parties, you may have different positions.  In fact, the coming of this Bill is very ill-timed, it is going to provoke the whole nation, it might start a crisis, because we are facing a very serious Constituent Assembly Elections, then we insert in between new elections to confuse the masses.  Sir, the first referendum which we should have held, if we were serious about referendums, is to determine whether we need a new Constitution or not, and this was not done! We are going to abolish the Constitution, bring in a new Constitution without a referendum.  

But as to whether somebody should become a King or not, that is a serious issue, more serious according to the government - then the removing of the Old Constitution and bringing in a new one.  Now, if we are to vote on that basis, then we would be asking people, do you want a new Constitution?  Two, do you want to have the 1967 Constitution?  Three, do you want to go back to the 1962 Constitution?  There would be three positions, or four or five.  So, in that case, there would be no question of saying just yes and no.  So, the Attorney General has to look in that part and see how he can provide for the ayes and nayes.

MR. TUMWESIGYE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that, the question of whether Ankole should have a King or not, from my reliable information, is not going to be a subject of referendum.  So, you should not really waste the time of this House -(Interjection)- yes, I am giving information.

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  My additional information to the speaker on the Floor is first that, I think the first issue that could have been subjected to a referendum was the issue of the extension of the NRM Administration, I think the population would have been very keen to decide on that matter.  Secondly, a King is born a King.  He is elected or he is not a subject for referendum, you are either a King or not by birth. (Laughter)

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  Mr. Chairman, I want to rush to a conclusion, what I am trying to say in short is, NRM came to power and then claimed that it is going to introduce a new order, and we accepted it.  It came on a claim that it knew how to manage the society better than anybody else, but I am sorry for what we are seeing today, as illustrated by the way that the National Enterprises Corporation has been mismanaged by the top executive of NRM, makes me frightened in supporting a Bill like this.  We have already made a mistake, we said we are going to have representatives of women coming from each district and we proceed to say, all the women in Uganda are allowed on a particular day to go and vote directly for the general candidates, men or women, standing!  But then, we say that when women go to vote for their fellow women, they must not vote directly.  They must vote through indirect RC I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII  -(Laughter)- when that Bill comes, I am going to move an amendment that women vote on the same day not through electoral colleges which can be bought.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. veteran politician, that when the Bill for the CA was brought to the House, this question was thoroughly debated by Members and passed it that way, I wish to inform him further, that the reason why we are having a woman from each district is not because we want every woman to be elected by a fellow woman, that was not the reason.  Since he was not here, I want him to have it from me that in line with the NRM Policy of promoting women, we are increasing the number of women who will come to the CA on top of those who will and with the men.  Thank you very much.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to take information of the hon. Member responsible for Women Affairs.  I have not said that I am against the women being given special seats, we debated that and passed, the woman is allowed to vote for me directly on the 28th of March, why should she be prevented from voting for a lady coming to represent here in the district directly?  They are going to the polling booths, you need to add only one additional paper, they can even use the same box, then they go and vote for the lady who is representing the district.  It is a simple thing, it is less costly that the procedure of having women being indirectly elected.  Unless the women who are here are afraid of being voted for directly.  

MRS. MPANGA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House to debate the CA Statute that we passed a long time ago.

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is not the one he is debating. Proceed please.

MR. ADOKO NEKYON:  There is no law in Uganda that prevents me from visiting any issue or any law whether passed yesterday or five hundred years ago. (Laughter)  I would like to conclude by saying that I will not support this Bill unless those amendments are carried out, two-thirds majority, this and the other one - I am going to bring them.  I think this Bill should have waited until the meetings of the Constituent Assembly, until the decisions are made as to whether we are going to have a referendum including the Constitution or not.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.

MR. SIBO (Nominated Member):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  It is true that this Bill should have come a long time ago.  There are a number of issues that should have been settled long before, unfortunately, the Bill was not in place and we were not able to debate on the matter.

There is no better way of settling a political problem than submitting the questions straight to the people.  Most of these decisions we make here, we are making them in the names of the people and if it is necessary to refer a matter to the people for decision, I think we should do so, and that is why, and that is the rationale and the resultant of the referendum Bill.  However, in this Bill, particularly in Clause 3 on which a number of hon. Members have spoken, it is proposed that the initiative should be taken by the Attorney General or by any other Minister who is responsible for the functions on which the referendum is being taken.

A referendum is a very serious measure to take, I agree with hon. Nekyon when he says that a referendum is very nearly a constitutional matter, and I think it is, in my opinion, it is similar to a Constitutional Amendment.  It is, therefore, a department from the Constitutional norm, if we decide that a Minister should decide that a referendum should be held, I think that is a very serious departure from the norm.  The decision should be taken at a much higher level than the Minister’s level and Cabinet level, and that is at the legislature level.  That is why, I propose an amendment in Clause 3 to the effect that any referendum on any subject intended to be taken should have a decision taken by the legislature.  I think it is no use for any Minister to try to by-pass the Parliament and go to the people for a decision which normally should lie with Parliament, and I therefore think that we should accept, and I believe the Minister will certainly agree with us, that the matter should be decided on by the legislature in this particular case.  

A referendum as I said is a very serious matter, it tends to produce or to prepare a course of collision, it should be therefore, taken sparingly.  We have heard that the proposal should be ‘yes’ or ‘no’ being the answer to the question, now, that decision of ‘yes’ or ‘no’ does not give room for any manoeuvre, it does not provide for any political expedience, it does not allow any further dialogue and therefore, the answer as to ‘yes’ or ‘no’ I think may be misleading and we should allow ourselves an avenue by which we could secure more acceptable decisions on any political problems.  We should not allow ourselves into straight jackets unless we really must and I believe such a situation should never arise.  

We have heard today that this Bill has been particularly brought up for specifically two reasons, namely, whether the Omugabe of Ankole should be allowed or whether we should have political parties or movements.  It is particularly for these two reasons that I have suggested that a dialogue is a much more sensible way of solving problems.  

In the case of ‘ebyaffe’ we are trying to create cultural Kings who are not political.  We are now being faced with contradictions in terms; while Kings may be considered cultural leaders, Kingship is a political system with a political jurisdiction.  For instance, we have heard a proclamation in Ankole that the words ‘Bahima’ and ‘Abairu’ are banned, now that kind of proclamation I think is difficult to appreciate or understand indeed, because for a proclamation there should be sanctions.  What happens if someone disobeys the proclamation?  That is why Kingship and cultural leaders are slightly different from what we had intended when we passed the amendments.  Indeed, we may later be faced with realities, we have been told for instance, that ‘ebyaffe’ is not complete, that there is more to be demanded.  Now, if this is the case, and I believe it is, then of course our amendment did not go far enough to cater for the situation.  We may therefore, come back to the amendment again.  So, I think when we talk about a referendum, we should seriously take that kind of decision when we have weighed every aspect of the problem.  

Now, in Clause 5(iv), it is proposed that regulations made by the Minister should be referred to the legislature within a specified time but with no reference at all or relation to the date of referendum.  What happens if the reference to the legislature and approval by the legislature is after the date of referendum?  It has no effect at all.  I therefore propose that an amendment should be made to the effect that regulations should be referred to legislature before the referendum has been held.  In Clause 6, we should also agree, and I think the hon. Attorney General has already referred to this and I hope he accepts that the expenses to be incurred in respect of holding the referendum should be voted by the legislature.  I do not believe that it is proper for the Minister taken or the Minister of Finance to draw money from the consolidated fund and pay for expenses of the referendum without reference to the legislature.  I therefore, believe that the funds required should be approved by the legislature.  With those short points, I beg to support the Motion.  


MR. BUTAGIRA (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Motion.  I am going to look at the Bill purely on its merits without reference to what is going on -(Laughter)- and also without speculations.

We must agree on one thing and that is the principle of the Bill that is providing for a referendum, I think this is a democratic method, it is recommendable, and in doing so, if we look at the Bill that way, then we can examine the provisions and see whether there are certain provisions that should be amended to make the Bill more democratic.  I think that is a better approach. It is a cardinal principle to start on.  Then there are also some instances when it is of paramount importance that people should be directly consulted, on certain issues, I think that is also a principle well understood.  Now, the issue is, when can we depart from this cardinal principle that sovereignty lies with Parliament as representing the people.  When should we depart from this and go directly to the people in a referendum?  I think that is an important distinction to bear in mind.  

As the Attorney General rightly said, we are not providing something unique.  I think referenda have been held in very many countries to determine various issues.  In Australia for instance, before certain Constitutional Amendments can be effected, the matter must be referred to the people in a referendum, in Switzerland the same thing, in Denmark the same thing, so there is nothing new for us here in debating this issue now, and that is why I am saying we should debate this thing purely on its merits without reference to what is going on because if we diverted we can talk more.  

Now, bearing in mind what I have said, it follows that when we are providing for a referendum it should be an exception to the general rule that; it is Parliament to make laws for the country and regulate matters, it should be an exception, and therefore, it is only, in my opinion, in rare circumstances, circumstances of such importance to a nation that we should go for a referendum or not, or it is such an important question so that the people’s legislature should be involved in making that decision and that is why I agree with hon. Sibo and others who have said that the legislature should be involved before a referendum is ordered, and I would propose in Clause 3 that the Minister can initiate; because we do not know, we should not limit him he can initiate the idea, but let him come to Parliament and Parliament by two thirds resolution or two thirds majority can authorise the holding of the referendum.  I think that way we can guarantee that not on any issue should we go to referendum, because as correctly said it is an expensive affair and before we go into this exercise, let people’s representatives decide whether or not we should really go and that is why I am saying an amendment on Clause 3 with that effect is I think welcome - two thirds majority Members of Parliament.

Now, when you come to Regulations that is Clause 5, here I am really unhappy, the Minister given a lot of power to make regulations of how the referendum is to be carried out, the Minister is now asking this Parliament to give him a blank cheque - he wants approval then leave it to him to regulate when can a referendum be held or proposing a referendum going to conflict with Constitution, all these are left with the Minister.  Now, that is where I agree with hon. Nekyon that we should be more transparent that we should know under what conditions we should go in the referendum and these matters should not be left to the Minister to decide.  Now, when you look in details at provisions of Clause 5 (2b) for instance, it even gives the power to the Minister to amend any law, now really are you surrendering your power to the Minister

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, I thought I was helping the hon. Minister but he is in fact rising when he should not be rising, if he noticed how I debate this time I am very cool.  Now, I am referring to Clause 5 (2) which says, without prejudice to the general effect of sub-section 1, regulations may be made under this; (a) to ensure the secrecy of the voting, (b) applying with or without modifications the provision of any enactment relating to elections including any provision relating to election.’  He can apply any provision of the law relating to election and make them part of regulations.  Now, if this is not tantamount to amending a law, then I do not know what that power means.  

So, what I am saying is that, this is not proper which should be given to the Minister, and when you go further to sub-Clause 4 these regulations once made to be put before legislature within 31 days.  But Clause 5 goes on to say, anything done under those regulations - even if later on Parliament disapproves those regulations - anything done already is valid.  Then sub-Clause 6; I want to read this and then summarise, that one reads; ‘Any period prescribed under sub-section (4) of this Section in respect of laying or annulment of any regulations shall not run during any period while the Legislature is not sitting.’  I do not know whether you have considered this, Mr. Chairman, it means that those regulations once made are law, once Parliament is not sitting, they do not count that we can remain in recess for months and months and by the time we come back the referendum is finished, because that period is not taken into account.  

So, really I think we should put the burden of the obligation on the government to make sure that Parliament is called, even if it is on recess, to approve those regulations, in other words I am saying, let the Minister make regulations but let those regulations, before they take effect be laid before Parliament for approval.  In this way, we would have provided transparency you would have removed power from the Minister arbitrarily, maybe to make his own regulations, we should have made sure that whatever is done has been done properly with the approval of the people’s legislature.  

I would like to appeal to the Minister to reflect very much on these provisions I have pointed out because we are all interested; should a referendum be held we want it to be held decently and we want it to be held according to constitutional provisions and we want to make sure that there will be no room for speculations that it was designed to manipulate certain interests.  All these speculations we want to avoid them by bringing the matters here so that we discuss we know on what conditions we are going for a referendum.  Mr. Chairman, with those remarks, I support the Bill.  

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I stand to support this Bill, but I would like the Attorney General to inform us why he made it so short, because to me this is an important Bill and its effects will affect the population at large, therefore, we need a better explanation as to why and where and what to be done, he leaves it as short as it he leaves it to the people’s interpretation and this can bring us into problems.  You remember the Bill on this Traditional Rulers, we left something out and now they are coming out, we must determine and give people guidance as to how to decide on a referendum and how to carry it out. This is a general rule and it should not be seen to address a few problems that we have at the moment, it should stand to prove that in future it can be used for any problem whether national or local.  But already people are insinuating that this rule is for CA only, it is a rule for ‘ebyaffe’ -(Interruption)

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Just additional information to supplement what the hon. Member is saying, when we passed the Constituent Assembly Statute together with that Statute were Regulations and that made it for everybody to understand, why do we not have the regulations also attached to this very Bill?  

MR. RWABIITA:  Thank you.  Now, at least for the CA it is specific that two thirds majority will be needed in order to call for a referendum especially in terms of Parliament, now, it should be the same for any referendum we should have specific figure or the people or community involved in decision.  If we leave it open, we leave it to wrong interpretation, therefore, I would urge the Attorney General and his experts to make sure that this law is expanded to include the decision to determine who makes a referendum and what percentage of the people would qualify, call for it at any time forget the CA, forget the ‘ebyaffe’ but any other problem in Uganda.

MR. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  If I understand the hon. Member, there is a provision now that, unless there is a law that provides, a question in a referendum is to be decided by simple majority of the people voting.  This is one of the important provisions of this law, how many people decide; answer a simple majority of the people voting in the referendum.

MR. RWABITA:  Mr. Chairman, that was my next point.  We would not be serious if we have to call the whole nation or a community for a referendum and you pass a decision by two people or three people that is simple majority, you cause war because the big minority will intercept such a decision.  I think we should be serious on this issue; a referendum should be called for serious issues and where the majority of people say yes, or say no, but not just only have two or three.

MR. TUMWESIGYE:  Point of information.  Maybe one year or two years ago there was a referendum held in Denmark to decide whether Denmark should join the EC the European Community or something, that was treated to be a very, very serious issue but it was decided by a simple majority, I think the results were 51 against and 49 in favour.  So, the fact that a matter is a very important matter does not mean that a simple majority should not decide it. Otherwise, issues could never be decided at all.  I think you should know that getting two thirds is almost an impossible task and if you have got an urgent constitutional issue to decide really the people should decide it by a simple majority.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  When we are giving examples or comparisons we should also be careful with what we are comparing with what. In Uganda we have suffered so many political manipulations that we have to put in place safeguard to avoid these manipulations.  In the Danish Parliament there over 11 political parties and they are more mature politically than we are.

MR. RWABIITA:  Mr. Chairman, I am still on that point of simple majority, if we want simple majority, then let us have t in Parliament and pass the law or decide on a national issue and if we get 20 people being the majority, we take a decision for the people.  But you call the whole country or a group of people standing in for a referendum and they know they are to decide on an important issue affecting them and it comes out by a majority of 10 or 5, nobody will believe you, Sir.  I think although this can work in other developed countries with out simple education and our understanding, let us be more transparent and show the people that what you have decided is really supported by the people not just by a few individuals.  I want also to talk on Article 4 about the person registered to vote as an electorate.  Now, this registration has been done for CA and perhaps for 1994, but what happens after 4 years if there is an issue to be decided by a nation or a group of people, must we use the old votes register or we should give a chance to the youth who have come up to the ages of 18, 20, 21 also to be registered; this is not indicated, therefore, it looks as if the people who have not registered today will never get a chance to discuss such a national issue.

MR. ABU MAYANJA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, this is a very important point, there is a provision in all electoral systems for the Electoral Commissions to have power continuously to be monitoring the changes in population, sometimes they even shift the Constituencies if populations move from one area to another.  So, when people grow up who were 14, they become 18 the Electoral Commission has power to add those persons to the electoral register without the process of carrying out this general registration as we did.  So, you do not notice it but the Electoral Commission is doing it all the time.  It crosses out those who die, it crosses out those who migrate from one area to another area, and it is continuously updating the register from time to time.  So, I think that would be the case here, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. RWABIITA:  I hope that will be done otherwise we will be denying people their human rights to be voters on the national issues.  Let me touch on this point on Article 3 about the Minister and Cabinet deciding on a referendum.  I think the system of the hierarchy should be that if the Minister finds out that there is need for referendum he could present that case to the Cabinet and the Cabinet approves it.  Then before we go to the referendum this should come to the Parliament so that we have a collective responsibility of our national issues, because if we allow the Minister to just start off and end the decision on a referendum this can cause a lot of confusion in our society.  

I think Parliament - the legislature could have a chance to participate in the decision whether the country should hold a referendum on certain issues and I would go in that before they decide we should have majority passing that decision.   Because how many times shall we hold a referendum if a Minister or Cabinet always decides that today there is an important issue let us have a referendum, next month another referendum, so we think we should be given a chance to decide on behalf of the electorates, if the question is serious definitely the parliament will advise the Cabinet and the Minister concerned so that we all share the collective responsibility so that the Minister is not accused or even the Government being accused of manipulating the people.  

On Article 6, about expenditure, this will depend on the magnitude of the expenditure.  Now, Parliament having the responsibility of deciding on the national budget it should also be given a chance to decide on such a big expenditure specially concerning referendum.  Because as some Members were saying this might take us into another billion of shillings, now if the Minister alone and perhaps with the approval of the Cabinet goes ahead to spend so much money outside the approval of the Parliament I think it will be a bit of - regarding financial management.  So we would request that when a referendum is considered to be taking place then Parliament should be called to pass a vote of a certain amount of money for such exercise.  

And lastly, before I sit down on the 11th, the Youth and Women are voting for their Councils.  But the students are supposed to report on 10th to their schools.  I think we should be fair to the Youth; we should give them a few more days, so that they elect their Councils from the Youth Councils.  Yes, because if we do not do that, when they come back to school, they will not have a chance to elect their officials upcountry. (Applause)  Mr. Chairman, I beg to support.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE (Nominated Member):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I want to join my Colleagues who have welcomed you from the old year and wish you a prosperous and happy new year, and wish you successful CA elections which are coming close, and also, wish you to prepare should God -(Interruption)- I am saying that, while it is a more realistic fact that one day, God will call us, we sometimes tend to ignore it. 

I stand to support the Bill, because I think that there is need for such a law to allow more democratic involvement of the population, to have a chance where the population can participate in major policy decisions and to take care of sometimes a number of assumptions that are made by the leadership especially when they are speaking on behalf of the people.  You know very well how often you speak for the people ‘my people’.  And sometimes assumptions are made that the majority of my people support or do not support this.  So, I hope such a law would help in sorting out issues that are major for the whole nation.  

I would like to point out that, I do not feel that the Bill presented is elaborate enough to indicate to us that, at least, apart from the Minister bringing the Bill here, the public or the population through a private Motion leading to the Bill and Legislation through parliament, somebody could push for an issue that could end up being resolved through referendum.  And I would like to say that, since a similar law or a similar method can be used to even amend the Constitution, it is very important to inform the public or to make the people aware that they have that right to raise an issue which might end up being resolved through a referendum.  

The second point, which I would like to point out is what has been mentioned by some Members in this House on the elaborateness or on the details of the Bill - the procedure and the regulations.  An example I would like to cite, is the question of the period that would be required to inform, educate and make the population aware on the issue they are going to vote on through a referendum.  We are having a problem on simple things like even interpretation of some of the laws that we passed in this House.  We sometimes do not take time to discuss them elaborately and go to the people and explain to them and hear their views.  We are already having a problem in interpreting those who so wish in Ankole.  It is a major problem and the population is saying, you know we speak for the population.  

But recently, I was consulting and the population is saying ‘you people you seen to be bringing things which you discuss there decide and finish and then when you disagree, you bring to us and ask us our views.’  They have a Runyankole saying that ‘Nosiga eyi butereirwe oza eyi butarakiire’.  Meaning that, ‘when you are hitting millet, you leave it where you have hit it and you go to where a few grains have scattered’.  That some of this information we use here, is mainly consulted from here but, when we get problems then we go to seek the individual opinions of the people in the countryside.

So, I would like to request the Government or the person who is tabling this Bill to indicate the period that would be given to the population to be informed, to be educated, to be told what the issue on which a referendum is going to be held, will be.  I would not like a situation where an issue is brought and it is to be debate on in one month or in two months time, however urgent it might be; if it is such an important issue that can only be resolved through a referendum.  

I would also request that at least a minimum of three months is given and money and facilities are provided to educate us to go to the masses and make them aware of what they are going to vote on.  This will also take care of explaining what the question might mean on which they are to say, yes or no.  So, that at least the population is not taken for a ride.  The history of the referendum seems to give indications that sometimes referendum is given to facilitate or to please or satisfy the dictators taking the example of the few that have been mentioned by hon. Mayengo.  

But taking from the good side and hoping that it is for the good of the population, it is more important that the population is fully and thoroughly educated on the subject they are going to vote on. It involves things like upgrading the Voters register.  You know how expensive and how much time it may take.  Because we have to get the voting age on the register.  So, that is something that should be taken into consideration and that is why I am talking on the importance of including the period given to a population to understand and prepare for voting on any issue to be resolved through a referendum.

The other point I wanted to raise was on where the money will come from?  It is a small one but important.  Saying that it will come from consolidated fund alone and leaving it there, I think is tying the hands of whoever is intending to present or carry out the referendum.  Because you know the consolidated fund is limited.  You should not pass a vote through here, if it cannot be utilised otherwise.  So, I wanted to add something approved by the legislature that leaves room for somebody to mobilise funds from elsewhere.

The most important issue that I wanted to talk about is the question in Section 3(6), the question of the number to decide on an issue presented for a referendum. (Applause) I fear any issue involving such a magnitude that would require a national referendum being decided by just a simple majority.  What does it mean?  It means that 49 per cent would be left out and denied a say in a major issue like that one.  I remember one time the President was speaking in Conference Centre when he was criticising some of the problems of Western Democracy which sometimes is not exactly speaking for the majority but for one group which manages to have one person more.  I think any issue that needs a National Referendum should be taken so seriously; I personally believe that at least two thirds should agree.  Two thirds should at least say that -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that, in Democracy you can elect the President of a country on a majority of one vote.  I do not see whatever can be so important as to may be get the very principle of democracy that is supposed to be authenticated by a referendum.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Mr. Chairman, he has given a very good example that I did not want to give.  To remove a President in our present or the old Constitution, we need two thirds.  So, while you can elect him by a simple majority because normally we must have one President, but for an issue which must be of a bigger issue which could not be resolved through normal democratic procedures, is as important as for example removing a President.  So, that is why I am saying that while in normal democratic procedures we could use simple majority, I am not opposed to simple majority, in normal situations. but in a situation where it must be resolved by a national referendum, it should be at least two thirds.  Actually two-thirds means even compromise.  I would have preferred a higher majority.  But at least two thirds is a reasonable majority.  

When we were discussing the question of those who so wish, many interpretations were given of reasonable minority, substantial minority, a big minority, all those are not conferrable, and I thought that if we are to decide on anything, which must be decided by vote, because there are those which are difficult to decide by vote traditionally, and there are those which are never voted for, and which I do not want to go into, but for those where we have to vote, and where we must vote through a national referendum, I propose two thirds majority.    

MR. NDEGE (Luuka County, Iganga):  Mr. Chairman, like all others, I wish you a happy New Year and may God make you live many more years to come.  In principle I think we all agree that we should have a referendum but small interests are maybe making us discuss just modalities of how we should have a referendum.  

In Section 3, I think we have agreed that only Parliament should and has power to approve a referendum of any nature.  Secondly, that under Section 5, if it is Parliament that has approved a referendum to be made, even the results are just automatic and conclusive.  Other people are saying we should have two-thirds majority for a referendum to be effected.  I think I disagree with that.  Once you have a situation, it is only besides that; that is what we call majority - it is ten people are there.  They have an issue and six say, yes, and then you say, no, you cannot have it because the four have said no.  I think that is not being very democratic.  There should be a simple majority and Parliament should approve the idea of that issue and the rest should agree that we have been defeated.  Whether it is in Ankole on the issue of the Omugabe, let the people decide.  If they so wish, means that before, there was a King, this King was abolished, although he was born a King, he was abolished, and this is not the first time the King has been abolished.  Now changes have taken place, and we have said they can come back provided the majority of the people wish.  

Now, if you are afraid of that, then I am sorry you are not being democratic; you are not even respecting what you call freedom of association.  You are forcing these people to associate with you.  If you are afraid of an election, if you are a King and you know that the people will say no, do not be afraid.  Go for it.  Now, if you are afraid that they would say, no, and then you cannot say that you are denying them a freedom of association.  No.  Freedom of association means they have a right to say no or yes.  I think we should not be afraid.  

Something with parties.  If parties have messed up people’s lives, they have died or what and then you come and tell me that people have no right to say we do not want the parties now we suspend them for the next ten years.  That is, they do not have that right, then I am sorry you are doing wrong.  A referendum is used to what people want at that particular time.  If they want you back, they can, it is like in a school.  Who says that in Britain they do not arrest?  Everyday they are arresting hooligans who come and, some are homosexuals wanting to have sex on the streets.  That is not a freedom of association.  You are abusing it.  So you must be arrested and put somewhere.  

So that is why I say, we should not just say freedom of association, freedom of anything is endless and anybody can do anything.  There must be rules and regulations governing it.  Now, if parties have abused themselves in this country for the last 20 years, my people in Luuka are saying - suspend them, finished until they behave themselves -(Laughter)- and I am going to support that position.  The other position I do not agree with in this Bill is that the Minister should supervise the election.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  Whereas people in his country say the parties should be suspended, people in my county say they must be reinstated. (Laughter)

MR. NDEGE:  My Friend hon. Ongom is very democratic that is why he is saying let us have a referendum.  So, one million people and others, the few I do not know, may decide.  Let them decide their own destiny, but do not decide for them.  That is why I was saying - and the same thing - I am saying, let not the Minister decide the destiny of elections.  We have Election Commissions.  Let us have these Election Commissions continue supervising these referendums.  Because the Minister will support the Cabinet decision.  

So, if he is the one to announce the results, then we will have a situation like when in 1980, somebody decided to reverse decision in favour of that Government at that time.  So, I want independent people to supervise referendum.  And I think the hon. Minister in his wisdom by tomorrow when we may decide, you bring the amendment to that effect.  I think these are just simple issues, but I think in the long run we should decide on principles and on mental reason.  Thank you, Sir.        

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira):  I rise to support the Bill, just in principle.  I say so, because in Clause 5 sub-section 4, the Minister is here saying that regulations in this sub-section will be laid before the legislature.  We are supposed, right now, to be making those regulations that he has not availed to this House.  I hope he is getting ready with his proposal that he comes tomorrow with these regulations so that we are able to see and agree.  So that at a later time after gazetting it, we shall not come back and annul it.  That particular sub-Section has a lot of misgivings.  First of all, it is talking of a time when the gazette will be published, it may take a considerable length of time before it is published, then after it is published, it is going to take another time then after that ­- (Interruption)

MR. MAYANJA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Rev. gentleman, that until the regulations are published in the gazette, they are not effective in law.  So, when the Government is interested in the regulations taking effect, they must publish them in the gazette and that is the earliest date on which they can be called regulations.  If they are written down and they lie in my office or anywhere else, they are not regulations.  

REV. ATWAI:  Thank you hon. Minister.  Although again in sub-section 5, you come up and you make it operational, even if it is not yet assented upon by the same House, not only that, I am supporting this particular Bill because for avoidance of doubt - whose doubt is raised and clarified in Clause 18 of the Statute sub-section 5, that matters of local nature, let us put it just for purposes of example like Rwampara, cannot be put before the or cannot call for a referendum.  So, what we are going to come up with, therefore, since there is already a guideline guiding us into the making of the mothers of laws, which is the Constitution.  I hope this particular Bill will not drive us towards that area where even in that same section, because there are already two options there. 

Sub-Section 1 of 18 and sub-Section 3, already you provide for people one for the hon. Minister, one for the President, but then we have brought this particular referendum Bill today.  The first sentence is very clear on the memorandum, but then it is distorted in the second half of the sentence where we are going to involve ourselves with the matters of a local nature that is unfortunate and something that we had already legislated upon and agreed that it should not be handled.  

The hon. Minister in Clause 6 of this very Bill on the expenses of the referendum, is referring to the consolidated fund.  Outside here, are people who are demonstrating, these are former employees of East African Community who are supposed to be paid from the consolidated fund.  Is there money in that fund? (Laughter) Because I would not like just to buy the impression that there is something in place that actually is not there.  That will be very unfortunate, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like in connection with East African Community former employees, to urge our government to make sure that they pay these people, because it is a disgrace to our country to see that former civil - I would like to inform hon. Members and our government, it is a disgrace to us as a legislature and to our country, our former civil servants should - this matter should be, I urge be settled as soon as possible.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.    
                                                                                                     
REV. ATWAI:  Thank you, hon. Wanendeya for that piece of information.  I hope it carries some good weight out here and finally, I would like you to permit me to inform the House on what took place in Lira about a week or two ago which is something to be condemned, because and I still insist that may be the hon. Minister for Internal Affairs at his own time will come to this House and explain as to how ammunition should be used.  This one in Lira, people were peaceful, there was nobody with a stone or any local weapon for fighting anybody, but the ammunition so used at the tax payers expense was alarming, although people would not want to go to Lira prefer to go to have audience with the BBC from Kampala.  In Lira, no life was lost, but people were injured.  

So, in future, I think before we come up with public statements, whether in Streets of Kampala, it is better to liaise with the people who represent those very particular affected people.  I am saying this, because people lost properties in Lira in that thing - uncalled for shooting, the policemen when they went to arrest just one person, which papers say is Ali, a businessman.  Other than arresting him and even when one person is resisting arrest, how can that one call for gunshots?  That is why I am saying, I am very much disturbed like the other people, but at the same time, I hope that we shall use the civilised policemen we have who know how to protect life other than destroy life.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MAJ. BUTIME:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much, but I wish to inform the hon. Reverend and also aspiring Lira Municipality CA candidate that what actually happened is that a person was being illegally arrested by the police.  The people who were around did not want that person to be arrested by the Police and, therefore, they were in the wrong.  They surrounded the Police an they wanted to disarm them.  Thank God, nobody was shot, but the police shot in the air and these people were dispersed and the arrest was carried out.  So, I do not think that was definitely the kind of good police which the hon. Reverend is talking about.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to make a few observations on this Bill.  First of all, I am also a little bit concerned about this Bill being rather too brief and there is always a danger in losing the meat if you are too precise.  However, when you want to make a referendum or to carry out a referendum, what makes you decide to carry out a referendum?  I consider that you have players in on the issue, you have Government, you have the Legislature, you have other leaders in society and you have the population.  And as far as I am concerned, you carry out a referendum when Government cannot make a decision, or a satisfactory one, when the legislature is either incompetent or feels unable to make a decision that will be caused to be biding on the people or where you have other leaders that are neither in Government nor in the legislature and they feel very, very strongly about an issue and therefore, would want government o hold a referendum.  And fourthly, you may have the population, saying that, a certain issue is so important that they would like a decision made on it and since this decision can either be made by government of the legislature, therefore, the people themselves should be asked to make that decision.  

Now, there are factors which are involved or which are conducive to carrying out a good decision.  The first and most important is that we must form a good hypothesis.  If you have a wrong hypothesis, then the decisions you make are not going to be good, and by this, I mean, if there is an issue, then this issue ought to be exhaustively discussed by everybody concerned - the government, the legislature, a decision can only be reached by going to the population, then a referendum ought to be held.  

In other words, what I am suggesting is that we should not be tempted that every time there is a bit of a problem, we should rush to the people for a decision.  Because quite often, the people may decide on our behalf, but these other players I am talking about the Government, I am talking about the Parliament and I am talking about other political leaders may decide that they are not going along with this decision by the people and that is why I said in the first instance, you must have a good hypothesis, where all the people have agreed that this is what must be put to test.  And that the results therefrom, must be binding on everybody.  

In this Bill, the only place where we refer to a hypothesis, I think, is in paragraph 3, where it says if the Minister is satisfied that it will be in the public interest necessary so to do with approval of the Cabinet an so on and so forth. This Section, does not allow sufficient time and latitude for a good hypothesis to be formed.  There ought to be wider and deeper consultation, because in the end everybody involved must agree with the results from this referendum.  After you have established a hypothesis, usually you want to decide on a sample that is; an individual minister can make a decision on behalf of the country, a bigger sample is the Cabinet that can make a decision on behalf of the country and yet a bigger sample is Parliament.  Therefore, after you have formed your hypothesis you might decide what size of sample am I going to use?  And a referendum means using the whole population.  You usually get the most accurate results when you use the whole population.  

Now, I am a little bit bothered - not bothered but I find it difficult to agree with Major Gen. Tumwine because, if you take the whole population as your sample, then any difference, is a very highly significant difference, and if you are going to go for two thirds majority, you might as well forget it, because you are unlikely to ever make a decision - forget it.  What you could do - and again, his worry and the worry of many other people is that. But you see the population we are talking about is really not a good sample because there are different factors involved; we have tribes, we have religions, we have what and eventually, when you are holding referenda, these are the issues that you must accept because they are real, you cannot afford to pretend that they do not exist.  

Usually, for us in Science, when we have problems like this, we stratify them; we look at things differently because for you to use a whole group of people as your subject for referendum, the assumption is that they are all the same.  If they are different, then you are wrong in your concept.  You must start with the population that is the same and if you do that, then hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine should have no fear.  But if you have different members of the population, then the problem he is raising can come in, and that is why I think when we are holding a referendum, we should be very careful and insist that only similar groups of populations are put in the same sample, because it cannot be a sample if you have different types.  

For example, if you are deciding on whether we should have a King of the Bakiga, I think it would be good that only we the Bakiga ought to be involved in this.  But obviously as hon. Amama Mbabazi knows too well - no, he can never be.  I mean even in other areas, if we want to decide on local issues, really the population must be the same; the sample must be the same.  It is practical to have two-thirds majority, maybe you could think about - I do not know frankly, but such a huge size would never work.

Now, method of analysis.  Again that is what hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine is talking about.  Again unless, you have a good hypothesis and good methods of analysis when you hold these referenda, you may get figures, but you may not get the desired results that everybody accepts and I mean when you are carrying out a referendum, as many leaders like to say, you should have level ground.  I think it is very important, honestly, it is very, very important that you have a level ground, if there is anybody who thinks he has got something to contribute to the people, so that it can help them to make a good decision, these people should be given sufficient latitude to put their ideas across.  Because what we hate to have is like what we had in Angola where people hold elections and someone wins and because the ground is not necessarily level, all the parties are not agreed on the methods of analysis.  Someone decides that it does not matter what results we have.  Mr. Chairman, with those observations, I support the Motion.         
                                                            
MR. MWANDHA (Bugweri County, Iganga):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution on this very important Bill and very early in this second meeting of the Second Session.  

I support the Bill.  I think it is important that from time to time there should be occasions when the population should be consulted on matters of great concern to Uganda and I think nobody should fear to face the population.  I, however, do not quite agree with proposals that the decision whether or not to consult the nation should be made by the Minister or by the Cabinet alone.  I firmly believe that the best way to do it is actually for Parliament to sit and consider any proposal from Government whether or not a referendum should be held.  The question of determining whether an issue of such public interest that should go to the whole nation should not be left to a few Ugandans in Cabinet.  I think it should be brought to the representatives of the people to discuss and agree whether or not a referendum should be held.  There are a number of issues apart from agreeing whether or not the referendum should be held.  There are issues to be considered; even the question to be put to the public, the way it should be framed is important, because if this is not done properly at the end of the day, you come up with the wrong decision. 
 
So, it is my view that actually it must be Parliament to authorise the holding of a referendum.  There have been a number of comments made on whether the referendum should have a simple majority or whether it should have a two-thirds majority or whatever.  Once a decision has been taken to take a question to the whole country, the question of two thirds does not arise.  Suppose the whole country decides by simple majority, you have no other authority in the country to go to and get the two-thirds majority.  It means you will have a stalemate and obviously we do not want to have a stalemate in any situation.  

Therefore, the question of a simple majority, when we resort to a referendum, does not arise.  The two-thirds majority which hon. Members have been referring to could work when a decision is to be made whether or not to have a referendum by Parliament.  If Parliament is considering whether or not a referendum should be held, it may be reasonable to say we should not simply provide for a simple majority, we should go in for a much bigger majority because that is a very important issue and therefore, the biggest majority of the representatives of the people must take a decision and therefore, it may be reasonable to provide for two thirds majority but when it comes to a referendum, I submit it has to be a simple majority even if it was a difference of one person countrywide, that is the wish of the people of a country.

The Bill provides that the answer will either be yes or no.  That will not be the solution.  An issue may have various aspects to it.  I think it will be necessary even to have multiple questions whether this or that or the other, so that people can decide between various possible alternatives.  I think it will be too restrictive if we decided that the question has to be either yes or no and therefore, I would like to propose that in this Bill, we should give an opportunity for a multiple question system so that the people have an opportunity to decide on one of the possible ways of resolving a situation nationally.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Point of clarification.  Sorry to interrupt the speaker, but I thought I should try, if I may, to clarify what I think that sub-Section says.  It says, ‘any question submitted to a referendum under this Section shall be framed so as to require no other answer than yes or no.’ It is not saying yes and no.  The point Sir, is if you take the case of the lost counties.  There were three questions and the questions required ‘yes’ or ‘no’ on the three so that this does not prevent the asking of numerous sets of questions - but the answers should not be explanation in writing but simply say you agree, yes or you do not agree, no.  So, if you say do you want to remain part of Buganda or do you want to become part of Bunyoro or do you want to remain a separate district, there are three possible answers and only one of them cab be yes.  In this case, you can say, I do not want to be part of Buganda, that is no.  I do not want to be part of Bunyoro, that is no.  I would like to be a separate district, and that is yes.  So, what he is saying is that the answers should not be in written form but just confine yourself to ‘yes’ or ‘no’, not ‘yes’ and ‘no’. (Applause)

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I do appreciate the explanation that has been given.  I think I quite agree that we can have several questions.  At the end of the day, it must either be yes or no, but what I wanted to really make sure that is going to be permitted in this Bill is that we shall not simply have two questions where one has to say that one - you take one and cross the other, but I think the point is made clear.  I quite appreciate.  One thing that I think is lacking in this Bill and I quite agree with hon. Members who are saying that this Bill is bony, is lacking meat.  It has left a lot out.  

One of the things that I think should be in this Bill - appended to this Bill, are the regulations.  How the referendum is going to be conducted and all the regulations and rules that should be actually observed in conducting the referendum. That is very important; and to me that is the real substance of the whole process of what you are carrying out the referendum for, and I would have preferred, if the rules which the Minister envisages to use when these referenda are conducted, are actually appended to this Statute.  It will be much easier rather than having to come up with the rules at any one time, obviously when we have our current Attorney General - we can rely n him to come up with the reasonable rules but who knows - some other person may come up with rules which may not be reasonable.  So, I would have preferred, Mr. Chairman that we have the rules appended to this Statute.  With these points, I support the Motion.  Thank you.

MR. NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I rise to support the Bill but my worry s that looking through the Draft Bill, I found that there were no provisions made for determining in a referendum.  I want to compare this with the Constituent Assembly Statute, where for example, the Bill says, ‘candidates will have candidates’ meetings during which they will be able to explain their stand on the aspects of the Constitution so that the electorate can say yes,’ we like the views of Candidate A, so we elect him.  We do not like the views of Candidate B, so we do not elect him.  So, if there had been provisions in the Statute or in the Bill to first put in place arrangements of explaining to the electorate on the merits and demerits of saying yes in the referendum or the merits and demerits of saying no in the referendum, the public would be in a better position to participate more effectively in the referendum.  

Again when you compare with what is happening in the Constituent Assembly Statute, we find, I think there has been - the media has helped us by putting people to discuss various aspects of the Constitution on radio, television and so forth and so on.  In much the same way, if similar arrangements were put in place before a referendum is discussed, I think the public will be able again to participate more effectively in the referendum.  

Now, there has been a talk about using civil educators to enlighten the masses before going into a thing like a referendum.  I am afraid I have got some misgivings about out civil educators and I am glad you have given the Floor because I was specifically asked a few days ago to inform the government through you - through this House that some of these civil educators have been seen more at the Offices of the District Treasuries claiming their allowances than being seen in the villages educating the masses.  

For the last four months, I have myself been a civil educator.  I have been around all my words and what not, explaining the three Statutes of Youth Council, Women’s Council, Constituent Assembly Councils, but still I have to come across an area where people can tell me they have benefited from the civic educators.  The only exception to this is in an area which happens to be outside my Constituency in Mbarara Barracks where I was satisfied that whoever was there - the political commissars there have given enough civic education to the soldiers. But in other places I see many members nodding, saying that the civil educators have not really done enough and I am quite worried as to whether we are going to have proper elections next week for Youth councils and Women’s Councils because the majority of our people, except I should say in my Constituency, where I have been for the last four months, people have not been thoroughly educated.  

So, when we are talking about a referendum - an issue to be put to a referendum, let us put in place in the Bill, arrangements to the effect that before a referendum is held - there shall be put in place sufficient facilities to educate the public on what the issues are all about.  I leave it to our distinguished lawyers led by the Attorney General to find the appropriate words of inserting these provisions.  I support the Motion, Mr. Chairman. 
 



MRS. LUBEGA M. (Women Representative, Rakai):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to congratulate you and this House for the successful year 1993 and I wish you a fruitful 1994. (Applause)  On a sad note, I want to convey my sympathies to this House, the Government and the people of Mpigi and relatives at the loss of our Colleague Teddy Nsubuga, God rest her soul.  Allow me to express my solidarity with fellow Ugandans sitting outside there for they are claiming ‘ebyabwe’ which they have not yet received and as per their communication, they were supposed to have received -(Applause)- them 30 days after the passing of the Budget Proposal.  I hope the Minister of Finance will be able to do something about it or for that matter give a statement to the effect.  

I stand here to support this Bill as far as it is a general Bill and I stress the word general, for we have developed a tendency of passing situational Bills.  Mr. Chairman, I am saying that because when you study the Bill you find that there are some indications of this Bill being a situational Bill and I hope the Attorney General will this time be very cautious to make sure that incidences do not occur as we have had them re-occurring on the ‘ebyaffe’ Bill.  When we passed the ‘ebyaffe’ Bill here, nobody envisaged what was going to happen thereafter because we thought everybody would be happy, but right now we are entangled in a quagmire of confusion.  So, I believe this time we shall not come to that.  

As far as the Bill is concerned, it provides for the Minister to make regulations of making a referendum but taking Clause 3, sub-Section (5) the Bill says that A statutory Order under this Section may provide for a voting in a referendum to be held on different dates, in different areas.’  If you are going to vote on the same issue and you are going to vote on different dates in different areas, that alone provides loopholes.  So, I think the Attorney General will be able to rectify that situation because as we are in a situation of political activity, so many things have been happening, so many people have been trekking from Kampala to different areas where they think they have got allegiance to go to and one is interested in fostering what he thinks is right for him.  So, we may not be surprised if we are going to vote on the same issue, in different places, at different dates.  I may be able to cross from Rakai to Karamoja as long as I prove that I want to vote there.

Same Clause 3, sub-Section (6) - there is a provision that -any question submitted to a referendum under this Statute shall be determined by votes of a simple under majority of persons voting in the referendum.’  Quite a number of Members have expressed their views about that.  I am not worried about the simple majority but let us think of it.  People in Rakai, we are 400,000 - just think that about half of those registered for voting or as voters in the general elections and then we say in between put or even thereafter you put in a referendum, and only 100,000 turn up to vote on that referendum and a simple majority will be 51,000.  That will not reflect the ideas of the decisions of people of Rakai.  

MR. NDEGE:  Point of information.  Thank you very much.  With all due respect if 100,000 people turn up and all of them voted yes or no out of 400,000 if her theory is correct - then it does not even hold water.  Because what she is trying to say is that if there are 400,000, all of them at least the majority should vote, but she is putting a case where only 100,000 people turn up.  Even if they all voted yes or no, they would still be a minority in Rakai.

MRS. LUBEGA:  Thank you for the information but the point I am trying to drive at is that some people may keep away from voting because they protest.  By just not turning up to vote, they reject what they are talking about and then if you take the 50 per cent or 40 per cent of people who have registered, that will not show the feeling of the people.  So, I am asking the Attorney General - what procedure, what method are you going to put in place to make sure that we actually have a simple majority?  Because people may just decide to keep away.

MR. MAYANJA :  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the question being moved by my hon. friend was debated here, I believe and it was whether we should legislate for compulsory voting or not and it was raised here and it was rejected in favour of freedom of the people to exercise their right to vote or not to vote.  Now, if you are not going to compete - there are some countries where voting in a referendum is compulsory and if you do not vote, you are put in prison.  (Interruption)


All these dictatorial - these countries with bad regimes like where we used to get majorities of 99.9 per cent; in those countries voting is compulsory, but if voting is going to be free, I am afraid we must accept, intellectually, a position whereby a minority of the people actually turn out to vote.  There is nothing I can do about it.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the Attorney General that this question of compulsory voting is contained in the Draft Constitution that is going to be discussed by the CA.  So, I think it is something to consider and more specifically for the referendum, I do not see why we should not even include it in here so that it is discussed, so that if there is to be a referendum, it is compulsory voting.  The other information I want to give in relation to the question of numbers is a situation where I would like you to take note, is a situation where issues that have sometimes come up for national consideration in other countries like the question; Do you declare Uganda a Christian or a Moslem country?  Should we have a leader at one time, God forbid, who wants to use that as a way of declaring Uganda either Christian or Moslem country and he says, he will do it by referendum.  What will be the implications?

MRS. LUBEGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you the Attorney General and the hon. Member for the information, but I hope that the point is taken that there are chances occasioned when we may come to a stalemate because the numbers are not there and I think something should be done.  One of them is that before the referendum is going to take place or before it takes place, enough sensitisation or mobilisation on the free speech should be allowed so that people know exactly what they are going to do so that they actually turn up.  Otherwise, you can see what has been happening in registration of voters - people refuse to go for registration because they just did not know what they were doing and they were boycotting it.  Eventually, when they came to learn of what was going on some people came in, but just suppose that there was a day decided that on this day things are going to be done that way, a good number of Ugandans would have kept out and I believe a good number of Ugandans are still out.  

Going to Clause 5.  We are talking of, a Minister may make regulations prescribing a manner in which a referendum is going to be held and in Clause 5 sub-section 2(c), the Minister may prescribe the manner in which the results of the referendum are to be published and the particulars to be included in the results.  If we are going to have yes or no, now what other particulars are we putting in and what are we leaving out.  I hope the Attorney General will be able to tell us that.  Again why should we give a Minister that power to decide that this should be kept away from Ugandans when he actually went to the Ugandans to get the results? 

Finally, somewhere in Clause 5 again, sub-Section (5), it said that where the annulment by Legislature comes after some decisions have been taken or some actions have been taken that annulment does nullify what has been done before.  That implies that there is a likelihood of having a referendum and regulations being put in place when the Legislature is not there and once that has been done and the rules have been passed, chances are that they will not come because the laws would have been passed, and that brings back my worry that may be we are passing a situational law.  Otherwise, what are we trying to guard here?  As I said before, I support this Bill as long as it is a general Bill, not a Bill to suit a situation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(The Council rose at 5.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 5th January at 2.30 p.m.)

