Wednesday, 13th January, 1993
The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

P R A Y E R S

The Vice Chairman, (Al-Haji Moses Kigongo) in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

LAYING OF PAPERS ON THE TABLE

DEPUTY MINISTER FOR FINANCE AND ECONOMIC PLANNING (Mr. A. Kafumbe Mukasa): Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the House that the Government has come up with a rehabilitation and development plan for the 1991/92 to the year 1994/95.  It has come up with these plans with two volumes.  Volume 1, on micro-economic and sectoral policy and Volume 2, on priority projects. Once hon. Members take keen interest in the economic recovery and performance of their country, I trust that each one will take off time and read each and every page of these reports.  Permit me, Mr. Chairman, to lay on Table these two Volumes.  Thank you, Sir.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE ANIMAL INDUSTRY AND FISHERIES (Mr. H. Kyemba): Mr. Chairman, I have the honour to lay on the Table, the South West Regional Agriculture Rehabilitation Project, Financial Statement for the period ended 30th June 1989 together with the report and the opinion thereon by the Auditor General.  Mr. Chairman, I have the honour to lay on the Table the Kibimba Rice Company Ltd. Accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1986, together with the report and opinion thereon by the Auditor General.  Thank you, Sir.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL WOMEN’S COUNCIL BILL, 1992.

(Debate continues)

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA (Bujjumba County, Kalangala): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support this Bill, but with number of observations.  This Bill intends to bring into being the National Women’s Council.  Members have been talking about the other sister group.  The National Council of Women.  I would like to warn our sisters that as much as they have heard about National Council of Sports, and its squabbles, you could also find a lot of squabbles with this body, the National Women’s Council, if the Members do not curb incidences that cause problems in institutions this nature and of course most of you are aware of why we have squabbles in organisations of this nature, even organisation like union they were put in force for good reason, but the people manipulating the institutions make them to become amorphous and they lose sight of the purpose for their creation.  

I would like to make some observations on Article No.4, where they talk about objects and functions of the council.  I would recommend the hon. Minister, that these objects should also include protection of women from fictitious women organisations.  When I made my research, I found that already they have got more than 10 NGOs many of them having purposes reflected in this Bill. But when you look at what they have done, it is contrary to their prediction. 
So, I would like this Bill to protect the women folk from fictitious women organisations I would also like them to include an item age that this National Women’s Council should co-ordinate all activities of NGOs registered for emancipation of women’s progress. Because if you leave the forum free for any good lady to come up and formulate NGOs for their own purposes, they will defeat the essence of the creation of the National Women’s Council, unless the Council can co-ordinate the activities of those organisation.  

In Article 5, I would like to omit (b) “two representatives of Non-governmental Organisations determined by the National Women’s Executive Committee, which are involved in “women affairs,” this is exactly what has been said, when I made inquiries, I found there are already 10 organisations. Now you are talking of two representatives; you are already going to begin a quarrel amongst these NGOs! Why have you selected such and such a member?  Unless you let these organisations sit and select two members who represent them, but the moment you go into this type of forum you are going to find problems, starting right from the beginning.  

I would also like to make some observation on article 7, which is talking about composition and hierarchy of Women’s Councils. In this one also, I would like to omit the representation of the women representative in the NRC, I wish the ladies could come out wholeheartedly and have this one as the National Women’s Council, so that we can get rid of the problem of a woman representative, most preferably chosen by men.  Let the ladies choose their representatives as they so wish.  So, I would request the Minister to consider omission of that last phase, the Women Representative in the NRC, if the ladies so wish, and continue to elect the same person in her own capacity.  I have no quarrel.  

I would also like to make some observations on article No.8. According to what is shown here, the Women’s Councils are shaped along the lines of the RC Elections and this has already raised outcry that men can dominate women in making their own decisions.  I would request the Minister that since this National Women’s Council is purely created for the emancipation of the women, they could as well have their village councils purely for ladies, when they want us men to give them advice.  We can conveniently come in, but let them make their own decisions and elect members as ladies without our import.  After all, in most cases, after elections, most of the ladies decide to come in and we the men make the decisions on their behalf.  

So, I would suggest that when it comes to these committees, let them be purely elected by ladies alone.  I would also like to make some Amendments or omission on Item 5, Clause 8, where they talk of “a person shall not be a member of more than one women’s committee.”  I am sure hon. Ladies in the House will agree with me that, we have had incidents in the RC Elections whereby people are elected from RC1 to RC5. Eventually there is no one left; every person they thought of has gone through RC1 RC2, RC3, to RC5. So, at RC1 they say, let us put there whoever is willing to take up the post.  The ladies will come to a stage whereby they are going to prevent fellow ladies from taking on two positions when the person they have got, could have mobilised. The lady was probably willing to take up positions on two committees, but according to the Statute this may not be possible.

I think people should be taken on their own merit. If somebody feels she cannot take up responsibility on two committees, she will be honourable enough to say so. But if somebody can work on two committees, ladies do not miss the chance. There are not very many people willing to perform effectively. 

On Item No.9, Article 9, I would like to omit that (f) ‘one of the two representatives of the Non-Governmental Organisations appointed under section 5;’ I have already proposed that unless you organise, hon. Minister, you may find a lot of problems and argument by getting those two representations.  Let people go on the committee in merit because the few organisations I have managed to read through, are soon going to raise problems when you come to getting two members out of 10 organisations or 15, so that I am suggesting that this one should be omitted.  

In Article 11, I want to go on 1 and 2; 1 and 2,is proposing that, ‘The Secretary shall be appointed by the Minister on the advice of the Council; and 2 says that ‘The Secretary shall be appointed from among persons who are qualified in management or administrative matters.’ There is a bit of ambiguity in these two statements, and I would request the Minister responsible for this Women’s Council that let this particular post be advertised. There will be many ladies assuming capacity to run this post and out of the many aspirants, the Council could recommend names to the Ministries, and the Minister in due respect can make a decision on who to select with the advice of the Council. But when you talk of appointment by the Minister on the advice of the Council, I prefer that, please, the advertisement must be stressed. Otherwise nepotism might crop in.  I want to go on Item 15, on Finance.  Most of these Councils, Unions and other forums, have got problems with Finance.  I have seen the sources of finance here and maybe the most vital one I see is No.(c) grants, gifts or donations to the Council and I know ladies will manage to seek many grants and gifts and donations and immediately after these have come in, the problems of the Council will start.  I do not want to mention other forums where such big things come in and start chaos, but let me hope sources being so uncontrolled, they require some professional control as this has always been the cause of controversy in forums of this nature. 

Article 17, as already mentioned by other Members yesterday, to me would be very inconvenient, especially when you come to paragraph 2.  You are over involving the Minister, especially, when you say that, “no expenditure shall be made out of the funds of the Council unless the expenditure has been approved by the Minister.”  This is really taming this Council, knowing very well what would happen when the ladies bring up their cups. If things fail they might bite. I think we should pull out the Minister and leave the Executive of the Council to make most of the decisions on their funds.  
 
I would like to conclude, Mr. Chairman, by observing about Article No.24.  I think the Minister as much as she may, after consultation with the Council by statutory instrument, make regulations for carrying out more effectively the provisions of this Statute, I think soon after this Bill has passed and the Women’s Council comes to be that Executive, will see the many loopholes, and will also see why the thing is going to fail. No wonder those interested in sports, including the Chairman of the National Council of Sports,  I do not think  enjoyed a lot during the last elections. There was a lot of heat and I am sure a lot of heat will come in once this Council is in place, and these other 10 organisations I have talked about will also see their way through to this Council. 

So, I think the Minister should use the courteous and knowledge and the capability of the Members of the Council to advice her to adjust and amend regulations for carrying out more effectively the provisions of this Statute through their own advice than, accusing the Minister that she may be changing articles to suit certain avenues of her interest.  I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and I indeed support this Bill.

MAJ.GEN. TUMWINE (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. After listening to different speakers on this Bill, who are mostly men and who have expressed some concern, I stand to support the Women’s cause and the purpose of bringing this Bill here.  I understand the intentions and I have no doubt about that. But I would like to make my strong observations on the set up and structure that is involved in this Bill, so that the women take note of those observations and during the implementation stage, they will be conscious of how they move.  At one stage, during the discussions yesterday, I almost got a feeling that, perhaps this Bill would have waited. But after serious considerations, I stand to support the Bill and establishing these councils as an experiment. I am calling it an experiment because of a few fundamental things that were even seen here yesterday and appear in this Bill. A simple question like the question of terminology. ‘What vocabulary do we use’ started being a subject of contention here yesterday and it is contained in this Bill, where in the definitions, if we refer to the definitions, the word of “Chairperson” is a serious subject of contention in this House, and it is an example of what is likely to happen where these councils are established, and what might happen at the lower levels. I, therefore, want to propose that, perhaps, before we move very far, we first see whether we have consensus on which words to use and who decided.  But the danger will be that it is likely to be two parallel sides based on our nature existence as either men or women.  I wanted to use this example to elaborate my observations of establishing these councils at all levels, up to the lower level, and making them exactly parallel with the RCs.  I have fears, that there is likely to be a situation where there is going to be a conflict and a problem of where power lies, so that we may have two power bases and, if you look on page - some of the reasons why I would like to warn the women - if you look on page 13, on the question of co-opting other members on the meetings. I am trying to elaborate even the context behind this Bill, how dangerous it can be if we do not take precaution. It is still on the word “person”; page 17 (6) it reads: “A Women’s Committee may co-opt any person who is not a member to attend any of its meetings as an advisor or consultant and that person may speak at the meeting on any matter in relation to which her advice is sought but shall not have the right to vote on any matter coming for decision before the meeting.” 

I am sorry about this because you can see, when you refer to a person who the women, at least those behind this Bill are referring to, it seems do not envisage a possibility of a man who is also a person to be a consultant or give some useful advice and that is where actually I wanted to caution the women and I would prefer to call them women and men, mainly because with the most famous people or people most respected that we know of, have always referred to people either as men or as women including Jesus Christ who - and Mohammed - who tried even to raise the women to the same level or looked at them as equal, they referred to them as man and woman.  Jesus called his mother “Woman.” 

So I would like to caution the women that while we are establishing these structures which seem to be parallel to the RCs they should be careful in whatever they are doing to make sure that we do not have a conflict of authority. Because I see a worry in this structure, and I have originally thought that perhaps it would have been better if this had been an NGO but I know what difficulties the women are trying to fight.  I know what efforts, what intentions they have, they are trying to use every effort and make their point understood. 

Therefore, I support the Bill as an experiment to see whether women will be conscious of the fact that at one particular time there should always be one authority at all levels, one undisputed authority at every level. I am referring to the family, to the RCs in the village up to the top.  In a situation where you have only two sections, men and women; and in a situation where we know that at least more than a half of the population, a little bit more than a half are women, if a decision is taken in the women’s council and is taken to the RCs and it is not supported, I can envisage a conflict there.  If they are electing leaders who are going to represent our interests or if they are to make decisions, they should be decisions which are democratically decided upon, and when we say democratically decided upon, we are leaving the right of the individual regardless of his sex, to take a side, but envisage a situation where a fellow woman takes the same side with the men in a decision, but he is against a whole council which is only women.  Is she likely to exercise her right as an independent citizen in the Resistance Council? And is this for her advantage like the men or the women?  I see a problem there, especially at the lower level.  At the high level, first of all, I would like to say that I recognise and I support and welcome the participation of the women and more women freely to participate at the higher level, but knowing our situation in the country, knowing that people in the lower levels in most cases follow what their leaders tell them and knowing how the women vote - I do not know whether you know that - if we are to be honest and we are to talk honestly, I know people are not being genuine in some of these issues because they are conscious of what the woman’s vote means to them.  

So we are very conscious of that especially, those who are here as political actors or as politicians. But at the same time, we should look far ahead in the future, we should not take an example or a precedent that when the society is divided into two at the lower levels especially, we are going to be forced here to form a Men’s Council and I promise, Mr. Chairman, that should the women mishandle the good intentions of this Bill, we shall not hesitate to form a National Men’s Council - (Laughter.)  

We have had an experience within the church where there is Mothers’ Union and then there was Fathers’ Union.  It came afterwards. That is the experience I am giving you.  Initially it started as Mothers’ Union.  So I am envisaging a similar situation that is likely to take place and that is why I am saying that the hon. Minister and her fellow women should really be conscious of how they implement this and I wanted to also refer to page 13 where the existence of these councils is directly tied to  the RCs. Because it means really that we are having everything in the same line.  I do not see the wisdom in having tied it to the RC period even when it has come in the middle of the year.  So I wanted to propose that we be conscious about separating the two.  If it is not possible to use women organisations, NGOs or to have an emblem that could unite all of them and we pass this Bill, I think the NRC Women Members should think of a method that will mobilise women in a way that is not going to conflict with the authority of the RCs.  That is my reservation and my strong reservation and I thought I should bring it out while I support the Bill and I say, this being a new experience, where the interests are mainly to lift the welfare or the level of the women from where they are to a relatively equal level, we should be conscious that if we are to be honest, the interests of the men as we speak now are that we are a bit worried at the speed at which you are making some of the decisions.  That is the general feeling.  

So, by way of trying to counter some of the things that are being taken by the women, most of them well intended but sometimes badly presented or mishandled, men are likely to be more negative, and, organised, officially supported, officially funded institutions, which especially if it conflicts with the present established structure of political structure and administrative structure. 

So, I would like to say that women representatives from the different counties and districts should be conscious of this and make sure that we move together as an entity so that a woman fights for her right as part of society or as a one society so that we do not divide the society on a sex basis. I would like to end by saying that I support the Bill -(Interruption.)  I accept the information.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, he had concluded already.  So, hon. Members, let me introduce to you the hon. Minister of Justice of Namibia, who is with us in the gallery upstairs.  Hon. Minister you are most welcome.  (Applause) You had finished, is it not?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I was going to be given an information.

MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am indebted to the Major General for giving away the Floor.  I wanted to supplement his point on dividing as a way of information, in dividing the population.  This is a very noble Bill but the consequences of this Bill might be very far reaching that the thinkers, unless they address the point raised by the Major General, it will be a very big problem. We may, in the end, create a society where women who are elected in this parastatal body - because it is actually a parastatal body; the section which creates it makes it a parastatal - in this parastatal body created along the political line of RC, which is another meeting taking place for women, where they had tackled the same subject and they passed a different resolution on implementation in the county, is going to be at a standstill and in the process, we are likely to face consequences not only at the village level, county level, or at the district level, but more seriously at a national, because then you will have created two parliaments, one for women and one for others.  In the process, Mr. Chairman, I really think that the hon. Mover, the Minister, should not withdraw this Bill because it is a noble Bill -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga take your Seat. I will give you time to contribute.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I just want to thank you for the supplement. I wanted to end by saying that I hope we shall not necessarily have to go into moving amendments on page 4, on the description of a person, so that we have clearly a chairman or a chairperson, because trying to move from being a woman into if you like it as a person, to me tends to bring in a feeling as if you have an inferiority complex of being called a woman.  I would want to see a woman who says, ‘I am a woman and I am a rightful woman in my own right and I have equal rights like a man and, therefore, be a chairperson or a be a chairman’, and similarly, on page 16(6) and (10) put in your meetings a possibility that men can attend and give advice when called upon or when co-opted and finally, be careful how you handle or you work with the RCs. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BWANNIKA BBAALE (Katikamu County, Luwero): Mr. Chairman, I personally find it difficult to support this Bill because the reasons which have been given by the Minister hardly convinced me.  In the first place, I did not get the reasons why the National Council of Women should not have been improved upon to take care of what she is trying to bring up here.  Secondly, I entirely disagree with making a structure, which is parallel to the RC system, the reasons having been advanced by the previous speakers, and you very well know that the RC system is ending in 1994. That one is a fact.  So are we making a Bill which is going to live the lifetime of the NRM system, or we are making a law for posterity? I think we should avoid making laws to suit a particular situation.  The National Council of Women was there and should have been supported or it should have been amended.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Point of Clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the Member holding the Floor where he got the fact that the RC system is ending in 1994. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order, please.

MISS ALIU: Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Member to equate an RC system with women?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is quite in order but not equating. Proceed, please.

MISS ALIU: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. BWANIKA BBAALE: Really putting it forward, when we know that the National Resistance Movement is ending in 1994.  And the Movement implies the RC system.  Mr. Chairman, definitely if we parallel the Women’s Council with the C system, we are going to have a lot of problems.  First of all, we are going to see who is going to chair the village committees, the secretary for women at RC1.  Some of them are not capable to chair a meeting.

DR. S. KAZIBWE: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor, to insinuate that the other half of the people in this country are not able to chair a meeting?

THE CHAIRMAN: It is not in order, please.  Continue.

MR. BWANIKA BBAALE: Mr. Chairman, I withdraw.  The situation when we were holding Elections, when time came for nomination of secretary for women, at least, I witnessed some situations, where it was very, very difficult to get a woman being proposed by another woman.  In fact, in such a situation, it was the man who was elected the chairman, who backed-on that; his wife to accept to stand -(Laughter.) If this happened, so how do you really expect such a person to be capable enough to lead the women at village committee? 

MR. KATEREGA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, that the point he is making is not valid at all -(Applause.) When we go down to the grassroots, especially during the RC elections, in the last elections of the RCs, many women came up as chairmen of village councils and -(inaudible)- Councils, and some of them went up to RC 3. In our midst here, when the RC system was introduced, we have an hon. Member who was an RC 3 Chairman of Mazinga, in the name of hon. Lorine.  So, the point he is making is not valid.	

MR. BWANIKA BBAALE: Thank you for that information but -(Interjection)- okay  -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of information. Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. speaker holding the Floor that in Kampala Central, half of my chairmen are women.  (Applause) Furthermore, Sir, I would like to inform him that on RC 2, most of the vice-chairmen are women. (Applause) So, the point of chairmen not being women is not true because we insist that they are called chairmen and we add on madam chairman (Applause and Laughter.)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think the hon. Member can benefit from further information.  I am carrying out research throughout the country on the process of establishing democracy.  And the information I have gathered so far shows that women are progressively taking over the position of secretary for finance. (Applause) They are really working in a big way.  So, it is not correct to say that women are incompetent, in fact, they are catching up faster than many of us think. (Applause)

MR. BWANIKA BBAALE: I am grateful for that information, Mr. Chairman, but I am saying that there are some exceptions.  Even here, we have got women who stood with men and won the elections.  But I am saying there are certain situations where you find it very difficult to get somebody coming. Mr. Chairman, I would also like to say that the Bill -(Laughter.)

MRS. BIRABWA KIWANUKA: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. May I take this opportunity to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that that is the very reason why we want to create this body so that we can bring these women who do not know how to conduct meetings and this is the forum we are going to go through to teach them. Thank you very much.

MR. BWANKIKA BBAALE: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move to the question of who is to be on the Council.  The Bill only gives opportunity to two women to be selected. My concern is which criteria is going to be used to choose a woman from an NGO. We have got YWCA, Women Lawyers (FIDA), ACFODE, and Moslem Women.  What method is going to be used to get these two women to come on the Council? Why do they not leave these women to go and also contest like any other woman to come on the Council? Why should they come through NGOs?  The Minister, I think should -(inaudible)- that provision, and allow each woman to stand on her own merit and come to the Council. I would also like to see that the Minister also has some powers to nominate somebody to come on the Council to represent her or the government’s interest.   Because the set up now does not show how government is going to influence and to advise the activities of the Council.  I think the Minister should have some powers somewhere where she can send one or two people to the Council. And secondly, the election direction there could be some very useful women who may be left out through the elections and who may be useful to the Council. I think the Minister should be given some powers to nominate some people to come to the Council.

Mr. Chairman, I also get a problem with the definition of a woman which includes a girl. I do not know the definition. So, I fail to understand from which age is this girl going to be regarded as a woman? I think the Minister should come out clearly to define at what age a girl should really be participating in these elections.  Either from 12 or from 16, because I cannot imagine somebody can - if there is an election, somebody can gather girls of about 2/5 years to come and elect, and participate the elections.  Because nobody can be put in an office if she is under the age of 18. But a situation can arise where somebody can get a schoolgirl, get all the girls under 14, to elect him.

Mr. Chairman, as I said earlier on, I am not in support of this Bill. I think the Bill should be re-examined by the Minister.  Thank you very much.

MRS. NKURUKENDA (Women Representative, Masindi): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to add my voice to those who have spoken before me, and wish you a happy New Year.  

Mr. Chairman, I rise strongly to support the Bill. The objective of this Bill, is to establish a National Women Council responsible for organising the women of Uganda in a unified body and to engage the women in activities that are of benefit to them and the nation at large.  Now, how do we reach these women? An hon. Member yesterday said, he had 600,000 plus women in his constituency and they were all well mobilised.  While I agree with that, I would like them maybe, to be more mobilised in order to play their role especially in the development of this nation fully.  How do we reach the rural woman? I have heard hon. Members opposing this Bill, but none of them suggested a way of reaching these women.  In fact, we should congratulate the hon. Minister of Women in Development for suggesting this, for bringing up this Bill.  Because even the hon. Members in this House, sometimes have come to us saying that the women have failed to mobilise their fellow women, how do we go about this, that and the other? And we have to find an answer to give them.  And this is one of the answers, a major answer.

When we are talking about the women in the towns or in the city for that matter, these women, we, as NRC Women Representatives know they are very difficult to mobilise.  What I am saying is, you may find they have their own groups. Groups like, we are quoting the Mothers’ Union, that is a sectarian group as far as I am concerned. Because it only caters for married women and does not even extend services to unmarried people. Unmarried women for that matter - Moslem women, we are not all Moslems and we are not part of that, we cannot, for instance, enter or register as Moslem women in those societies or associations.  The Catholic Act; I is for Catholics, and so on and so forth.  

So, I feel when you urge that we should use the National Council of Women which is an umbrella project, for instance, an umbrella organisation for these other associations, I feel there is some sectarianism somewhere, but this particular Bill intends to unify all the women of all colours, of all creed, of all tribes and so on.  So, I feel it is a necessary Bill and we should give it our support.  I also still urge about the village women. Most of the village women are illiterate and we all know that.  But they are the majority in Uganda, and they are the producers of this nation.  In fact, they form a pillar as far as economic development is concerned; social and cultural. But how do we put them together?  We have to find a way of bringing these women together, and this will be done through this Council, Sir. As I said, they are illiterate, they do not know how - some of them need to be educated maturely as they are - adult education. They need to be instructed on how to look after their husbands and their babies and, in fact, what we are doing is facilitating the ladies or the women of this nation to care for Uganda generally. 

Here, I would like to point out that even as we stand here, most of our hon. Colleagues would like an enlightened woman rather than an illiterate one because even research has showed it.  The homes of educated or enlightened women are much better than those who have no or little education. One thing, I know, it even frightens our counterparts here because you can even feel that - I feel that men and women have to work together.  Even in the home a man and a woman have to work together.  And this will apply to the nation.  I would like to allay the fears of the hon. Gentlemen here and others maybe outside, that really our aim is to improve the living standards. The lives of the women who for centuries have really been left behind and the speed you are commenting about, there is nothing wrong with that.  You know when you are left behind, you try to catch up as quickly as possible so that you are in line and you are able to fulfil your role.  So, do not be afraid of the speed. It is only that women by nature, maybe, are very quick at learning and adopting themselves. You can imagine one leaving her own home to go and get married in a different home where she has never been, where she was never brought up, and yet they catch up very quickly and fit in properly.  So, as I say, I am asking that you should not be afraid but you should help us actually to organise ourselves and try to serve you better and serve the world better. 

As regards the fears expressed, on the financial aspect of this Council, first of all, one of the hon. Members has pointed out that women run for positions of secretary for finance.  We are very good at keeping money and we are very good at getting it.  So, you do not have to be worried.  The only thing you have to do here is to try and improve our Vote for the Ministry of Women in Development so that we are facilitated to do the work properly.

Mr. Chairman, again, I would like before I finish, to appeal to the hon. Members to give this Bill support because I know it is of benefit to everyone, and you should loose to gain.  So, for the time being, maybe, you have not seen the fruits of what the women can do.  Giver it a try like hon. Major Elly Tumwine has suggested, and you will see the result.  

In conclusion, I would like to salute all the women of Uganda for the role they have played in the development of this country despite the fact that they have been deprived a chance for quite a long time.  And I want to assure you that the potential is great if fully exploited.  So, Mr. Chairman, once again I appeal to the hon. Members to support this Bill although they are hurt because they are the beneficiaries.  I beg to support it, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA (Women Representative, Rakai): Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill.  I wish also to take this opportunity, to thank the hon. Members who have continuously supported the women course, both outside and inside this House.  I wish also to thank the hon. Member of Women in Development for ably hatching the eggs I laid when I was still in that Chair (Laughter and Applause.) Because I left this Bill in its early stages of formation, and I am happy that at last, it has reached this House (Applause.) And I hope it is going to get all the support.  

Allow me, yesterday hon. Mukwaya elaborated on the list of women who have tried hard, really, to work for this country and show the ability of really being women and what they can do.  And I want to add on that list hon. Betty Bigombe who has really done a commendable job in the North for making peace in that area.  Women are peacemakers and Betty Bigombe is really an outstanding example, so I want her on that list as well.

Turning to the Bill, this Bill is very, very important not only to the women of this country but to all the people of Uganda.  I have noticed one thing, there have been so many queries ‘whys?’ ever since NRM came into power.  Why create a Ministry for Women? Why bring the women in the RC system? Why the women everywhere? Why special consideration for women to Makerere admission and so on and so forth? Now one thing, probably some of us have not yet understood is why the NRM Government came into power; to rectify what went wrong; to put right all the mistakes which were made by the past regimes.  And one of the outstanding mistakes which were made, were to leave the women behind.  So, that is why we are trying to find a mechanism whereby women can form a strong body to push their problems and be able to be supported by you, our honorable men because we cannot move alone.  So, correct that error which was made in the past, of leaving the majority of the population of Uganda backward, the women, and yet we are the pillars of this country.  How can a country stand on pillars, which are weak?  (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of this House to correct her history.  None of the past regimes, including UPC and the DP, were against women; were these people here? Hon. Lubega was here and others.  So, it was a gradual and growing slow movement.

MRS. KALEMA: Point of information.  I would like to inform hon. Obwangor who has given information that in actual fact hon. Byekwaso was correct.  During the first elections, UPC and DP never brought any woman into Parliament.  Florence Lubega and Sugra Vistram came to Parliament through the special elections of Buganda and not through UPC or DP.

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA: I wish to thank the hon. Members for that educative information. So, if UPC was supporting women, it was very slow, so it was unfortunate some of us never noticed it.  It was very slow.  So, the whys of asking why the women, it is the NRM’s recognition of the women’s contribution to this country.  Why have a pillar which is so weak supporting the whole country and yet it has no strength?  So, it is strength that the NRM Government is trying to give to the women so that they continue supporting the country.  We are the majority and you know that, you know it very well.  How can you push the majority to the background? (Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to take this opportunity to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the gender issues is not only a Ugandan affair. Today in Switzerland women do not vote; in Britain they started voting in 1926; and in Saudi Arabia they are not even allowed to drive cars. So, the reason why I brought this point out was because, while some of us have a very strong support of trying to improve this question which is being held against men, is that it is not strictly true to say that all men have been against women. In fact, I would like to inform the hon. Member that one of the problems that I see coming out is this hammering of the point that the women are the majority, therefore - and this is causing the suspense, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA: Thank you very much for that information. But surely, it is a fact that the women are the majority, I am not just cooking it and at the same time I did not mention that all the men in this House are against women. In fact the majority are our supporters; you are our allies and we are very proud of it.  That is why I started by thanking you for the continuous support you have given to the women.  So, those who feel guilty do not need supporters. (Laughter) 

To continue the story, Mr. Chairman, on this note, I wish to commend the NRM Government for having realised this mistake which was maybe in the past, to try to find a way of bringing women together so that we form a strong body which will give us a foundation of continuing to support our country.  Then people continue saying why women in RCs - now suppose this position was not given, I do not think there would be any woman in this Council of the nine people.  So, it was given to us so that the women start coming in the stream of joining politics. Women have been so ignorant of what has been going on. All we have known in the past is that politics is a dirty game and women usually do not like to involve themselves in things which are dirty.  So, we kept away; it is the NRM Government, through mobilisation and education, that women are coming in to learn that politics is in fact not a dirty game but it depends on who is in the Chair, who the Leader is and all of us in fact are politicians.  We should mobilise the society so that we have a healthy society.  Then probably to talk about - some people have talked about the National Council of Women and then the Ministry of Women in Development.  The National Council of Women was formed after the declaration of UN in 1975. Am I correct hon. Members? Yes; when the UN declared the Women’s Decade after - of course women from different countries or member countries had expressed the need for women governments to pay attention to the women - were given this allowance and -(Interruption)

MRS. V. SEBAGEREKA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that her point was correct that from that United Nations Decree, countries were asked to have IDA and National Women’s Organisations or a Ministry of Women in Development or a Women’s Bureau and at that time, Uganda opted for National Council of Women; that the Decree which came to put the National Council of Women in place was an error. It was a speaking error by the then Head of State who said that he had denounced all the Non-Governmental Organisations except the National Council of Women.  

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the information. The National Council of Women; in fact UN, asked all member countries or rather forced them to start a mechanism whereby women’s activities will be co-ordinated.  So, Uganda chose to form the National Council of Women and, I hope, Mr. Chairman, you will give me some extra time.  I have been too much interrupted. (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Lady that what she is saying, that United Nations urged member countries to encourage the formation of Women’s Councils was almost long after Angy Grooks of Liberia had been President of UN General Assembly.

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA: Having taken the interest of women, you really followed very well.  Thank you very much.   So to add onto that, the National Council of Women was created.  This was to be the umbrella body for all women Non-Governmental Organisations. But these women’s organisations were rather sectarian.  They only catered for organisations which were in small groups.  Not everybody was encompassed in these organisations.  So, once you were not a member to these organisations, you were not in this umbrella.  So, the National Council of Women became the umbrella for all women’s organisations.  And once a woman did not belong to any of these organisations, she was automatically left out.  So it was a bit sectarian and on top of that, it lacked the political backing.  It is only during this time that the National Council of Women could talk politics, could talk high and talk about projects in various places. In the past, it was more or less - the name was there alright but rather dormant and what was bad about the Council, was that it was composed of the elite; the women who were educated; the women of the rich or the wives of Ministers and top government officials.  Where were the grassroots women? And it became more or less a political body. (Interruptions)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Have you concluded?

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA: Well, I have not because I have not touched the - I wanted to give the background.

THE CHAIRMAN: Have you concluded?

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA: I have not concluded, Sir.  So this body was sectarian; a body of the rich, the wives of Ministers and top government officials and the poor women at the grassroots time - I am not saying the present National Council of Women. I am not changing my statement.  It was a body of the rich, the educated, the wives of Ministers -(Interruptions)- though, I am not saying that the story is the same.  It has changed.

MRS. MASABA WAFAANA: Point of order. Is it in order that the women should not recognise the efforts of the elder women who have been fighting for women’s rights?  Up to date, they continue fighting because -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: It is quite in order.  Proceed please.

MRS. BYEKWASO LUBEGA:  With due respect, I recognise all the effort made by the older women to keep the National Council of Women moving, otherwise it would be dead. But they continue persisting.  I am not quarrelling about that.  So, the National Council of Women was for the organised Women’s Organisations.  Once a woman never joined any organisation, she was automatically out of the umbrella. Then again, we were in NRM so that many women were left out. But then the Ministry of Women was created and the Ministry is to make policies because many people have been asking in the villages.  What is the Ministry doing? Some people have written papers, we do not know what some Ministries are doing. Now the Ministry has come up with the Bill; with a Council which we want your endorsement today or tomorrow.  

So, one of the areas which the Ministry is trying to put right is by creating this Council so that every woman, right at the grassroots, is involved and in some areas like my district, we already have these councils at the village level; because when I was in the chair, I remember mentioning something about the councils and the women went ahead and started organising them.  We have these village councils; we have a women’s desks in Masaka.  I do not know; probably they are just waiting for this noble blessing from this House when the Bill is passed. So the Ministry is there to make policies, one of which is to make this Women Council to forge ahead for women’s development and to raise the status of women and this is exactly what it is.  So, there is a difference between the National Council of Women and the Ministry of Women in Development because some people were saying that how about strengthening the National Council of Women? The National Council of Women is for Government Organisations yet it does not bring in well a woman.

Some hon. Members have complained about, for example, about what hon. Gwaivu said, that women in his Constituency are well organised, but what they lack is literacy, leadership and managerial skills.  Now when we form these councils at the grassroots these are the areas we are going to touch.  We are going to learn who is who in this council.  How many women are illiterate, how many women are educated? We are going to take stock on how we want to raise the status of the woman right from the grassroots.  So if your women are well organised then the work there is going to be very easy.  We shall know very quickly how to take our data from there.  So you do not have to worry about the Council. 

And now probably to wind up, though I have been so much distracted.  There is no way we can move as a ministry without the support of the people - of you, our men, the men in this country.  Some people are saying - some men get scared when they see women getting more organised and consolidating in their status. This means, we are going to improve the status of the country as I have already mentioned.  We are the pillar, the pillar must be strong.  This idea of saying these women are going to be too much for us as some of you have translated it, is out.  We have our respect for you as husbands and no woman will ever turn into a man physiologically; it cannot be, and physically we agree you are stronger.  So, all we need now is your support so that this Council Bill is passed. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the support. 

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE (Mrs. Okwir): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill. This Bill is a very good one, is so good that some of the Members are excited to the extent of opposing it.  It is very unfortunate. The women of Uganda do not oppose constructive opposition but the women of Uganda do not like cheap negative opposition. What this Bill is requesting for is a simple thing from the House and that is full support, Mr. Chairman.  Now, why can’t the Members give this Bill their full support before declaring it impotent? You let it go through and then see the exercise; how the women of Uganda are going to manage it before you say it is not going to work, it is not going to do this and that and so on.

The women of Uganda are so orderly; they like doing things in the orderly way.  They like to do the right things at the right time and right place that is why we are grateful to the Minister of Women in Development for bringing this Bill here to seek for the legal aspect so that the women of Uganda do things in the legal way.  Mr. Chairman, from yesterday’s talks, it seems as if some Members here have some funny fears somewhere, which we as individuals do not understand.  That fear -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that as adults in politics, there is no fear in this hon. House, but we debate deliberately for Uganda, as our role.

MRS. OKWIR: Thank you very much for that information, Mr. Chairman, but then if - I would like to say that - if the Bill is a good Bill, there should not be a lot of negative attitude towards it. It should be straightforward with full support for it. Otherwise, it is good for the Members always to go in for a straightforward point. 

We are here to support the Bill because we feel that the gap in gender issues is becoming wider and as women of Uganda, we feel that this gap needs to be closed. The women of Uganda have been sensitised, and we feel that we cannot continue suffering in silence any more. Whether somebody likes it or not, the talk must be heard and should continue.  

So, I would like to call upon the Members here to consider this Bill seriously and give it full support.  I know that it has been difficult somehow in the past when we think in terms of the way the women have been left behind, it is unfortunate that a lot of factors have contributed to these.  We are trying to see how we can improve this situation. Up to now we are still pressed by our cultures and it is true we cannot change all these things in a day. It is unfortunate that a lot of factors have contributed to these. We are trying to see how we can improve the situation. We have to go step by step.  Some of these steps may be lose steps and may cause us to fall. It is alright we are prepared to fall a million times as long as in the end we shall stand firmly. I would like to say that the women have always tolerated difficult situations; some situations are, actually, very difficult in a cultural way.  For example, Mr. Chairman, one of the cultural situations where, I think, women have been quite tolerant is a situation where women accept difference until difference can be difference no more; and that is women in our cultures accept to have one man as their husband; that is a very difficult situation. (Laughter)

If you compare that situation to this one which we would like to have in the name of “National Women’s Council,” surely this one we are more likely to manage it easily than this other one we have always managed; and in any case, if we can afford to have that man as our husband and in a number of cases as you might have known from your areas, you find that you could have two, three, four women having that one man as their husband, it goes a long way into having these women tolerating one another and tolerating that husband as well towards the development of the family. (Laughter) 

So, it is actually very important that we have this Bill go through. It is going to solve - help us solve a lot of problems that we have in the country. Quite a number of these problems which are national, which have been mentioned by previous speakers such as, “National Unity;” these examples which I have given actually, has been helping the women a lot towards National Unity. So, this Bill is just consolidating what we have always been doing, giving these examples as an example towards a struggle towards national unity, which was already mentioned by the previous speaker.  Actually, the women of Uganda take National Unity very seriously. It is a pity my Colleague hon. Butele is not here. He would actually help me to identify which number it is on the ten point programme. I think it is about number three.  So this Bill is very important and it is a vital Bill for the women of Uganda. So, we need the hon. Members’ full support for the rest of the other problems you have raised. It will be handled administratively.  So, I do not see why it should actually keep you away from giving us this support and I promised on behalf of the women that should you see something funny, please, do not hesitate to call on the Minister of Women in Development and draw her attention to some of these problems you have raised; some of the problems you have raised are genuine but they should not actually cause you to sit aloof and continue opposing the Bill. 

For your information, Mr. Chairman, and information of the House, for quite sometime, there has been some pressure towards halting or even reverting the women’s struggle for progress.  It is very frustrating. For now you can even imagine that what you have been saying, especially if it is on the negative side, is already raising the blood pressure for all of us because all this time we imagined that the Bill had been such a simple one; you understand it and it is passed. But what you are saying - what some of you are saying is raising hair on our heads! It is making us imagine that some of you are not actually serious! It is making me wonder whether we owe some of you anything -(Laughter.)  

I think the men and women of Uganda need to make an ally in the struggle towards the development of our country. Without that kind of ally it is going to be very difficult for us to sit and do things together.  What I mean is, iwe feel uncomfortable; we are saying, let us strike a deal; if you do not co-operate; we shall also revenge elsewhere -(Laughter.) Mr. Chairman, I am not threatening but I am very serious about it -(Interruption)- 

AN HON. MEMBER: Is it in order Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Deputy Minister of Social Affairs and Labour, to threaten mankind in this Bill, and impute certain improper motives about what one gender can do to another? (Laughter)  

THE CHAIRMAN: Not in order, please. Proceed hon. Member.

MRS. OKWIR:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for protecting me. In fact that is the kind of attitude I was talking about. Please, the hon. Member who has just sat down, take it easy just co-operate.  In the paper somewhere on election of representation, that one is okay. I do not see any quarrel there. You give this opportunity. The rest will be handled administratively.  And for finances - okay, the Ministry has not been having so much money but the Ministry has always managed.  In any case, what money could be there? This Ministry which has been fully-fledged is only one and five months - one year and five months old compared to other ministries which have been there for a long time.  I am saying this because originally at the beginning, it was a women’s desk in the NRM Secretariat. Then it was promoted to a department in the President’s Office. In July 1991, it was made a fully-fledged Ministry. So the Ministry is only one year and five months old.  

All this time, right from the time when it was a desk, it has been managing with very little money.  So, it will continue managing like that. But on the whole, whether a department, a desk or a ministry, most of the work which the Ministry has been doing, was mostly on voluntary basis. I would, therefore, like to call upon the women of Uganda that, should this Bill go through, which I have confidence that it will, please come in and volunteer your time and energy to do the work of the organisation.  We do not have money - I do not think the non-governmental organisations, leave alone World Bank, will give the organisation money. But I think the women have been offering so much and nobody has ever put value to it. May be this time something will be done towards that end.  We are always willing to do more than we can afford.  We are even prepared to die in the name of “Saving the Birth of our Men,” in the name of culture.  We have never quarrelled but this time we need this Bill, we shall on a voluntary basis try to make it succeed. 

The other issue has been raised. I would not like to go too far into it. But this Bill again will help us to see how the rights of women, the rights of children and the rights of men can all be brought together and harmonised; and it will also go a long way in making a great tribe in the ream of Public Relations. In the composition or the structure of these organisations, there is nothing wrong with it; everything else is okay. In fact, I would not like to go further because I may actually litter something, which may not be very comfortable. But we are prepared to do a lot to develop our country. We are even prepared to control our language if necessary. What we want is action not reaction, we shall control - this organisation will control the destiny and will actually motivate and influence a lot of other women of all categories, and it will also give them opportunity to achieve a lot.  The women of Uganda through this organisation will face a lot of challenge, but they are ready for it.

With that brief remark, I would like to call upon the Members here to please support this Bill. The rest of the issues will be handled administratively, and for that matter, there should not be any cause for alarm, I beg to support.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU (Mukono County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  Mr. Chairman, I am a greater supporter of the women and my district - Mukono District supports the women and my county, especially, Mukono County, which is the biggest supporter of women among counties for some good reasons.  In my county, there is a sub-county which is chaired by a woman and 50 per cent of the chairmen at RC 2 level are women; and I have a village which is composed of six women at the RC level, of which chairman, vice-chairman and so many others are women.  Some of the Members -(Interjections)- some Members who think that women are not capable of chairing some of these meetings are not really very serious. I am sure everyone in this House is going to support this Bill except two people only yes, who are they?  That is someone who was not born by a woman will not support the Bill -(Laughter.) Yes, that is the person. The second one, the second person, Mr, Chairman, is that man who has never married a woman he does not know -(Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Mr. Chairman, though I support the Bill I have somewhere and at a later hour, I intend to put in an Amendment; for example Clause 2, the definition of women; the Bill says it should include girls. I really do not like this to be part of the Bill because the girls are catered for in the Youth Bill, and in this Bill, a woman should mean any female who has attained the age of 18 because it is already defined in the Clause 8 sub-section (4) of the same Bill. So these two words “including girls” should not be part of the Bill. 

I have another problem on Clause 5 (a) which says, “the Council shall consist of (a) one representative from each district directed by District Women’s Council.” It should be two women to be represented from a District Council to the National Council, because we have very few districts and, okay, 39 that would make a number of 78. Part (b) and (c) that is okay, but the reason why I want these ladies to be two is that, the secretary for women at RC 5 should be among the two women to come to the National Women’s Council, so that the District Women’s Council should have some political support, especially, at a time when this government is moving towards decentralisation, when a women’s council at a district level elects someone who is not on the RC 5 executive. I find it difficult for the implementation of activities in the district to be by a woman.  The secretary for women is part of the delegation. When they come back to their district, it can be quite easy; afterall the districts will be in charge of all the funds. so the moment she is out, the other lady at the national level can find it quite difficult.  

My other problem is the secretary for women, that is Clause 8 on Page 6; there is established in respect of each women’s council, a women’s committee which shall consist of the following: ‘The Secretary for Women of the corresponding Resistance Council which shall be the chairperson’.  I feel this should not be the case; the secretary for women in a corresponding Resistance Council in a particular district. Instead, the women should elect their chairperson because it would become a problem once this lady, the secretary for women at the district level, fails to perform well and is elected by another body such as the RC.  It will be difficult for the women to vote her out, and if at all they came out with a vote of no confidence, I do not think it would be binding in the Resistance Council system because the Resistance Council system is quite different from the Women’s Council.  Therefore, the women should elect their woman chairperson who should be responsible to the Council. 

And then I have another problem there that divided - okay section (a) says; “the secretary for women of the corresponding Resistance Council who shall be the chairperson - woman, representative of the county to the district RC shall be the chairperson of the county women’s committee.” Now, we have county resistance committees. I do not see why a woman representative at the district from a county level, chairs a county women’s committee, yet we have a secretary for women at RC 4. She would have been denied her chance and responsibility.  There will be a power struggle. Therefore, that portion I suggest is put in another Amendment so that we should delete it.  Then the Council should elect their vice-chairperson. But when it comes to secretary to the committee, the secretary for women in the corresponding RC level should automatically become the secretary of the Council or the secretary of the Committee. 

The other bits I have no problem with, and according to the Bill, we have already defined a woman in Clause 8 sub-section (4) and it reads: “a person shall not be eligible to be elected a member of a Woman’s Committee unless she has attained the age of 18.” Mr. Chairman, with those few observations, I fully support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

MR. KIGYAGI: (cont’d.) We need, therefore, a Resolution to change the system. To change the system so that, we can have a situation where the majority of the people participate in the development of the nation.  As we talk, Mr. Chairman, the output of the women in the system is not part of the GDP and yet we all know that it is productive.  We also know that it is an addition on farming.  I do appreciate that it might have been necessary to form a new council for women.  Nevertheless, I also appreciate that the old one could probably have been changed and modified. I do not appreciate the idea of tying this new Council in the RC system because I think it should be a separate organisation, well organised in its own way, without necessarily tying it in the RC system.  Why, because in the election of secretaries for women, the majority of the electors in most cases, if you talked about it, the hon. Members who are here, were elected mainly by men. So why should we have to say that those who were elected by men must necessarily lead the women? Why is it that we cannot conceive and say that any other person can be elected to be a chairman or a chairperson or chair-lady of the Women’s Council at any level without necessarily first being elected as RC Secretary?  I think the Minister concerned should really look into this and change it so that any other person can come up and lead this organisation.  There is no guarantee that when somebody has been elected now, he should necessarily always be the leader.  Tomorrow there may be a better one, and one who is politically alert, not necessarily administratively alert, and yet what we are looking at is the administration of women at that level, not the political organisation mechanism.  

What is not quite clear to me in this Bill is whether we are trying to set up a parastatal or a department or a Non-Governmental Organisation.  In some sections we are painting it as if it is a Non-Governmental Organisation, and in others we are seeing it as if it is a department and in others, as if it is a parastatal.  Why? It has the capacity to sue and be sued in its own right and that pre-supposes that it is an entity of its own. But at the same time, we are saying that the Minister shall appoint the Secretary and she will be the accounting officer at the same time because in Section 17, it is stated that no expenditure can be done without the Minister. 

I think we should be very clear and make this organisation a separate entity; completely separate from the control and directives of the Minister so that it can do things without necessarily being controlled by the Minister, but the Minister can oversee it without necessarily controlling it, and I would also want to see a situation where the Minister does not appoint the Secretary, but is appointed by the National Council - the National Executive, and that means, we have got to make the top body very strong. But the one we have now in the Bill, which gives us the Chairman, the Secretary General and the Treasurer, is a bit fluid in Section 8.  Fluid in the sense that they seem to be there without powers, without authority and without the actual strength to direct the organisation.  For instance, you have the Secretariat headed by the Secretary but at the same time you have got the Secretary General.  Now, what does the Secretary General do that cannot be done by the Secretary who is at the Secretariat?  Because by nature of this kind of organisation, the secretary should be the secretary of the Board and if say the Board is actually this organisation which is the Chairman and the Treasurer, you do not need a Treasurer at this level because you will have a Chief Accountant then the Treasurer will not do any job because he will not always be around. They are like a Board of Governors who come actually for meetings and, therefore, must have permanent staff, but do not do the administrative work, and actually perform and always release a policy.  

So, the Minister should give a guideline of what is to be done by this Body which he is the Chairman of, and these other committee members give the policy guidelines and the secretariat performs the day to day operations.

We need also to have an executive in this Bill. Which actually creates a system that changes the system because what we are talking about is that we should bring the women together, sensitise them, to bring their issues into economic power.  But all this cannot be done unless the men are sensitised. In fact, I would have wanted to see one of the objectives to be to create a situation where men and women come together and understand their problems and sensitise each other to see why things should move the other way, because unless you have got a section which sensitises the men, I can assure you the men in the villages are not going to allow to keep going for these meetings -(Interjection)- because it would look like you are creating a rebellion that the hon. Lady was talking about, and I do not think that cultures and systems are changed overnight.  They take time. They need to be sensitised and we need to have a situation where everybody knows what is going on and I would want to see one of the objectives being a situation where men and women come together and actually understand the cultural problems that create and inhibit development and, therefore, make these changes in order for us to move together. Otherwise, we shall have a situation where there is a tug of war and I do not want to say that the men will win, but most likely they may.

So, I would want to see the objectives increased to encompass more people, to encompass all other elements in society, to be able to see how things can change so that society can meet together because development cannot be done by one section of society. Development has got to be done by all of us, and the only way to do it is for the women to be involved in development.  Nevertheless, I have got one worry, we may and I think probably we are going to pass this bill, but the massive work involved, how is it going to be financed? Are we creating another elephant that we shall put across and then keep it in Kampala? Because we need lots of money to be able even to sensitise the women on how to do the election, and even how to elect their own leaders in the villages will need a lot of work, and I would have wanted to see more of the relationship between this Council and the Non-Governmental Organisations.  I see you are only including two representatives of Non-Governmental Organisations. But I think this will end up by being a pivot in the development of this Council, rather than a subsidiary because if you do not include those people that can fund the organisation, I see that as a problem.  

Mr. Chairman, I wish to support this Bill but I think there are some sections which need to be changed in order for it to be comprehensive and developmental, and nationally implemented. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. BIKORWENDA (Women Representative, Bundibugyo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also stand up to support the Bill not because I am a woman and it is a woman’s Bill, but because of its objectives.

Mr. Chairman, it should be an unfair game -(Interruption)- after creating a system that brings all these Members to Parliament, without thinking of the legal system to re-arrange our sisters we left at the grassroots. Therefore, this is one way in which we think our sisters can be sensitised and then brought to life so as to enhance development.  To the hon. Members present in this House, I wish to inform them through you, Mr. Chairman, that this was not a one man’s act to produce this Bill in this House.  Throughout our life in this House, we have had a lot of seminars, meetings, and workshops with different organisations of women and men, and one of the strategies was how to set a system to reach the rural woman so that we tap her own experience at the grassroots, and then bring in a way of communication so that we know what is really happening and how that problem can be solved.  To mention a few of these workshops or seminars, they have been reported on the radio, you attend and then you cannot come out of a meeting or a seminar without a resolution and some booklets or reports, were produced entitled, “How to reach the rural woman.” This is one way in which we thought we could reach the rural woman.  Therefore, I request the hon. Members in this House to give support.  As one speaker put it that it is an experiment, we accept to have that experiment since we were also brought here as an experiment -(Interruption)- yes, there had never been a card on which women were elected in Uganda.  So this is the first time it is done.  So if we made a mess wouldn’t the one who created that system regret? So we have to organise, to keep in touch with the arrangement which was put there initially, so that a system is created legally and permanently that will never to be regretted.  

Now, some Members have shown fear over some interest with other NGOs. I have already mentioned above that in these workshops we were meeting with different organisations of women and men. So we agreed -(Interjection.)

MAJOR GEN. TUMWINE: On a point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and other hon. Ladies in this House that one of the main reasons why they enjoy the confidence and respect of all the people of Uganda is because they were elected by all the people.  All society voted a woman leader to be a representative here. The problem with this is that it is going to be done by half of the society.

MRS. BIKORWENDA: I thank the hon. Member for that information, but I know the Mover will have something to explain on that.  So, I am urging the hon. Members not to have any fears as to how we shall operate with the other NGOs and on this note I thank all the other NGOs that have tried in all spheres for whatever they have done towards the women’s cause, whether they have gone just a small circumference or they went very deep. I thank them all except those people who had the facilities to go down to the grassroots and they failed to utilise those facilities. But these NGOs have been trying very hard and sometimes we magnify what they get, especially from donor countries, that they get a lot and, therefore, have failed to reach where they should have reached, but we really do not know what constraints these people have and I really thank every NGO that has been trying all the time to reach the women and assist them.  

Now, as we were meeting in these foras, the women representatives of these RCs we were meeting at a lower level were telling us that when they are meeting in their councils and present the women’s problems on the agenda, women’s items are placed almost last on the agenda and, therefore, get little consideration at the end of the day, and some of them really do not know how to present their items on those programmes.  Therefore, they need to be educated and we thought of a system of educating these people so that they utilise the chances that are before them in the RC system.

I am also having my attention on the Ministry of Women’s vote.  Some people are saying a whole Ministry was created for Women in Development.  When it comes here during the budget day, you can really imagine how much the Ministry of Women in Development is given.  It is so wide and more departments continue to be added to it, therefore, there would be something special, a system specially created just to look into the affairs of the women.  We have now got the youth - it is not written in bracket that the “women and youth”.  It is all the youth of Uganda. Then how does the Minister handle this problem? So that system should not worry anybody.  I know in the long run you will like it and appreciate it.

I also wish to add my unhappiness over the chairmanship of the county representative on the RC 5 chairing the women’s council at RC 4. If in the other districts they were not given the elections to voluntarily accept to go to RC 4. Some districts had problems to elect officials on RC4 and I imagine this is a redundant stage where the RC 4 feels that - well, they do not know what to do there.  So, when we jump again, the secretary for women’s affairs on the RC 4 - well, I am not happy about it. instead she should utilise her time so that she becomes a bit busy with the Women’s Council at that stage.

Now, when we create this Council, we should give some powers to the Minister because she is the one who knows who can do what -(Interruption)- without biases -(Interjection)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Now that we are advantaged, the hon. Doctor chairing who happens also to be a lady or a woman, there may be a situation where you have a man who does not hold the same interest and it may be more dangerous to the women’s cause.  So, I think trying it to the present situation might not be conducive.  I would rather not have the Minister but leave it to the women to see who does what.

MRS. BIKORWENDA: I thank the hon. Member for that information but it is not indicated that she will sit alone and decide upon someone, but it is indicated that she does it in consultation with the Council.  So with those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Mover to wind up.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr.S. Kazibwe): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand up to really thank all Members who contributed in support and even against the Bill. We are all students at all stages in our lives.  If this Bill had not come here I do not envisage any time during the year when I would have had the opportunity for two consecutive afternoons to get advice from the hon. Members. The fears that have been raised by the Members are real.  We have been experiencing them and indeed through that experience we have realised that we need advice in the Ministry, the NGOs and also the Secretariat, which advice will help the hon. Members to best guide the women in our constituencies and also integrate them in the plan that we are making right from the villages.

While we stand here, I would like to also acknowledge the fact that some Members have noted that the issue of Women in Development is not an issue which is pertinent to Uganda alone.  All over the world the capacity for women to contribute to the development of their nation has been recognised. Research has shown that investment in the education of women and girls may well be the highest return investment available in the developing world.  A lot of money has been borrowed, especially by the developing countries, but why do we see no dividends on this investment.  It is because half of the population which is supposed to put these resources to the best use, as I said in my opening remarks, have been pulled down by customs all over the place. They have been denied equal opportunity to education. The culture keeps them where the manager of society continues saying they should be, and to add insult to injury, it is the women who are custodians of these cultures.  

So, what do we do to make our culture adaptable; to adapt it to the modern methods of management so that we can best utilise our resources? It has been shown that when a woman is educated you get better wages for the family, you get an increase in social benefits, and there is a decrease in child mortality. You all know the reasons why we continue having more and more children; it is because we are not sure of whether these children will survive and we are talking about having a population which is not much in resonance with our resources.  We also record a decrease in fertility rate to really have these women to have higher education, and to better participate in the development of our country. 

Research has also shown in countries that are busting with population that if you get a thousand girls and you give them just one more extra year of education, you will prevent forty children dying, you will prevent three hundred unnecessary births because these births are by children from children and you will prevent two women dying unnecessarily.  We are talking about environment; about sustainable development. It has been shown that since women are the closest to the natural resources we are harnessing to improve on our economy, if these women are educated in the ways one acquires AIDS, statistics has shown, especially in the urban areas where AIDS is prevalent, that the prevalence or the number of new cases that are reported year after year, decrease with the education of women.  

So, when given the portfolio to make sure that women participate effectively, one asks, what do I do to reach every woman in this country? What do I do to get this knowledge to them? What do I do to get these women out of a viscous circle of neglect to a viscous circle of prosperity?  Mr. Chairman, we are talking everyday, not here in Uganda only, but the waive of political freedom is enveloping us every night. We are on the BBC and on so many radios. But the right to vote is of less value to someone who is starving and one who is illiterate. What value will you attach to your votes if they are given by somebody who actually does not know whether you will perform or whether you will not performer?  Somebody who does not know the criteria of choosing a good leader; somebody whom after sitting here in Parliament, you have to go back there and expound on the policies of government; to talk about double production. But this woman who has never gone through any system of schooling, whether through this Women’s Council or through secular education, will sit there and listen.  Or as is currently the case, she will sit at home and the husband will come and demand his meal and that will be the end of the day. Then we shall continue having increased losses when we harvest.  We shall continue to have abundance but malnutrition in our midst.  

I would like to sound a motherly warning that political democracy will always be fragile until the basic economic rights of every individual in the society are addressed.

While I talk about political freedom, I would like Members to reflect on what the barometer of political freedom is. There is personal security.  What security do your daughters have to undergo, through education, so that at the end of the day they will be responsible citizens? Will the law really be neglecting the rights of every individual and only thinking that it is the ‘mightest’, those who know, who should be protected?  We are living in an era of survival for the fittest; like in the jungle where anybody can be ambushed and raped and nothing is done.  What do we do to educate these women so that they have personal security; the security of owning property, so that they can stand up as upright citizens?  We should give them the chance to be educated; on which option to take. 

Without freedom of expression, how can you talk of political freedom? How many women in this country have freedom of expression? They are prisoners within their own compounds. I talk this because I have bothered to visit three quarters of this country and I believe hon. Members will bear me out even within the meagre resources in the Ministry, I have bothered to do the research and to physically go and see what is on the ground.  We talk about freedom, how many women in this country have freedom of which man will marry them; and this also will apply to your daughters because the basic unit in any society is the family. But if two people go into a partnership with no security for half of the partners in this relationship, then we are doomed.  This insecurity will show seeds of disunity and when hon. Members talk about one of the objectives as being women are cautious, nationally cautious, the fact is, they do not know east from west.  Some of them if they sat on a bus and the conductor was not merciful, they could even pass the sign that takes them to their home and they would be taken wherever the bus will end.

I am talking about the majority of women in this country.  When you talk about democracy it defeats the whole purpose because when you talk of popular democracy, you are talking about what the needs of the majority of that society have.  The demography figures by the Minister of Planning showed us 51 per cent of the population in this country is women. But are they participating? Do they have equality of opportunity? 

I wish to submit that what we have in the Ministry is contrary to what you Members would wish to know; when you see women turning up in large numbers for rallies, that is not mobilisation, that is curiosity. They come to sing, they come to dance but what happens when they go back? Because effective mobilisation means that you have mobilised the person to the point of that person putting into effect whatever they have seen and heard.  They go and nurse their children and do whatever they have been doing over and over again.  Otherwise, I am sure that since hon. Gwaivu was appointed, the maternal mortality in his Constituency his information yesterday.

The Ministry is seeking your permission to put in place a structure which will help us to organise these women to make them more productive.  We are talking about - Members have the fear that the structure that we have in place is a parallel structure based on the RC system. I challenge hon. Members to look at the RC; the Statute which spells out that the supreme policy body on any village in the district is actually the committee that is set up by the RC. 

All of us are lucky today that - I am sure there is no hon. Member here with only one finger - because the little finger has its function. The ring finger has a function for those who are lucky to go and wed in the church or in the mosque. The middle finger also has its own function.  The pointing finger apart from pointing, it is the one which goes into your ear, and the thumb, without a thumb you have half of the hand. 
So, we are saying that in any society, and with enlightenment, you must look for every avenue where you will champion and mobilise whatever is available so that the hand, which is one of the most important parts of your body, can actually move; and this is what we are suggesting.  This is why we bring this Bill so that where the thumb has more power than the little finger, the little finger can be flexed to meet the thumb at par.

Members are worried that there will be power struggle.  We have had the RC for a long time, if you really go back to your areas and ask the executives in the RCs. They will tell you that we wish we had a structure to organise the women - and this is what they have been saying because wherever you go, they say, madam, you want us to do this, you want us to turn the welfare vote at the district level into real votes for women, youth and culture so that at the end of the day we can quantify what the vote on women has done, what the vote on youth has done and what the vote on culture has done.  But where has been no structure up to now to give mandate to this secretary for women at the district level to be able to plan and mobilise finances, even at the district level for programmes in the district.

Members were saying that women need to be given the opportunity to elect their own leader and at the same time they fear that we are going to have duplication; we are going to have parallel structures.  The making of the secretary for women, chairperson at every level, is meant to do exactly this. If the women and later the youth really want to choose somebody who is accountable, not only to them but the whole village, they must come and participate in the RC elections.  And this is one of the purposes of this Bill. This Provision is meant to ensure that if the village has given somebody a mandate, then each and every member on that village must give respect to that person. They must make sure that the deliberations within the village are actually adhered to, because the whole village actually chose the leadership in each and every sector.  Otherwise, I stand here in fear that if the secretary for women is not made the chairperson, then women issues will remain women issues.  The whole village will start telling this secretary for women who does not have an executive position in the women council and say, oh! what are the women doing? They are there again; they are struggling but through the secretary for women. 

The RC executive on the village has a mandate to look into these affairs; to look at the resolution and guide the Women Council accordingly.  Mr. Chairman, I am glad the hon. Members touched the issue of funds and they have also linked funding to NGO activities.  

Mr. Chairman, why is an NGO born? It is born out of the needs of the community.  If you have an NGO, which I am going to beg you to give me financing in line with the objectives why you were set up as an NGO, then you are a job-seeker and not answering the needs of the people. 

I want to correct the statistics of hon. Mulwanira who says there are ten women NGOs. They are 100, some with four women, others with two. But who are these people accountable to? Who elected them? So, when Members say that we put the mercy of the mobilisation of half of our society to the mercy of voluntary people who go to sleep and wake up and say I will form a Catholic Women’s Guild, what if tomorrow none of us is Catholic?  What if tomorrow, none us is Moslem?  What if tomorrow, we do not have any women engineers in this country? God forbid! I hope we shall have more. 

The reason why we have come up with this structure, is to allow the NGOs to organise themselves and in consultation with the Women Council, where the target is the same for both NGOs and us in the government. They will sit together and chart strategies on how best to work out programmes and projects for the benefit of the women; and I want to assure hon. Members that one of the reasons why people say NGOs are squabbling, is purely because they also lack education.  They do not know anything about leadership, or about management, because I will wake up one morning and say I am chairperson of SWAM and say this is the environment. When was I trained in environment? And I want to manage that organisation; to manage the funds. Yet I did nothing in economics. 

Through the women councils, all the women, whether in NGOs or whether alone on their own, will have opportunity to get training in leadership and in managerial skills. The funds for this council - definitely the government which earns money from the sweat of its people, must surely come up with money to make sure that it improves their well-being. So, if money is voted for other programmes, why should money not be voted for the women councils? And from there, we shall start moving.  After all, all of us are Ugandans and all of us are saying, give money to the women councils so that they can do better production through training; so that they can be better entrepreneurs, run their small scale industries and in future, large ones, so that the government can actually get taxes from that source. Any person who fears to start anything because they have no money, is a non-starter because the money is here if I quote the Vice-President. The capital is in your carpets which is the head.  So, once you have your carputs straight, you have a structure which identifies the need, then money will surely be sourced from somewhere.  

The pertinent issues Members have been raising are mainly on women squabbling. The financing, the representation and I think the other area where we need to effect an amendment, is in the tenure of office provided for in this schedule, because it is two years and we would like programmes right from the village to march at the same speed; be they women programmes, youth programmes, or programmes for the whole community, so that at the end of the day, we change the governance at each level when we can actually quantify in time as far as time is concerned and know whether these people should be returned into office or not.  Otherwise, there is provision now for the incumbent RCs to continue and when the first council is elected, it will lapse when we go into the RC elections.  So, if you have one year and you have not thought of what to do, surely, how many years will you have to do anything because everything must be done within a time limit?

People have talked about the terminology and whatever.  When we come here, especially when we lead people who are illiterate and ignorant, and when we talk, we tend to think that we are talking for everybody.  It is this Council which will give you an idea whether the women will not be called chairman and not hon. Babu in Kampala, or whether they want to be called chairperson. In other words, even us in the Ministry, we really have no way of counter-checking the information that is coming in through the NGOs.  Through the statistics they are compiling, we cannot be in every village to know whether actually they got there to do the research they are purporting to be doing; not only NGOs from here, but also NGOs all over from outside; and it is the same with pro-sectoral programmes.  Because when statistics are brought, women are benefiting from this and that, there is no way we can actually find out whether women in a particular village, in a particular district, benefited from that knowledge.

Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I would like again to thank you very much for the advise because as you heard, we are all here on an experimental basis.  If it was not for the NRM, I would not be standing here, I would have died having missed the opportunity to get advise and to know what our male counter-parts think about women issues.  In fact, you should also thank yourselves. Hon. Wanendeya passed me a message the other day – yesterday, and said, indeed this is going to be a wonderful year because in which country do you start the year by debating the Women Council Bill?  

So, I really think the fears of the hon. Members will be put to test, not only by the Ministry which is administering this Bill, but also by you the hon. Members who are on the ground, to make sure that as we go on administering the Bill, we put in checks and balances to ensure that the target beneficiaries of this Bill are actually benefiting. 

At a later stage, in the Committee Stage, I am going to move that the National Council of Women Decree of 1978 be repealed.  Members were saying that the reason why we are setting up this Council is because women who are in NGOs are actually - they are not happy.  NRM is a Government of consultation, it is a Government of seminars, it is a Government of workshops and since 1989, what has been going on is just this consultation.  In actual fact, Mr. Chairman, this structure has already been tested as I talk now. In many districts, the secretaries for women actually have women who are helping them to mobilise the women and run their affairs.  They need the mandate of you the Legislature in this country to institutionalise it so that they can move knowing that they are recognised; because there is nothing more than being recognised for being married or co-habiting (or married in our traditional sense) with a man of seventy; you hear them putting rings on their wives of eighty.  So, what we are doing is to we build a house to consolidate whatever has been started, and the women NGOs in a workshop in Jinja in 1991, were called by the Ministry of Women in Development in Crested Crane Hotel. There is already a report and they say they do not want to fall under a Government Decree any more because they have matured.  They want to go on their own. And as I talk now the NGO Board is in the process of registering their umbrella organisation.  So, when we talk about NGO representation, women NGOs will be under an umbrella organisation through which further training in institution building can take place, and through which the Ministry would be in a better position to liase, co-ordinate and monitor what is happening. Otherwise, even the election of the two representatives of NGOs will surely work, when we are talking about democracy coming from that umbrella organisation. It will not be the Minister to say, I know this NGO you go and sit on this.  So when the executives meet, because they will have come up through a democratic process of election, they will put that in place.

As I talk now, even this morning the Chairperson of the umbrella organisation for women NGOs was in my office with the Secretary General, and we are already chatting out programmes together to organise.  There are so many conferences that are coming to this country because of the support to the emancipation of women in this country, and in order to achieve that; to also give our nation an image that is befitting an image a country that is reborn again, we cannot do anything but work together.

So, Mr. Chairman, with those few remarks I again thank the Members and I beg to move that the National Women’s Council Bill 1992 be read a Second Time.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Assembly rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. on Thursday 14th January, 1993.)

Normal
Normal
Default Paragraph Font
Default Paragraph Font
Parliament of Uganda/C:\ Hansard_NRC\NRC ISSUES\Issue 25\Jan1393.docÿ䀁
Times New Roman
Times New Roman
Symbol
Symbol
Wednesday, 13th January, 1993
Wednesday, 13th January, 1993
Parliament of Uganda
Parliament of Uganda
Parliament of Uganda
Parliament of Uganda
Wednesday, 13th January, 1993
Parliament of Uganda
Normal
Parliament of Uganda
Microsoft Word 8.0
Department of the Official Report
Wednesday, 13th January, 1993
_PID_GUID
{862AF0A0-6BA3-11D5-B9ED-00010261AC6D}
{862AF0A0-6BA3-11D5-B9ED-00010261AC6D}
Root Entry
1Table
1Table
WordDocument
WordDocument
SummaryInformation
SummaryInformation
DocumentSummaryInformation
DocumentSummaryInformation
CompObj
CompObj
ObjectPool
ObjectPool
Microsoft Word Document
MSWordDoc
Word.Document.8
