Thursday, 16 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. at Parliamentary House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995

(Debate continued.)

MR HIGIRO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am standing up here to support this Bill with whole heart and with the support of all the people of my Constituency who are saying that they are extremely happy to see that of all the years that Uganda has been independent, this is the first time that a Ugandan man or woman from my Constituency is going to select his own President by not using the gun, but by using a ballot.  They are very happy that we are discussing this Bill.  

The Movement has been here for quite sometime.  The Movement has done a lot of work, most of which is good for this Country.  But this Bill we are discussing and the one we shall discuss next are considered the climax of the good work that the NRM has carried out, because, this is the foundation of the democracy which we have been lacking.  This is the foundation of democracy which people have chosen themselves when they elected people to construct a Constitution.  Mr Chairman, therefore, our support for this Bill is really genuine and we want it to be through as quickly as possible.  

There are few points which I would like to put forward, and for the Minister either to explain or to amend.  One, is on Page 4, Clause 4, 2(b), where there is a requirement for a Presidential candidate to get 100 people to nominate him from Districts.  The word here is that each District of at least 2/3, I wish to amend that one.  Every District should have, a man who wants to become a President of this country should have these 100 names from each District.  Mr Chairman, the point is that here we are passing a Statute for election.  Therefore, there is no point why I cannot say that –(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I wish to inform the hon. Member contributing and for the benefit of the House that the Provision as it stands now, talks of at least 2/3 of the Districts of all Uganda.  It is a minimum.  So, there is room for the prudent candidate very serious to say, no, I will not go by the minimum; I will get 100 names from 39 districts which comprise Uganda.

MR HIGIRO: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  That understanding is good.  Mr Chairman, another point is about security provided for the presidential candidates.  We are saying that the Commission shall provide security for the protection of each candidate and that the Commission shall with the approval of the Legislature, offer facilities to candidates, as the Commission may consider appropriate.  Mr Chairman, when shall we have these estimates?  Because it is not going to be small money.  If each candidate must be given at least two vehicles, 4WD, and at least each vehicle should have two to three policemen to guard him.  Each policeman will get allowances.  The vehicles will have fuel and it will be serviced.  All these will be costly.  Mr Chairman, it is better that the Minister should have some rough estimate of what it will cost. 

There is a question of looking for Funds.  There is a point here which I would like the Minister to tell us how we shall find out.  That we can get money from any where except from any Government which has intention to overthrow unlawfully the establishment of the Government of Uganda or to endanger the security.  Can we know roughly how we shall find out about this candidate.  

Then, there is a point of when results should be announced.  On Page 9, Clause 10, 3, it is talking about 48 hours.  I think 48 hours is too long.  These days we have fax communication, we are going to count immediately on the same evening and then these results after they have been signed, they will be sent.  I do not know why it should take so long.  I think the time should be reduced to 24 hours longest, and when the decision should be made.  That is to give room for some collections in case of some difficulties.  But actually 12 hours would be enough.  However, I would propose that we amend this to 24 hours.  

The last Clause 16, the Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, make Regulations for giving effect to the Provision of this Statute.  Now the question is when will this be done?  We must avoid the situation where the Minister can send Statutory Instrument when actually campaigns and elections are about to go on to change the situation.  I these regulations should be made much earlier while we are still around so that the country knows what regulations they are.  Otherwise, as I said at the beginning, we support this whole-heartedly and I do not see any problem.  With those few points I support this Bill overwhelmingly.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to make a contribution to this very important and historic Bill.  I believe this is the Bill of its kind we have had in this Country because it is the first time that everybody is going to participate in the election of the President of this republic.  

Mr Chairman, this Bill is straightforward.  The Minister took time to discuss it with the Committee on Legal and Security, and I must commend the Minister for the cool manner in which he received various proposals.  Some of them were very provocative.  But I must say that he did very well.  

I have only few proposals on this Bill.  The first one is Clause 2 - that is the definition Clause, and on Page 4, the definition for ‘Minister’.  It says, ‘Minister’ means, the Minister responsible for Presidential and Parliamentary elections, and Referenda.  When I first read it, I thought that the Government was going to set up the Minister responsible for this.  But after reading it, and knowing that in some countries there is always the Ministry responsible for organising elections, I understand in the U.K. of Home Affairs or Local Government, so that there is always the Ministry responsible for organising elections all the time whenever elections are due.  

I think this is a matter which should have been settled at the time of making the Constitution, unfortunately that was missed.  I think it will be Parliament to maybe come up with a Ministry of Government which will in future be responsible for elections because this is a major thing; elections.  All the time Ministry must be organising elections of one kind or another.  

My next point is in clause 3 and this is Clause 3, sub-Clause 2.  The Commission may request such evidence as it thinks necessary of the qualifications specified in sub-section 1.  Now, in sub-section 1, the details of the qualification of the President are given there.  Now, when I read sub-Clause 2, I got in my mind the kind of situation that is arising in Zambia.  It was so embarrassing to hear for the first time, that Kaunda was not a Zambian and then even other people proved that even Chiluba was not a Zambian.  I think these are very embarrassing consequences.  So, I would propose to the Commission that under that sub-Clause 2, they will visit 1(a) and try to find a little bit more about the citizenship of the candidate so that we avoid this kind of happenings in future.  

The Baganda have a tradition of the family tree.  They can trace so many years back and I believe other people in Uganda do have this kind of system.  Maybe, this is something else which could be used.  That is a small point but it is one which can cause problems in future and get everybody embarrassed.

My next point is on Clause 6.  I am worried Mr Chairman, about Clause 6.  Let me read it.  ‘Subject to Article 269 of the Constitution, every candidate may hold individual public campaign meetings in any part of Uganda in accordance with any existing Law.  A candidate or a candidate’s agent may hold consultative meeting with the candidate’s campaign agents for the purpose of planning, organising the candidate’s election campaign.’  

Mr Chairman, you look at the Provisions of that particular Article 269.  It reads, ‘On the commencement of this Constitution, and until Parliament makes Law regulating the activities of political organisations, in accordance with Article 73 of this Constitution, political activities may continue except opening and operating branch offices, holding delegates conferences, holding public rallies.’ We are providing for holding public rallies by presidential candidates.  

I believe that goes against the Provision of this Constitution.  In my view if this is a permitted and you allow the candidate as well as his agents to hold public rallies, it is likely, with provision here, for instance, of a candidate holding a public rally in any part of Uganda or his agent holding consultative meetings in any part of Uganda.  I do not see how it can be difficult for people even to organise delegates conference without naming them delegates conference but under this business of consultative meetings.  I am not saying there is anything wrong with it.  But what I am saying is that if we have a constitutional provision and we provide for a situation where this is likely to be broken, we are going to cause people on the ground, the Police, chasing people around because the Commission will not be on the countryside to see whether this is a genuine consultative meeting or a political meeting.    

Really, I do not want to be misunderstood, but what I am trying to say, and I must talk like a disabled person, that we should not create a situation where the people on the ground will go and disperse meetings because they believe they are party meetings when in fact these people are saying we are holding this under Clause 6.  So, Mr Chairman, I am extremely worried -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I thank the Member for giving way.  The information I want to give concerns Article 269 referred to by the hon. Member.  That Article only concerns political organisations or parties.  Now, the type of rallies or consultations envisaged under the Bill we are discussing are based on the individual merit criteria.  So, all the campaigns that are going to be carried out have their genesis, in the individual merit concept of standing.  So, you satisfy that, you can now hold rallies and so forth.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to inform this august House that Police Bill, 1994, in Section 33, 34 and 35 empower the Police to stop rallies.  While at the same time Article 29, 1(d) allows people to have meetings freely.  So, the interpretation as under Article 273, is contradictory and unless the whole thing could be clarified whereby either the High Court should state what would a private meeting, and whether or not this confirm to Article 29 because this was done to me in Mbale as a Member of this august House when we had gone to distribute copies of the new Constitution.  We are still under the Movement System until new elections are held.  So, unless this clarified, Mr Chairman, we may have problems because it was done to me in Mbale.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I do not want to be misunderstood.  What I am trying to point to this House is that we should not have a situation which is a bit ambiguous, because the people who are going to interpret the Law on the ground, may have a different interpretation from the interpretation that the Commission may have from the interpretation that the Parliament had.  Within that confusion, we shall be making the work of the Police extremely difficult.  

Therefore, I would like the Minister to think very carefully about this particular provision.  If it is necessary, the Presidential candidate should hold public rallies.  I think the Minister may then agree that even Parliamentary candidates have to hold public rallies.  If you do not, it will still happen because a Parliamentary candidate can hold these rallies according to this Law we are passing.  He may say that no I am working as an agent of a Presidential candidate and therefore, I am permitted by this Law to hold this public rally, when in fact he may be campaigning on his own behalf.  So, this particular Clause has a lot of difficulties.  

Let me push on to Clause 6, 3.  In my view, Clause 6, 3 requires that the Presidential candidate will given notice of their intention to hold these meetings and their programmes to the Commission.  I do not think this is really necessary, because meetings are going to be so many, that for the Commission to really keep on getting programmes and meetings here and there throughout the country, and it is not only that it is the Presidential candidate who will be campaigning alone.  His agents will be campaigning in different parts of the country.  I think even the Commission will not have the capacity even to know which meeting is taking place, where.  

In any case, I do not know for what purpose, it will be necessary for the Commission to know where Presidential candidates are holding their meetings.  I believe will be provided and I do not think the constitutional Commission will be in charge of security.  It will have to depend on State Security.  Presidential candidates can make arrangements with various District Police Commanders to organize security for their candidates.  Therefore, still I am not convinced that it is absolutely necessary for them to give notice.  

My next point, Mr Chairman, is on Clause 7, 2.  The Commission with the approval of the Legislature of such facilities to candidates as the Commission may consider appropriate.  I would like to propose like the hon. Member who spoke before that I think the Minister should really give details of the expected package that is going to be given to these Presidential candidates so that at least the Parliament is aware and can actually approve in accordance with this particular provision.  The next one which I have a lot of problems about is sub-Clause 4.  ‘A candidate shall not obtain solicit any financial or other assistance for the purposes of his or her campaign any foreign Government, Institution, Body or person, which or who has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the Law full established Government of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda.’  

I have two problems with this provision.  First of all as it stands, it is implying that the Commission will have to announce or to provide a List to Presidential candidates of those countries which have demonstrated with intention to overthrow Uganda.  I do not think that this is really a good to do.  After all today you may be at log-heads with somebody, tomorrow you maybe friends again.  By the time we pass this Law we may have difficulties with certain people.  In a month time, the situation may change.  So, in my view, I think that provision is not necessary.  But I know that there maybe some groups of people who may want to endanger our security here.  I think the only thing that can be done is to really administratively advise the candidates.  The Commission can advise the candidates.  I think the candidates will be national enough to appreciate that they should not deal with people who are against us either internally or externally so that in fact this provision does not only relate to enemies who are outside, but also to include enemies who may be inside.  

But the other part of this Clause which I find difficult to accept is to suggest in this Law, that Presidential candidates will be able to solicit money from outside.  I think we should make it very clear that candidates should not solicit money from outside.  If you allow the candidate to solicit and obtain financial assistance from a Government or an Institution, we shall be mortgaging this country to those Institutions. 

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to mention to the hon. Member that the whole idea sounds a little bit ridiculous.  If we go along the ideas he is proposing, that a mere candidate should not solicit assistance from foreign Government because it will mortgage the country, how about after he has been elected and he is now a President and he goes with open hand to every country Overseas seeking assistance.  What is more in the area of mortgaging than that one?

MR KASAJJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, my information is in relation to what hon. Mayengo has said.  He is saying that if a candidate is given opportunity to go to any country and get financial assistance that is mortgaging the country.  I think that one is not as worse as, for example, if the President is elected Mr Chairman, in Africa or in developed countries, it is almost becoming a culture that you have to get assistance.  Poor countries have to be assisted in order to uplift themselves from the poverty.  So, for me I would think that if the President goes and gets assistance after the election, I think that one is better than soliciting assistance now.  Because you can be mortgaged.  Thank you.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I am surprised because I would also agree that if it is to solicit assistance openly on behalf of the Government of Uganda, it is different from an individual to solicit assistance for the purpose of winning an election.  So, this is my position.  Other Members may have different views.  Then under sub-Clause 6, (a),there is a provision that ‘each candidate shall within 14 days, after election, account to the Commission for the facilities given to him or her under this sub-section.’  It seems it is only the facilities which will be given by Government that you will have to account for.  

But, other countries, I am informed, even America, Presidential candidates are given a limit of the amount of money they should spend on elections.  I would have thought that this account should include all the funds that the particular candidate got so that actually this can be accounted for before the Commission and that will be my proposal.

I now wish to move on to section 8; ‘No candidate shall use Government sources for purposes of campaigning for elections’.  Then 8 - 2, provides that ‘A person who is a President of course can use the facilities.’ Mr Chairman, in my view, I would like to propose that that Clause 8 be deleted because it is difficult really to monitor the use of Government facilities.  

My last point, Mr Chairman, is on the last Article 16 which says, ‘The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, make regulations for giving effect to the Provisions in the Statute.’  I am aware that according to the Constitution this Parliament will continue in existence until the new Government is formed.  I think it is important that this Parliament continues to be responsible for approving regulations from the Minister rather than permitting the Minister to do it alone.  With these comments I support the Bill, Mr Chairman.

LT COL BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  First of all, by way of general comment, I would like to, while thanking the Minister for presentation of these Bills, really sound a warning to those persons who are concerned with preparation for the Interim Administration Management.  I think we are very relaxed in the way we are progressing with arrangements for ending Interim period.  It is now three months plus since we promulgated the Constitution.  Since it was enacted, it is about four months, and we are just beginning to debate the Presidential elections Bill.  We all know that we have a maximum of nine months within which to do all possible manoeuvres for installing a new Government elected under the New Constitution.  This includes election of the President, election of Parliament and election of the local government.  All elections of local government councils are by universal adult suffrage as opposed to the lining up which we had before.  Of course the other provisions for petition and whatever.  I think definitely the Government and this House owe to think very seriously and work very hard to make sure that we do not again appear to either be working under pressure which we have caused ourselves or to even get into constitutional crisis.  

Having said that, Mr Chairman, I have been lucky because I was attending the Committee that discussed the Provisions of this Bill with the Minister.  I was rather disappointed to learn that our participation in that Committee was only Public Relations Exercise, and that what we came up with as conclusions are only for our own benefit.  But I hope that that being the case, the Minister still in his consideration and indeed wisdom will take into consideration the detailed areas that we pointed out to him in the Committee.

MR BUTAGIRA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, just on a small matter regarding what hon. Besigye said about; discussion in the Committee as only being an exercise in public relations.  If you recall, there was circulated in this House before the debate started, amendments to the Presidential election, Interim Provisions Bill, moved by hon. Francis Butagira, Chairman of NRC, Sectoral Committee on Legal and Security Affairs.  So, what was our consensus was reflected in this amendments which were circulated and also discussed with the Minister.

LT COL BESIGYE: I thank hon. Butagira for that information.  But quite obviously the fact that he has circulated the amendment under his name, implies that he tends to move those amendments as hon. Butagira to the Bill as presented by the Minister.  I would have expected that what we had agreed between us and the Minister would come as amendments by the Minister himself.  But quite obviously I think there was kind of misunderstanding and we shall proceed to move those amendments which the Minister does not adopt as his amendments at an appropriate stage.  

MR NTIMBA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and who has expressed concern about the speed at which we are progressing towards preparing this country for a new Government.  When you speak to people either people whom we represent or people we interact with, there has been some strong suggestion that if we have to get things moving, we must apart from being disciplined and making sure that we do not fail to get a quorum, we must be prepared when we are discussing important Bills like this.  We must be prepared to lengthen hours in which we are debating.  So, instead of breaking up at 5 o’clock, we should be prepared to continue and break at 7 o’clock.

THE CHAIRMAN: That is not information; that is your suggestion.

LT COL BESIGYE: Mr Chairman, really we must look at elections very, very critically and seriously because we should not forget that even the existence of NRM itself is as a result of election mismanagement.  Therefore, we must know that this is a very critical area, these are very critical provisions, we must examine them very critically and even if we are to spend as many hours as somebody was saying, I think it would be welcome.  In fact I am rather surprised that the Minister and other relevant people in the election preparation process have not sought it wise to hold wider consultations outside the House.  I, of course, have lamented before about the death of fora like NEC which is a Committee of this House.  That was a body that was established by this House which is a Committee of this House, which should meet regularly in this House and which should be used for the purposes it was established in the Constitution because it is a constitutional provision.  Its cardinal role was in policy formulation.  The advice in this particular area would have been useful or even the House sitting as a political organ without discussing as a Legislature like we are discussing definite provisions of a Bill.  I hope that this kind of practice will not lead us into more difficulties than solutions.  

Mr Chairman, turning to the Bill, as I have said, I do not have many comments which I did not make in the Committee and which I hope the Minister is aware of, and if he does not take care of them, which we shall move as amendments at the Committee Stage.  But I would like to intervene in three areas.  The first area is the area which hon. Mwandha was contributing on a short while ago, relating to the provisions in section 7, sub-section 4.  I tend to get a feeling when I sit and listen to contributions that we maybe attracted, like it always happens, to look for an easy way out of a difficult situation.  But which easy way may only serve as a temporary solution, but in the process, drag us deeper into problems. I think we have a duty as persons advantaged to be taking decisions on behalf of the country at this pointing time, to take even difficult decisions but which we think strategically will help this country.  

I have no doubt that the people of Uganda really love the Movement.  The reason they contributed in the constitutional Commission and said, we want the Movement to continue.  Some were even saying, 20 years.  Some were saying forever, was because they love the Movement, and the Movement they love is not just the name.  They love a particular Movement with a particular substance. (Applause)

It should not be assumed by those people who advocate for the Movement that the people of Uganda shall support any Movement.  Even when the content has changed for the worst.  The Movement the people of Uganda support is the Movement that they have known since 1986 which includes everybody.  The Movement which is based on the Ten Point Programme which was told to them very ably which my Friend hon. Butele has always been reading out point by point.  This is the Movement that the people of Uganda cherish.  If the content of that Movement changes, it will be unwise of us to think that the people will still support the Movement because they said the Movement will continue.  

Now, really if we go back and look at what we have been advocating in the Ten Point Programme, national independence.  If you read under national independence; what we mean by national independence.  To have the independence and influence ability to decide what is good and what is bad for the country.  This point is so cardinal.  Those of you who do not remember hon. Butele, unfortunately he is not here.  It is No.4 on the Ten Point Programme.  Now, I have of course noted especially that these points on the Programme have been mutating in the way they are emphasized by leaders of various cadres within the Movement.  In actual fact, I have been trying to crystallize what the new programme we are operating maybe.  I think the points on the programme from the way I hear certain leaders say, you will find now are concentrating on restoration and expansion of the infrastructure, privatisation, liberalisation, industrialisation, balancing the Budget, monitory expansion in harmony with a rate of GDP, universal and compulsory education, preventive medicine, regional integration and national unity, and sectarianism.  These are now ten points which seem to have replaced the original points in the understanding of some people.  I think that this will be a tragedy to especially mutate without sufficient discussion so that every body appreciates the need to move from one position to another.  

So, you will find in the new programme, there are certain areas which are very prominently missing.  The first one is the popular democracy which we had as number one.  Popular democracy was defined as Parliamentary Democracy, Grass-root Democracy and a descent standard of living.   You cannot have democracy without those three ingredients. 

Another which seems to be missing is the fight against corruption, which was a very cardinal area in our Ten Points Programme.  I do not know whether someone is saying animal farm, I do not think it is.  But I ought to really say with as much seriousness as I can marshal that those areas which maybe the emphasized now, or whose priorities have changed ought to be looked at very critically.  We have said time and again, that the problems of Uganda have never been economic.  The fundamental problems of Uganda have been in the politics.  The way the politics are handled, you can have everything as long as you mismanage politics all that will be mismanaged and we will go even to a worse situation than we were.  Therefore, the pre-eminent area to look at is the area of management of politics and it ought to remain high on our gender in as far as we are looking at these things.  

Now I am diverting you from my point.  My point is that No.4 of National Independence.  National Independence dictates that we have leaders who have independent thinking.  I doubt myself that it is possible to have an independent thinking President who was sponsored by country ‘A’ of company ‘B’.  Even out of good moral, will pay allegiance to the person who made it possible.  This is, whilst do we talk about godfathers.  

There is no way you can talk about independence if you cannot support yourself, even as a person at our level as individuals.  If you cannot support yourself; if you have no ability to support yourself to feed your family, to do whatever, you cannot talk about independence even as an individual.  This is why there is a proverb that whoever pays the piper must call the tune.  You may know how to play the pipe but may not determine the tune unless you are able to buy that pipe and to operate as an independent person.  

Therefore, Mr Chairman, I think that this point ought to be looked at very critically.  The question of saying that we give a licence in Law to our Presidential candidate to go to the highest bidder in the international community I think is a mistake and is a mistake we are going to live to regret if we go ahead with it.  I have no illusions that we are surrounded by poverty that individuals may not be able to campaign throughout the breadth and length of this country unless they have adequate funding.  But the way to take care of that, I do not mind at all if Uganda as a country, borrowed money and gave it to candidates as a country.  I do not mind at all.  But for the candidate, Mr So and so, to head for the other one, this question of saying, even those countries which have demonstrated that they are hostile, of course hostility is subjective also.  This is why I believe somebody was bringing an amendment; it must be still on the Floor, that we should allow prisoners to vote.  Somebody is interested in prisoners voting is because the prisoners will vote against those who imprisoned them. (Laughter) 

So, when you talk about countries which are hostile - if he is hostile to the Government, he is going to be very friendly to the opposition of the Government.  Whether you say that that person should not get - even if we pass it in law, there is no way you can stop funds from flowing from the hostile Government to a friendly one.  Even drug money is moving all over the world with the biggest policing system of the internal community system.  So, how can you stop money flowing from a hostile area to support friendly forces here?  

So, I think that what we are engaged in is a dangerous provision.  I think we should seriously analyze it with a view to running away from it.  Of course, I must also mention that I have read various constitutions and all constitutions that I have read prohibit the raising of donations from outside countries, and outside political foundations. I can read for you the one of German which I have here.  This does not talk about individuals but it talks about parties.  Even parties raising funds externally, which is prohibited.  It says political parties are entitled to accept donation.  The following are excluded from this. 

One; donations from political foundations. Two; donations from cooperate bodies, and  I think some of you have been listening to TV have heard what happened in South Korea with those cooperate bodies.  The question I am talking about independence.  Three; donations from outside the sphere of validity of this law. Unless (a) those donations flow directly from the assets of a German who is living outside or donations in questions are donated by a foreign political party represented in the European Union. This is a recent amendment of course after the European Union.  So, what I am saying is, there is -and it is not because they are rich, this provision is right from the time they had difficulties.  But the whole thing is that you cannot build riches on a wrong foundation you must first create a good foundation  before you can talk about building. (Applause)

So, Mr Chairman, the other area that I would like to comment on is in the provisions of section 7 (2). The provisions of section 7 (2) are the ones which permit the commission to offer facilities. When we were in the constituent assembly in m y committee which discussed the executive, committee No.2, I moved an amendment seeking to establish some preliminaries in Presidential elections when using the movement system of administration. My intention was that preliminaries would help to think the candidates so that we remain with  may  be 2 or 3 who have passed through preliminaries who could then be adequately facilitated by the state. 

Of course, that proposal was defeated. Having been defeated, I do not see myself the possibility of government offering reasonable facilities to whoever availed himself as a Presidential candidate.  The qualifications for Presidential candidates are very low.  The fact that you are qualified to be a Member of Parliament I think, and you are 35 years old, I think these are the only two -(Interjections)- and then collecting names of voters. 

Now, in fact I saw in the news papers my friend Col. Pecos Kutesa ridiculing the whole system and working out how he was going to become a billionaire through government providing facilities and how he was going to collect the names and so on, and get money.  We are already talking about the policemen, vehicles, I do not know for what.  For somebody who simply even for purposes of adding on his CV that he was a Presidential candidate. Even if the fellow is not serious at all, and knows very clearly that he has no chance of winning.  These characters are going to persevere; I met one outside here the other day. There is a short man with beards. I understand he at -(Laughter)

Mr Chairman, the point I am making is that, there are many people out there who would like to become Presidents and who have no sense of estimation of themselves -(Laughter)- and it is a fundamental right in any case.  It is a fundamental right that people come as long as he feels that people may elect him he has something to say he will come up. Now, the 2 million shillings we have put of course, some people think it is a lot others say it is little.  But whatever it is, I do not think it is very difficult now to get UShs 2 million if you are a very serious person.  Somebody may even sell part of his plot, he may sell off one acre and raise UShs 2 million and he is around with us. 

There is no way we can provide for- government to provide facilities.  The reason of course, I believe hon. Minister did not attempt to suggest some facilities, was precisely because of the Pandora books that he would have opened, should those facilities be approved.  I do not see the electoral commission with the budget which they have already presented or with UShs 8 million I do not know and what from donors, I do not see government being in position to give equal facilitation because you cannot discriminate, to give equal facilitation to all persons who may qualify as candidates for Presidential election. 

I, therefore, myself would like to propose that, given the current circumstances now existing of the law whereby we are talking about individual merit elections, where we are talking about these qualifications of candidature, I think we should simply know that the circumstances of the law of the constitution and of the economy do not permit government to provide facilities beyond what is mentioned here may be security. I do not see even these candidates getting Pajeros to start running around; and Pajeros even if they give you a Pajero, how can you run from Kisoro without fuel to Kotido, to Kapchorwa to whatever.  

The cost of running the Presidential election is simply unafordable to any Presidential candidate, whether an incumbent or not.  Because even to put a poster so that people know the face of the person they are going to vote for, to put a poster in every RC 1 will wipe out the savings of most people here which they have had in their life. (Laughter) T

his is true. This is the fact.  So I do not personally see, what we must simply resort to is the serious Presidential candidate must go back and make organisations.  This is what will in any case happen.  Candidates must go and create organisations that will support them in the elections.  Those organizations may not be political parties since they are prohibited, but they must have organizations that will fund raise for them that will create electoral machinery and the electoral facilities for them to be elected. (Interjections) 

The fundraising being prohibited is another matter which needs another discussion I think.  Because I am satisfied myself that it does not bow down infringement of our rights as individuals. (Applause) I am aware of course, that the commissioner is given powers; general power  to make sure that he takes measures that ensure free and fair elections.  But whether under those general provisions of ensuring free and fair elections you curtail people fund raising for my wedding, or fund raising for my school fees, or fundraising for my election, I do not know.  It needs to be clarified further and it may merit a further discussion and or even contention.  

Finally, I would like to , having observed that election management is a delicate matter, and is a matter which a small error can result in a large injury.  Many Members have been talking about this question of not stamping the voters’ cards, and what effect it may have had. Just that simple procedure, this is a procedure but the fact of the announcement that now you may vote wherever if you have voters’ card. The effects of that, and these are procedural matters. 

I would like to request the hon. Minister once again, the matter I think that we also discussed but which obviously he was not convinced about.  To reconsider involving the House in making statutory instruments. I know it is inconvenient, I know it is inconvenient, especially, when everybody is out there on the life and death campaign as they intend to be, to assemble you again to come and discuss a simple procedure.  It may be difficult in terms of operation. But I think that knowing the delicacy of these procedures, and how they may affect whatever you are doing out there, I think it is a matter that would warrant you Members to come he gives you the procedures and you say yes. We all understand these procedures and they are good. You can have a small procedure and the procedures are endless.  I happen to have the benefits of having been involved in organisations of elections for RCs, and you would make a small announcement and it would turn round the whole system even creates circumstances which you -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I wish to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  There is an official report of the CA elections as to how best the CA and that report the evaluation work and seminars which were held and they are giving very good recommendations as to how best the CA and possibly consequent elections should be organized.  But it seems we are ignoring this report.  I would think that as the hon. Member is fearing that as we possibly break off here, it may be very difficult to call us together.  But if we read that official report of the CA elections and went through the recommendations that were given, we can save ourselves a lot of trouble.  Thank you very much.

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.   I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that ideally the regulations, which have been mentioned in Clause 16, should be discussed together with this Bill for the whole exercise to make sense.  Because when we say that these regulations will be presented to the Parliament, and we have not looked at them as we discuss this law, definitely the thing will not make sense.  So I observations and I think the two apart from being done by this Parliament, ideally they should be done together with this law as we did in the case of the constituent assembly elections.
      
AN HON. MEMBER: Mr Chairman, first of all I have to appreciate the information I was given by hon. Kavuma that really most of the procedures and would appear in regulations have already been incorporated in the main body of the statute, the procedures.  But even if they were not and he had provided regulations separately attached to this Bill, elections are such that, you cannot cease making new procedures. Having something to announce or realizing some new need as time goes on.  Therefore, even if there were regulations here, I think still it would be necessary for the Minister to be able to make statutory instruments from time to time.  But whenever those instruments are made, the only point I am saying is that, we should have a common sharing of the contents of those instruments. So that it does not appear as if the instruments were issued to the disadvantage of the other person aimed at this or in any way interfere with the elections being free, fair and understandable by everybody. I thank you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Mr Chairman, I need not to over emphasize like other Members have done, the important step we are taking into further democaratisation of our country. I say this in the context of what I hear and see on TV happening in other parts of Africa. In this connection I have in mind what I hear is going on in a great country in Africa called Nigeria. Where a group of you men who excel in their sport have for obscene political reason been prevented from joining their brothers and sisters in an entertaining themselves, their country men and the World.  

I think it is terrible that even today in Africa you can continue to have abuse of human rights of that nature.  I read in the paper I think yesterday of a Member of Parliament in a country no too far from here who was plucked in public by a public officer who is supposed to protect this Member of Parliament. Mr chairman, these issues, these events galvanize my resolve to participate in as much as I can possibly do in making sure that we establish democracy and good governance in this country.  

Therefore, I would like to support those who continue either to agitate or to counsel for good methods of governance in our country and elsewhere.  Of course, the desire that we have good governance in this country, need not to a monopoly of either individuals or groups of people, and I think it is probably relevant that a Member who suggests that there must be as wide consultations as we possibly can have, need to be listened to. 

We are moving into having an election of a President that is separate from the Parliamentary elections.  There were many people who were opposed to this both in Uganda and from without.  I am glad that we have steadfastly refused to be moved without convincing reasons; to simply accept someone else’s prescription for our democratisation -(Applause)- and this is the independence that hon. Kizza Besigye has been talking about.  We must create our own circumstances. It is enough to read in text books in journals what others have done.  But are we always able to do what others have done.  I know even in science, I have read journals gone to the laboratory and tried out what someone else has done judiciously to the letter and experiment has just not worked.  

Therefore, it is yes absolutely that is why it is always important to do your own thing that you understand, more important than anything else that the people you are leading can relate to.  So when our people say, they are not yet ready for multi-party elections because of what they have experienced in the past, Mr Chairman, there is no reason under Heaven why people including we leaders should not listen to these people; and time and again people have acted and have spoken on behalf of the people. You often wonder, Mr Chairman, when they ever carried out these consultations with the people. (Laughter) 

So, Mr Chairman, what I am saying really is that the political leadership of this country at present, including ourselves here, must be proud of what we have done and continued to do. I want to agree with hon. Kizza Besigye and hon. James Mwandha regarding these funds for running an election.  In fact, it is dehumanising to go around begging for money to run an election let alone a Presidential one.  Hon. Mayengo said it was just as dignified to ask for Aid after you have been elected.  At leas after I have been elected, I am in the seat you cannot remove me.  So if I have got some strength I can resist.  But before you get there, the temptation to exceed to what these people are asking for is by far the greatest. Therefore, I am totally convinced that it is not necessary, it is even wrong for Presidential candidates to go outsied the bounderies of Uganda looking for money for purposes of defeating their own fellow countrymen. (Applause) 

So, I think if we cannot raise the money from ourselves and we have many wealthy Ugandans including my friend hon. Ssebaana Kizito behind me here who should be able to contribute to the independence of the process of electing our President -(Applause)- and eventually - by the way Mr Chairman, it is good investment that we have an election in which we are only people who have participated in determining who becomes our President. Where is the allegiance?  You come here and swear to uphold the constitution.  If someone else has paid for you, you can rest assured that swearing has got some qualifications behind it.  

Mr Chairman, I want to talk about leveling of the ground in the coming election.   Many people have talked about leveling of the ground; and the impression you get is that, it is only the Government who has got power and responsibility to level the playing ground.  That is not correct, Mr Chairman.  Everybody in Uganda in the executive arm of government in Parliament here at RC V, everybody in Uganda must participate in leveling the playing field.  There is no way you can stand up and start insulting someone who is in government and expect that man to sit back and say yes, the ground must be leveled, therefore, I must keep quiet.  The leveling of the ground must be by everybody in this country; and how do we do it?  How do we do it, Mr Chairman?  People who make irresponsible utterances, people who think that trickery is the only way to do things.  People who go around antagonizing others against their people ethnically, religiously and otherwise.  They are not allowing the ground to be level.  In fact they are planting land mines. (Applause) 

Therefore, I want to plead to my fellow leaders that if the ground must be level, then everybody must play their part and responsible part at that, Mr Chairman.

I want to make brief comments on some of the provisions in this Bill.  One of them is in 5 1(a) where the fees paid by the candidates.  It is very simple, and people need not to read it.  But a general receipt is issued for this money. Now. I am made to understand by those who know financial regulations that, once a general receipt is issued for money you paid, then that money is not refundable. So some other form of receipt ought to be issued. 

But as far as I am concerned, there is no reason why if you are a Presidential candidate and you contribute 2 million Shillings to every expensive protest, you should expect that money to be refunded to you.  As a matter of fact may we should pay more so that the likes of Kagonyera can be prevented from making the exercise a little more expensive. To every candidate who stands is going to have security, is going to have Media coverage, is going to have what.  It is very expensive, so anything that can help us limit the number of Presidential candidates much as it is a right of everybody to stand, is a practically reasonable thing for us to have.  

I want to make slight observation on the question of corruption during elections. I think it is imperative although I have seen provisions elsewhere regarding this.  It is imperative that if we are going to make a start on having a government that is constituted by as little corrupt leaders as we possibly can, we should start with the election. I notice in the law that the Bill we are going to discuss among the things prohibited, there is no mention or arms exchanging money even on election day, which has happened in the past; and money you remember, Mr Chairman, those of us who believe in Christianity is what was paid for the death of our Saviour; and it can continue to be paid even on the election day for the death of political leaders.  Therefore, the question of -(Interruption)

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Point of information. I want to inform the hon. Member speaking that according to the picking of grants there is the left hand know what the right hand does.

PROF. KAGONYERA: Obviously hon. Ali Kirunda Kivejinja is quoting the Bible out of contest,and I cannot blame him. (Laughter)

MR MAYENGO: Point of information.  Since the hon. Prof was talking about corruption, and he was saying there is no mention of money changing hands, I thought on more serious note that if he looks at Clause 15 more carefully, he will find that they did not skip that.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Okay, I thank the hon. Member for bringing this to my notice. I actually was comparing this Bill, or with the Parliamentary election Bill where most of the provisions for the procedures are provided for. But I thank him, and I hope, Mr Chairman, we are not paying lip service to this provision.  Because this is one of the greatest abuses was practiced in the last elections and should be avoided.  

I would like to end by saying that there are many people out there whose not sole purpose but main purpose might be to make this election not the succeess; and, therefore what we do as leaders, we must bear that in mind.  Someone is going to provoke you or the police to have him arrested so that he becomes a what, a hero or a martyr. People will use all sorts of pretext to say that they have been prevented from consulting the people.  

Consequently, I would like to plead, Mr Chairman that as far as is possible the main thing we must aim at, and it is a duty of the government, is to maintain peace and security in the country.  Nobody in pursuance of the so-called human rights can or should be allowed to interfere with peace and security in the country.  But where that is not interfered with, let everybody have as much opportunity to have themselves blamed if they lose, and not claim that it is the government which has caused them to lose an election.  Mr chairman, I support the Motion.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I am very grateful that I have been able to catch your eye, and I would like to say how really moved I was by the contribution made by the hon. and gsllant representative of the UPDF, the hon. Lt Col Kizza Besigye – Oh! He is a historical. I think this coming in the light of what we heard here on Friday; last Friday on a very sad occasion, we should not leave it to go by.  That is to say, if they are important things for this country to be said, we should have the courage of our conviction and say them when there is still time to do so.  The purpose of this Bill is to ensure that, we have-is to provide machinery for the election of the President of Uganda which will be seen to have been free and fair.  So that nobody says that the President of Uganda was not fairly elected. Now it is very very important. 

Now, the question to ask ourselves is, will the Bill when passed into law achieve that. One of the terrible matter that I use the word advised is that, before the process of the Presidential election started months or years, it started a month back.  This has not yet been passed into law.  Somebody has been talking about facilitating candidates.  The electoral commission will not have money or resources with which it would facilitate candidates until after this Bill has become law, and until after the ministry of Finance has appropriated funds for the purposes of implementing the provisions of this Bill.  But are we really serious don’t we know what is taking place in the country today?

This Bill seems to me be flawed in three different respects.  In the first place it does not create any election offensive.  It creates criminal offenses as opposed to election offensive.  

Now, an election offence, Mr Chairman, is an offence which if you commit it, you are punished politically in future by being debarred say, from standing as a candidate or from voting as a candidate. But this one there it is just a fine, fine, fine.  Anybody can pay these fines. It is not serious. The punishments which are provided here are not designed to ensure that people should not infringe this law; UShs 100,000 UShs 500,000 or whatever.  Look, we are talking about elections and we do not want people to infringe the provisions of the election law.  We must provide very stringent punishments. These are to say that, a person who cheats at election should be debarred for a period of 10 years, should be disfranchised, a person who stills votes should be disfranchised, a person who commits bribery, that is what it should be; and such a provision where in the laws which are being superseded by this law.  But it has not been brought out. Question is why?  

The second flaw in the Bill is precisely in this provision of section 15 to which my hon. friend the Prof. was referred.  Now, I am going to move if I have, I give notice that if I have the opportunity and I am here at committee state, I am going to move that section 15 should be deleted from the Bill. Section 15 says any person who, whether before, or during an election with intent either directly or indirectly, to influence another person to vote or to refrain from voting for any candidate directly or indirectly gives, provides, or causes to be given or provided any money or gift or other consideration to that other person commits the offence of bribery and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding UShs 500,000. This is being done everyday and night in this country; as we know it is being done, and we shall be making fools of ourselves to make a law as though we did not know that this thing is being-it is not being ordered now, because it is not the law, but when you passed, anybody who provided bicycles, anybody who provides Pajeros, anybody who provides Daewoo, anybody who provides Ekanzu, anybody who provides what, anybody -(Interruption)

MRS KALEMA: Thank you, Mr Chairman. Mr Chairman, I am supporting the hon. on the Floor my Brother, hon. Abu Mayanja that a similiar provision, I am informing on reminding this House a similar provision was put in the CA elections Bill; and did not work.  It did not work at all, and no one was punished. Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, the point I am pleading for is this, that we should know what is happening. This is our country, we have opted to provide for its..... of government, somebody indeed has told the fact that we are not borrowing from other people, we are making home grown institution, we are building up home grown institution; and this is good.  But, it is not good I am speaking, Mr Chairman, as a Lawyer of some experience, to make a provision which will only be honoured in its breaking is not making a good law.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Further information. Thank you, Mr Chairman. I only stand to give further information supporting the hon. Member giving us the information.  Section 15 is completely useless. Why I say it is completely useless, we had provided for general ... called facilitation which we say we accept.  We are going to facilitate Presidential agents; we are going to facilitate Parliamentary agents. If there is no agent we are facilitating the agents to campaign for us. That is legalized.  Where is the limit of facilitation? Where is the limit, is it in money? Is it in clothes, is it in what? If so, why?  

I do agree let us remove what is obvious we know is being abused. This CA election we said we should not use government facilities; very many members, ministers, very many private members used the very vehicles. It is again very difficult for anybody here to go and start to prosecute the person doing this.  So the best solution is to leave it open; it is to the advantage of a poor man to benefit.  Let him benefit from this rich man. (Laughter) But all the same the poor man knows how to vote.  They are people who came in more spirits, were defeated. Let us have to the advantage of the poor man.  Thank you very much.

MR ABU MAYANJA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information.  Now I want to wind up this submission by saying that, I was reading the other day in the News papers that President Clinton of the united States was reported to have said that he and his wife have been impoverished by paying legal fees.  Him personally was impoverished by paying legal fees in respect of the various allegations that have been made against them, White Quarter and that kind of thing. Now, if it is your first time to realize that when people make such allegations against the President of United States, when he has to defend himself he deeps into his own personal pocket.  He is not defended by the Attorney General. But you see, Mr Chairman, what are we providing here?  We are providing one law for Paul not Ssemogerere, I am using an English expression, and one law for Peter. Because we are saying, except as authorised, no candidate shall use government resources.  Then we say No.2, not withstanding that, they can use it. (Laughter) 

You can see the extent to which this - somebody was talking of using a Pajero. Even if you are given a Pajero without fuel from Kisoro to Arua. One Presidential candidate can use government vehicles with mounted escorts, with fuel provided by the state to move anywhere, anytime, and or at any time he likes. Another candidate cannot. 

Now, these matters should be carefully considered.  I think it would be desirable, having fought in the bush, in order that this country may have a different form of government.  I think it would be desirable at the tenth hour for us to face up to the logic of doing these things. Candidates should as far as possible have equal opportunities.  That is why you find that in some countries there is a limit to the amount of money which a candidate is allowed to use.  Some people can raise more than others, but there is a limit. They say you cannot use more than 5 million dollars, and that is what the law should say so that everybody uses up to that amount. 

So, I am disappointed that this law is not meeting those specific - is not providing for election offensive, it is not providing for a level playing ground. It is allowing resources of the government to be used by candidates.  When we availed the CA election, Mr Chairman, the law was not there but I remember I was then a Minister in the government.  The President directed from now Ministers shall not use government vehicles for the campaign; and we did not. (Laughter) 

I do not know the cause of the laugh but in Busuju I can say, I can swear on Oath, and the people who were there, the presiding officers, all the officials know that immediately that was done I had to borrow my son’s little car which I then used.  I ceased using any vehicles with government registration Numbers.

DR MAGEZI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seek clarification from hon. Abu Mayanja.  The CA statute was very clear Ministers or Public Servants should not use government vehicles or facilities.  While this require a head of State to make hon. Abu Mayanja comply with that provision. When it was already a law?

MRRWAKAKOOKO: Additional information. Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the House, and I think to inform the hon. Magezi that I think in passing the relevant Clause to what he was talking about, we talked about Public officers.  I think at time we did not understand the legal meaning of public officers.  Public officers are public officers by virtue of the previous Clause 104 of the constitution then which excluded political appointees. So, I think the interpretation gave totally and disclosed the Ministers and political appointees to use government resources on hand.  I think now if we want to restrict we should be very very specific.  Thank you.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Mr Chairman, all that I am saying is, it is in the interest of this country which we are all trying to serve or we pretend we are serving.  It is in the interest of this country that the elections should be properly done irrespective of who eventually wins them.  This is something in which this House ought be unanimously interested; and for this to be done we must ensure that the law we put there is so designed properly; done to ensure this.  

So, Mr Chairman, I have said this, I think that this Clause about bribery is being infringed every time, it is not there today but it is being infringed and it will continue to be infringed, and it is better that it should be there,-it should not be there, it is better that it should be removed rather than be there and being a perpetual brought on the law of the country, and other; and apart from that, I would say that a good would be, it should be supported and I hope that should be amended to enjoy some of these particular respects.  

But above all, I deplore the present situation whereby -already some people are being harassed. If what was reported in the newspapers yesterday was true, the police a Member of this House. They were cerebrating in a house, inside.  So they were arrested were taken over, that story is reported in a newspaper called Ripota.  There are so many of these things.  If we want fair elections, must all be resolved on.  One; the law must be properly written and enacted. But two; the administration of that law must also be done, must be accomplished, must be done without fear or favour or affection; and unless this is done we shall not have free elections, fairly elections, and if we do not have free elections and the people of this country will sense it.  They will sense it that justice has not been done properly and we shall continue to be in the ...  We shall not have come out of ....... Mr Chairman, I thank you very much.

MR RWABIITA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for giving me an opportunity to comment on the Presidential elections interim provisions Bill, 1996.  Mr Chairman, before I comment on the Bill, there is a problem that has been itching my mind.  This is the question of registration of voters.  I am not convinced that this exercise was done properly; and the reason being that, there was a question of money, and therefore, I think the budget could not prolong the exercise, and from the discussion of many Members it seems a lot of people in the whole country did not register properly.  Now we have been given a deadline of 23rd. I wonder whether in one week this will be possible; and if it is not possible what are the repercussions. We shall have a lot of Ugandans not voting for the President, for the Members of Parliament, even the LCs, even other public relations.  So, I would request the Minister concerned either to give more time, and give it more publicity, and request the LCs to participate in this registration exercise.  Otherwise, leaving it to chance is not going to help us, Mr Chairman.

MR KABUGO: Point of information.  Thank you very much hon. Rwabiita for giving me this opportunity to inform the House about what is happening.  We had a meeting in Nakaseke on Friday, and this information was raised that there were some people who were not registered because some of these were young and now after extending the period, they wanted the exercise to be conducted in the same way as the case was prior to November when they were stopped; and Chief Executive Officer informed those present that the district had no funds, whoever was not registered has to go to Luwero in order to get his name registered or could get his card changed.  

But, taking Nakaseke as a county, people who were registered to travel all along from Ngoma or Kinyogoga to go and register it will be very costly.  Because what happened at the end was this fellow to propose that since hon. Kabugo may be one of those interested in getting votes, he should provide transport.  Is it the normal way of doing things?

MR RWABIITA: Mr Chairman I think in close on that point, I would rather suggest that we use the LCS or the RCs because these people are used to this work of no pay; and many leaders are ready to do that.  Let the Minister or the Chairman of the Constitutional Commission send these forms upcountry and they get people registered.

MR KAVUMA: I thank you very much Sir.  I wanted to inform my hon. Friend and Colleague and hon. Members that what is happening is not a new exercise.  There was a time when we went out to up date the register; originally the period I think was two weeks, there was a lot of disatisfaction from the population.  We marshaled around additional funds, and we extended the period, and even after then we said this registration exercise should continue, it has been continuing but I think the problem is dissemination of information needed from our source as leaders is not very thorough.  

So, we are only saying now, everything that has a beginning has an end.  We are talking about constituents in time, we cannot go on endlessly because after the new names have been put on the forms, a lot of work has to be done at the headquarters placing the actual names on the register, and we do not have that much time. 

So, Sir, I want to appeal to fellow Members, instead of lamenting to now face the problem squarely, do as much as you can to inform our people, destructions are already in place, LCs have been authorised to help the people, they lead at all levels and this has been in a standing instruction for a number of months.

(Incomplete.)

