Thursday, 14th January, 1993
The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.
PRAYERS
 (The Vice Chairman, (Al-Haji Moses Kigongo) in the Chair
The Council was called to order.
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE
The National Women’s Council Bill, 1992
Clause 1 agreed to.

Clause 2.
THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I propose in clause 2, under Interpretation, that ‘Women’ means all females aged 18 years and above.  Sir, I beg to move.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).
Clause 2 as amended agreed to.
Clause 3 agreed to.

Clause 4.
MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to seek the Minister’s indulgence to move an Amendment to clause 4(2)(d) by deleting the phrase ‘to play a more beneficial’ and replacing these words with ‘consolidate their development’.  The reason for my amendment is that if this sub-section remains in its present form, it is likely to be interpreted that hitherto women have not played the beneficial role. But we all agree that traditionally, women have always played a beneficial role. All that this Bill seeks to do is to consolidate this role.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe):  I have no objection, Mr. Chairman.
(Question on Amendment put and agreed to).
Clause 4 as amended and agreed to.

Clause 5.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend Clause 5(b) where it reads ‘two representatives of Non-Governmental Organisation determined by’ I want to cancel ‘the National Women’s Executive Committee’ and insert ‘determined by a general election of the Non-Governmental Organisations involved in Women’s affairs which are registered under the Non-Governmental Organisation Statute’.  I am moving this amendment, Mr. Chairman, because we do not want the Women’s Council to appoint two people to represent non-governmental organisations on the Council.  I would like the two people to be elected by a general meeting of the non-governmental organisations.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. Specisoa Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I object to this Amendment.  First of all, all the non-governmental organisations registered under the NGO Statute are not Women in Development NGOs.  In my closing remarks yesterday, I explained to the Members that a new umbrella organisation for women NGOs called NAWO, the National Association of Women Organisations Secretariat, according to the NGO Statute, will be the one to actually sit with these members and elect the two representatives.  I, therefore, object to all NGOs sending a representative.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).

MR. HARUNA IMAGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an Amendment to 5(b) that the whole provision be deleted and be replaced with one representative from UWESO and a representative from any other religious organisation not represented from amongst those directly elected from the districts. 

My reasons are very clear.  By including NGOs in this National Council will make this Council a pro and it will tie the hands of other NGOs to contribute funds to this National Council.  And the other reason is that of putting religious representatives. Religious organisations play a big role in assisting women.  Therefore, if we take one of the religions with no representation in the district, I think this one post be given to that religion so that ideas can flow from this religious organisation to this Women’s Council.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I do object to this Amendment. UWESO is not a Women in Development Organisation, it is a voluntary service organisation to help orphans in this country.  Its role is for both men and women.  Secondly, the fact that UWESO is an organisation by women, it has the mandate to be affiliated to the umbrella organisation.  If there is a member of UWESO who has the qualities and qualifications to go and represent NGOs at all levels, then she will be definitely elected not only as a Member of UWESO, but as any other woman, and at the National level, she will go through to the umbrella organisation, NAWOU.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).

Clause 5 agreed to.

Clause 6 agreed to.

Clause 7.

MR. HARUNA IMAGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to introduce an Amendment to Clause 7(5).  Apart from the reasons stated here, these NRC representatives are called representatives because they are women. Otherwise, they are peoples’ representatives.  Therefore, if we try to push them back to a lower decision-making body, they will - with the experience, influence this lower decision-making body.  So, eventually, these decisions will look more or less like a one man’s decision.  Secondly, we want these ladies to be in many law-making organs. But if we start to push these ladies back to this level, it will reduce their chances of having many women in the Council.  Thirdly, these ladies are performing very well; the hon. ladies are performing well in Board of Directors and in Parliament. Therefore, if we also give them positions at the district level, it will jeopardise their performance in Parliament and also as Board of Directors.  

Also, these hon. Ladies are very important in family affairs. As members of their family, they need to have time to at least to stay with their families, particularly children and relatives. Thirdly, we shall be exhausting these ladies very much because most of them come from very far.  For example, if a meeting of the Women’s Council takes place today and she attends, tomorrow she may travel for a Board of Directors’ meeting. The next day she may be in Parliament, and the next day, she may need to go to see her family.  I think we shall be exhausting these ladies very much.  Therefore -(Interjection)- it is not in a bad spirit, that these Members of Parliament should not be on the District Women Council.  They should attend this Council’s life, NRC meetings, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the concern of the hon. Member about the role of his Colleagues, the females in this House. But, I object to the Amendment because, when you are building institutions that are not only viable, but have linkages that will stay, it is important that we create avenues for easy communication. Currently, what has been happening as all of you our male counterparts know, is that the schedule of the NRC Women Representative for the District and vice-versa, the District Secretary for Women, has been so heavy that in some districts, it has created a lot of misunderstanding and, I explained that most of the provisions in this Bill have been out of the experience we have seen since 1989, when we came to this House.  The fact that the female Members of this House are also parents does not derogate the role of our male counterparts; a family is for two people; the woman is just as responsible as the man, and this is just one of the avenues where women can easily voice their concerns. The very reason why this Bill has been put here is so that those voices can actually come to the House to stop a parallel system of making laws.  When NRC Members attend these women council meetings at district level, they are not going to make laws; the only organ that makes laws in this country is this august House.  I, therefore, beg that the House understand the situation as it is, and I reject the hon. Member’s Amendment.  Thank you.

(Question on the amendment put and negatived).

Clause 7 agreed to.

Clause 8.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, I remember that so many Members who deliberated on this Bill expressed a fear of having a Secretary for Women on the respective RCs, to be Chairperson of the Committee. You will appreciate that since the women are going to have their own elections from women councils, I would imagine that they should also elect their own Chairman.  So, in Clause 8(a), I would like to delete the whole Clause so that it reads, ‘The Chairperson who will be elected by the Women’s Council at the relevant levels’.  I want the Chairpersons of the Committee to be elected by the women’s councils at the different levels, instead of using the Women’s Secretary in the RC system.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I remember also yesterday and on Tuesday, when women were deliberating, one of the fundamental fears in passing this Bill. Originally, was the fact that Members feared that the women’s councils are going to create two parallel systems of administration in our society. As I talk now, the Secretary for Women is already chairing the women’s councils in over half the districts in the country. 

When this Bill was being drafted, consultations were made amongst the women leaders, the NGOs, and also among the RCs. The Secretaries for Women who are at the RC level, normally like we all do here, go back to our constituencies to get the people’s views. I have a fear, and it is a fundamental one, that if we allow women to actually elect their chairperson, then it is going to be a women’s organisation, a women’s council, and this is when they come up with a resolution -(Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, there is no women issue that does not affect men, except maybe when it comes to pushing the baby. Otherwise, even the making of the baby -(laughter)- the making of that baby is a joint effort of both the man and the woman.

I would like the hon. Members to re-cast and remember that when we have RC elections which, according to the Statute that set up RCs, this is the supreme administrative organ right from the village up to the district level.  So, if the women really wants to participate in all matters that affect them right from the village up to the National level, they should be there to elect their Secretary for Women, and if you look at the numbers, surely if the whole village is lining up and there are three secretaries for women and one of them is not favoured by the women’s vote, there is no way you will find that this person will be elected by the village council. 

There is a provision in the Schedule that when the first Women Council Bill and the executive that will be elected will lapse, when the current RCs also lapse, which means that women, and later on the youth, will have a chance. And in fact, this is one of the ways we are going to pull them to also participate in elections at the village level, right up to the district level. This Amendment is quite fundamental and it really upsets the whole way we would like administration to be set up right from the village level up to the National level.  Mr. Chairman, I strongly object to that Amendment.

(Question on amendment put and agreed to).

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that in Clause 8, the provision to paragraph 8(1) be deleted in line with the Amendment as proposed by hon. Kigyagi.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 8, as amended agreed to.
Clause 9.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, you will appreciate that in Clause 5, when they are electing two female student representatives from the National Students Association, they are two and when they come to the National Women Executive Committee, they are supposed to elect one.  So, I am suggesting that 9(g) at the end of where it says, ‘one of the female student representatives elected under Section 5 with the highest votes’, so that we do not need to decide between the two who should go on the National Women Executive Committee.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I want to confess that I saw hon. Kigyagi’s Amendment just when I came to Parliament.  So, when I look a bit flustered, I do not understand what he talks about when he says, ‘with the highest vote’.  I thought when you are electing somebody, the one who takes the highest votes is automatically the one to be elected.  I do not see any Amendment, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, in Clause 5, you elect two female student representatives and then in Clause 9, you are supposed to elect one to go to the National Women Executive Committee.  I am providing a method by which it can be decided which of the two goes on the National Women Representative Committee.  When you have two elected, one might have 15 votes and another one might have 20.  Between these two, you take the one who had the highest votes.  

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you very much.  I do not think hon. Kigyagi’s Amendment arises, in that, when you have the same people on a Council, when they get to that Council and are going to look for a sub-committee from amongst themselves, you do not have to use the votes that actually send them in.  It becomes a bit out of place to say that between X and Y, Y came with 20 votes and X came with 18, and when they are going to set up a sub-committee, because Y came with 20, he will have to be the one to go to the sub-committee.  I do not think that Amendment is necessary and valid.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

(Question put and agreed to).
Clause 10 agreed to.

Clause 11.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, Clause 11 in the Bill provides that the Minister on the advice of the Council shall appoint the Secretary.  I am proposing, that the Secretary be appointed after advertisement, short listing and interviewing by the Council, and then the Council recommends two names to the Minister, out of whom the Minister will choose one.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that what hon. Kigyagi is proposing is a procedure.  The Minister appointing after the advice of the Council depends on what the Council does in the physiology of work.  Because the Council will not get names without necessarily looking for them, and the only objective of getting the names is to advertise, and after they have short-listed, then they will recommend some names and the Minister will then appoint one person.  So, I wish to oppose the Amendment.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): I oppose the Amendment, Mr. Chairman, because as explained it is a procedure.

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 11 agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13 agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.


Clause 15.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, you will appreciate that we are establishing a very important Council in our community in Uganda.  We should ask all organs of Government to participate in promoting this Council.  I am suggesting, Mr. Chairman, that if it does not contravene with the provisions of the Ministry of Local Government, and maybe the Constitution, that two per cent of the graduated tax annually from each district, should be contributed towards the Fund of the Women Council.  I want it to be given as a provision under 15 (e).  There is confusion on my paper.  Clause 15 was put down at the last.  I am providing that under Clause 15, there is an (e) inserted in the Bill, where two per cent of the money collected by each District Administration in form of graduated tax only, is contributed towards the fund of the Women Council.

MR. CHEBROT:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to oppose the Amendment moved by the hon. Member.  First of all, it is against financial regulations.  Two, in a number of other organisations like the Uganda Farmers National Organisation, I propose that two per cent of the national income be given to the farmers.  So, if it starts in the House, to allow such an Amendment, I am sure many other organisations will propose to this House to have a certain percentage of the national income to be given to them, so I am opposing the Amendment.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Amendment on the grounds that, from the fact that we have passed this Bill, means that we are determining the important role the women should play, and she can only do that if she is funded.  If we just approve a Bill and then we do not back it up with some funds, it will be a waste of time.  So, I would like to support the Amendment and add that perhaps, it could even be reviewed from time to time to see whether we should increase or not.

MRS. KULANY:  Mr. Chairman, in view of the fact that 60 per cent of production in Uganda is by women, I think this two per cent should go to the Women Council.

MR. TOM APILA: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.  I would like to suggest that the respective districts should decide the question of giving two per cent to the Women Council.  

MR. BALMOI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand to oppose the Amendment.  We are already providing that this Council is supported from the Consolidated Funds, and why should we now go on taxing the other districts to add on to the Consolidated Funds.  From today, we are starting to discuss the National Youth Council.  If we start giving all these people funds from the districts, some of which do not even have enough money to support their own programmes, I think it will not be correct.  I oppose it, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman. hon. Kigyagi’s Amendment is very welcome.  But I would like the House to know that since this Bill is going to be put into effect and most of the work is going to be done in the districts, we shall propose that at a later stage, under the regulation with the Ministry of Local Government, that the vote for welfare be split up to explicitly explain where this money is going.  Because the vote for women at the district level is enveloped or in a haze of welfare.  Mr. chairman, since it defeats the financial regulations at this moment, I also do support this Amendment now.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 15 be Amended as proposed by hon. Kigyagi.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 15 agreed to.

Clause 16 agreed to.

Clause 17.


MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, I found out that the provision given in the Bill in Clause 17 is a matter of procedure, and from time to time, the Minister can be consulted by the Council as regards the funds of the Council.  So, I withdraw the Amendment in Clause 17.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to.

Clause 19 agreed to.

Clause 20.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, I have found out also in the course of time that laying of the Audited Accounts on the Table is a constitutional requirement.  So, it is not necessary to add that part which reads that the books of account will be laid on the Table of the National Assembly.  I am told that it is a constitutional requirement where money is got from the Consolidated Fund.  So, I withdraw, Mr. Chairman.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25 agreed to.

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an Amendment and additional Clause which will be Clause 26, which will read as follows: ‘26(1) The National Council of Women Decree, 1978, is repealed.  (2) The Minister may by Statutory order make provision for the vesting of assets, liabilities and pending proceedings falling under the Decree repealed under (1)’.  I beg to propose, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I think it will be better English, like in paragraph 6, where we have Amended, to just leave the word ‘her’.  Because the important thing here is advice.  We should just delete the word ‘her’.

(The Schedule as amended, agreed to).

The Title

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an Amendment that the Title of the Bill to read; ‘The National Women’s Council Bill, 1993’.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Tittle as amended agreed to.

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council does resume and the Committee of the whole House does report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS

REPORT STAGE

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the Whole House has considered the Bill entitled: ‘The Women’s Council Bill, 1993', and has passed it with some Amendments.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.

(Question put and agreed to).

The Schedule

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an Amendment in the Schedule, Clause 2(1), by deleting the words ‘two years’ and inserting ‘three years’ on the tenure of office of the committees.

MR. KIGYAGI:  I think I support the Minister in light that we have made a major Amendment where the secretaries for women are not necessarily the people who are going to be the chairpersons of these women councils.  I think three years is adequate, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an Amendment under paragraph 9(6) of the Schedule where it says; ‘A women’s Committee may co-opt any person who is not a member to attend any of its meetings as an advisor or consultant and that person may speak at the meeting on any matter in relation to which advice is sought’.  Mr. Chairman, this is to allow our male folks with experience in administration to also be called upon as consultants.  I beg to propose.

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment and an additional Amendment connected to that which is in 7(1) which is exactly referring to the same issue where a women’s council may co-opt any person who is not a member -(Interruption)-

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.  Let us finish one first and then you will move your Amendment later.

(Question put and agreed to).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Schedule 7(10) to read; ‘A Women’s Council may co-opt any person who is not a member to attend any of its meetings as an advisor or consultant and that person may participate in any deliberations at the meeting on any matter in relation to which her/his advice is sought but shall not have the right to vote on any matter coming for decision before the meeting’.

BILLS

THIRD READING

The National Women’s Council Bill, 1993

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Women’s Council Bill, 1993’, be read a third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

Bill read a Third time and passed.

Title settled and Bill passes.

BILLS

SECOND READING

The National Youth Council Bill, 1992

THE MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the National Youth Council Bill, 1992 be read a Second time. I would like to start by thanking the Youth of this country for the patience they have exhibited since the NRM pledged to organise them under a body that will unify them and also bring them to Parliament

The constraints are many, but together with the youth, we have been able to come up with a Bill that is planned to guarantee the unification of the youth, organising them so that their energies can be properly channelled for the benefit of the country.  

Why do we need a youth movement?  The history of our country has been full of many ups and downs as far as the youth are concerned.  The youth in our traditional way of life were organised, where people were grouped according to different age groups. They were meant to go through a system of training, both skilled and intellectual education, to become useful adults in that community.  With the advent of colonialism, our systems almost broke down, save for circumcision in some parts of the country, and the abhorred circumcision of girls in Kapchorwa, while all recognised that the time for being a youth is a time when one is full of energy, when one needs to be guided, and a time when one is looking into the future.  After colonialism, a system of secular education through schools was brought in, and that is when we started getting a rift between our youth; the youth, who were going to school and those who were remaining in the villages, leading the traditional way of life as their grandparents had done. This rift which was brought in by colonialism continues to pervade our society today.  When you go to the rural areas, you will find that majority of the youthful population is actually out of school, and there has been no system of tapping their resources through an organised channel, so that we can know what is best for them through their own voices, and organise them better. 

When colonialism gave way to political systems in the country, political parties grabbed the youth, not for purposes of organising them for better production, but as organs of oppression against members who did not belong to the same party.  The issue of Youth Wingers is very fresh in our minds, where youth, because they did not have anything to defend themselves, and neither had families nor anything to fear, and also because in our system, for many years there has been no way of teaching our youth about national unity and how best to channel their energies. 

The Ministry of Youth or the department of youth within the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth, is a very old unit.  It started with community development, where youth affairs were regarded as social affairs. There was no linkage between the capability of the youth and production, although there was a link between the youths’ capabilities and the future of the country.  The department - when you look at the objectives of that department - were noble.  The department is supposed to identify youth problems, plan and mobilise the youth and organise them so that they participate in all areas of development.  It is also meant to train the youth both in physical skills and in managerial skills, to some extent, so that they develop, and the Ministry is also, through that department, supposed to implement youth programmes and co-ordinate them.  Currently, what we have in place at the District level are the District Youth Organisers, who as I speak, are mobilising the youth in producer groups.  These youth are actually not accountable to each other and I believe in our society, if you grow up not accountable to each other or not accountable to your neighbour, this is when you get the problem such as we have been having, where when you steal public monies, it is your own affair, it does not matter whether somebody is going without food or medicine.  

When I visited the Districts, I found that whenever District Resistance Councils and Committees presented memoranda, youth issues were not mentioned at all. This led me to believe that because government had not come up with a structure through which the local administration could monitor and find out the needs of the youth, they were not doing much about it.  And there has been an outcry, not only from the youth, but also from the administration and elders, including my hon. colleagues, that we come up with a way of organising the youth properly, so that when we are gone, we are sure that what we have started has people who are capable of carrying it on. 

I assure the hon. Members that the youth have a lot of energy, just like when they themselves were youth.  But what is this energy being used to do?  The biggest occupation is redundancy.  The youth are very redundant and at present, in the urban areas, we are getting reports of drug abuse, not only marijuana, but sniffing of petrol, the using of drugs like pethidine from the hospitals so that they can get to heaven when they are still on this earth; without thinking of how they are going to eat or whether they will get a roof above their heads.  

The youth in the rural areas are also drinking.  When you move in the villages, when they know a Minister is coming or a Member of Parliament, those small bars you saw on the roadside will be closed.  But if you knock on any of them, you will find people there drinking, and the majority of these are the youth.  
The prevalent youth problems notwithstanding, a good number of youth have taken up the challenge, and you can now find youth engaged in the biggest mining venture in this country, which is the mining of clay and earth to make bricks.  Some Members may think that making bricks is not mining; it is a big industry and you will find that if these youth are not properly guided, we are going to end up with a lot of environmental problems.  In districts like Rukungiri, where they are not only mining for gold, but to make bricks for building as well, we get sporadic outbreaks of malaria because of the ditches they create as the mine, which collect water and become breeding sites for malaria parasites.  

The rift between the educated and the uneducated youth is also a reality.  When we were doing consultations on this Bill, the Uganda National Students Association felt that this should be a Bill for the youth, but the major part of it should be about students.  However, what is the student population among the youth in this country?  We know that a good number of our young children get to school in primary school, maybe about 60 per cent.  By the time you get to the tertiary institutions, less than 20 per cent of those who started are there. However, we would like these youth to know that together, they will be responsible for the destiny of their country when they grow up and this Bill, in actual fact, comes to bridge this gap so that the youth who are not in school, those who have not been to school, come together so that they know that together they will chart out the future of the nation.  
Questions have been asked that, who are the youth?  I know that there are many definitions of the youth. But in this era of technology, one has to come up with a definition of the youth that is measurable not only psychologically, but physically, because I know all of us feel very youthful, but the majority of us are far from being youth.  The role of Government is to cater for the physical needs of people.  So, while you feel youthful at fifty, government does not have a yardstick to know how far your brain or your feelings are towards being useful, except maybe from your actions.  

So, we sat and saw that we need to satisfy our society according to age brackets, where interests are similar and where the needs are also similar. Before birth, your needs are those of your mother, so that you are fed and you are born a healthy baby.  Between the age of six and thirteen, this is an age of indoctrination, when whatever is taught to you, you take it as gospel or Koran truth, and at this stage - I hope when my Colleague the Minister of Education comes up with his Education Report - we should be able to have youth between the age of six and thirteen in school.  After thirteen years of age, this is the time of discovery; a time when after indoctrination, somebody is starting to ask questions.  You find that energies are spent up and this is the time when everybody starts thinking of themselves; not like animals, but as individuals who reason, and this stage goes up to the age of 26 in the majority of the people.  After that age, you are no longer in the stage of penting up energies, but using up your energies in any way, and also making sure that you conserve your energies for the right activities at the right time, and in the right place, and this is when adulthood has set in. 

When you look at the demographic figures in the country, you will find that the population aged 0-12 years constitutes 40 per cent of the population.  These are rough figures rounded up in line with the population survey we had last year.  Between those aged 13 – 16 years constitute 30 per cent, and those aged 27 years and above constitute 30 per cent. 

We also know that the life expectancy in our country on average is fifty-two.  So, since ours is the technical Ministry for youth, we asked ourselves, What is happening here? and, What is happening at the international level?  The UN definition of the youth stops at the age of 26.  So, in view of this, while we legislate, we are also saying that one of the functions of this Council is to liase with other youth organisations in other parts of the world, find out what the RC Statute states about youth who are 35 years. In the other parts of the world for instance, grandchildren actually sit at the same table with the parents and discuss similar issues? 

We would like to make legislation to guide our people so that one grows gradually from childhood into a youth and eventually into a young adult, and not to jump from being a youth, a formative stage, to retirement age when you are, actually unmouldable.  
The objectives of this Bill are to unite the youth. They also do not want to - the youth themselves had this input in this Bill, they said they need this Bill because -they do not want to be manipulated.  Because when they are united, if anybody wants to address them, they will be together - Catholics, Muslims, or Protestants. Even those who go to the papyrus churches, or whether one is a youth from the Northern part of Uganda or from the Eastern part, we need an avenue where we can be together so that whoever wants us will come and find us together.  This was the specific provision by the youth themselves.

The functions of this Council will not only be to unite the youth, but to help the Ministry identify the needs of the youth, and propose that the structure rhymes with the administrative structure of the country, right from the village level, where there will be a whole contingent of youth who will meet and choose their executive – the chairman, vice-chairman, general secretary, secretary for finance and so forth, as is elaborated in the Bill.  

We also propose to have a District Youth Council, which Council will not only be composed of chairman of the youth from the respective counties, but we would like wider coverage so that these youth can participate more in the running of the affairs of their district.  Here we propose that the Constituents of the District Youth Council will be made up of the chairperson from the county, the vice-chairman, the secretary, publicity secretary and the finance secretary of each county.  And on top of this, we would like, because we know the populations are growing by the day, and because of the big size of many of the districts, that we get a female and a male representative from each sub-county to go and sit on the District Youth Council. 

The National Youth Council will consist of a chairperson of the district from each of the districts.  We shall also have 18 student representatives. In line with the support of the members for gender, we propose that each district also sends female representation, because when you go up-country and you call youth, you only see boys.  Girls have not been allowed to grow up, not only in this country, but in other countries as well.  We do not want to have a youth movement which fragments our society, which is the genuine fear of the Members. We would like the youth to move together. Once in a year, we propose that a National Youth Delegates’ Conference takes place.  This is the Delegates’ Conference which will elect the National Youth Council.  There will be a chairman from each county from all over the country. There will be a chairman of the District Youth Council, a secretary for the female youth at the district level, and 18 students.  The 18 students are going to represent the National Students Organisation. The students have been complaining that 18 years is too low. But I believe hon. Members know that even in this House we have students who are not youth. This National Delegates Conference will be the one to elect members to the National Council, and the National Council will elect an Executive which will be composed of eleven members.  We also propose a Secretariat for the Youth Council and I would not like to end before I talk about the election of the NRC Representatives.  The five NRC Representatives will be elected as one of the functions of the Delegates Conference.  On top of that the Delegates Conference will conduct elections for the National Youth Council representation. 

We as a Ministry have definitely been bogged down by finances, but we agree and would like to acknowledge the participation of all the NGOs which are undertaking youth work. These NGOs currently are not organised like the National Council of Women, under any umbrella organisation.  In 1989 - I give credit to my colleague hon. Betty Okwir, who took it upon herself to invite NGOs that are dealing with youth affairs, and in that meeting, they resolved to form an umbrella organisation, and as I talk now, the Constitution of that umbrella organisation is already out and the NGOs are going to discuss it.  So, we propose that we shall have a consultative forum of two members from the National Youth Executive, sitting with representatives of the NGOs, who will be elected by this umbrella organisation, to give advice to the Youth Council.  This is an effort to make sure that all the youth activities are harmonised to avoid duplication and wastage of resources.  

I would like to beg the indulgence of the Members of the House that we propose in this Bill that the secretary for youth again chairs the Youth Council and the Youth Committee. Just as the Members are entitled to their opinion, and I listen and get their advice, it is this august House which is to enact this law.  I am only giving my observations and I think it is correct that as the Minister in charge of this sector I should give the views of the technical people so that you the Members make your decisions.  

I do not know of any home or institution where children or young people are left on their own without any direct linkage with the adults. The women are adults, but the youth need guidance at all times, and that is why we have proposed that while the secretary for youth at each level is chosen by the village, let the election be based on the wisdom of the elders, and the youth who attend these elections, could chair the Executive Committee at each level.  

I beg to ask the Members to debate this Bill knowing that the future never comes because tomorrow is always tomorrow.  We are deliberating for today and it is difficult, because none of us has had the vision of Jesus or of Mohammed or of Buddha to know and look into the future. As human beings, we can only talk from experience and it is in line with this experience that we are asking you hon. Members to agree and take up the provisions as they are elaborated in the Bill.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the National Youth Council Bill, 1992, be read a Second Time.  I beg to move. (Applause)

(Question proposed).

MR. EKWARU (Amuria County, Soroti): Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Bill.  The Bill is very timely.  In Uganda, the youth play a major role in the development of the country and they form a major component of human resources.  That is one of the basic reasons why I am supporting this Bill.  In the development of Uganda, we need the full participation of able-bodied persons; that is the youth. If we have to achieve a satisfactory level of development, we must involve the youth in all aspects. 

When we look at the Bill, we see the youth classified between the ages of 13 and 26 years. But I would like to caution that somewhere somehow, some people in Uganda remain youth just by their physical appearance and this protects the youth from manipulation by people of an older age.  

So, we should be very strict when we are considering the classification of the youth as the Minister has emphasised. In Uganda, 60 per cent of our population are the youth.  So -(Interruption)- the population of the youth in Uganda is about 67 per cent.  As I had earlier on said, they are more energetic, and are, therefore, the ones who should be used in our community for development.  However, at times, the youth become victims of circumstances just because they lack employment, and have got a poor social background, and also because they lack education opportunities and vocational guidance from those who are supposed to give it to them.  So, the work of organising the youth into useful and productive ventures is very difficult.  

I am, therefore, challenging  - the NRM Government has given a whole Ministry to look into the affairs of the youth in Uganda.  So, this Ministry has the challenge of grouping the youth into producer groups and also solving their problems of unemployment. There are also youth who have been an attraction to politicians.  In the north and north-east, for instance, the rebellion was incited by adults and they manipulated the youth to get involved and these youth became drunk with rebellion. Recently, for instance, a boy in primary two was lured into rebellion. He managed to travel from Soroti up to Gulu and Kitgum, and then went up to Kenya, just because he was incited to do so. He returned recently, and when I interviewed him, he said that he was lured by some adults into rebellion.  So, I would also like to caution leaders, especially political leaders, not to misuse the youth -(Applause). 

 You can also look into our history, where the youth were used as youth wingers, especially in political parties and the youth were the most dangerous persons -(Laughter).  So, I would like also still to emphasise that we should not misuse the youths.  We should instead direct them into doing useful work. 

Religious leaders have guided the youth and have trained them in the right direction.  They have taught them carpentry, mechanics and other skills.  Besides, the youth are also in contact with educationists and academicians, and in most cases, everybody I assume, will one day be or is already a parent.  We should guide our youths right from the time we get them.  
So, Mr. Chairman, I really think that if the Bill is passed, it will promote the youth in development ventures. With these few remarks, I support the Bill.

MR. SEMBAJJA (Bukomansimbi County, Masaka): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The formation of a National Youth Council is a welcome move and I fully support it.  But this does not mean that as parents we should not take part in shaping our youth.  We should not simply leave it to the National Youth Council.  As parents, we still have a big role to play in shaping the youth, because the youth depend on their parents for guidance and for financial support.  

Also, the youth in this country form a big force as a factor of production and once they are left redundant, without tapping the resources, then they are likely to be dangerous to the society.  Although some of them have played a big role in the liberation of this country as Kadogos, I think they could have even done much better if they were also involved in production, other than looking at the gun as a factor alone. 
Besides, the youth lack guidance in that they have been a part and parcel of the destruction of the environment.  In the villages a good number of youth has formed themselves into small groups to make bricks and charcoal. But whatever tree they cut, they do not replace by planting other trees. It is because they have not been guided or sensitised. There is no specific forum form where they can be sensitised. So, they keep destroying the environment and this is a very serious issue in as far as environmental destruction is concerned.  
Also, we set a limit that a person should not be on the youth committee if he is above the age of 26, and at the same time, we allowed secretaries for youth to chair these meetings.  If you go to the districts, the secretary for youth in most cases is above the age of 26 -(Applause). I do not know whether by passing this Bill it will automatically mean that anybody who is above the age of 26 at the district level or even at the county level, will relinquish his seat and elect somebody who will be able to chair this Council.  So, I think that also the mover needs to look at this issue because it will be contradictory.  

I also fail to understand why children at the age of 13 are counted as youth.  These people, are still in primary seven, and are still under age. They cannot be expected to vote, for instance.  I think the person who drafted this one went too far -(Applause).  These people are still under parental care and there is no way a parent can send their child to attend youth forums at the age of 13.  I think that one is ill-timed. 

Concerning youth and the dreaded disease AIDS, AIDS has claimed the biggest part of the youth aged of 24 and 26. That is where the death toll is highest, according to a recent publication.  So, I think that it is bad for the youth to die at the age of 25 or 26, before they even reach the age of 30.  This is where we need to utilise them and probably tell them that this nation - and as the President has always been telling the youth in all fora - that this country needs them because we are looking at them as the future leaders of this country.  
As I earlier noted, the youth have been redundant and they did not know what to do. Even youth secretaries at various levels of the RCs, although their work has been to mobilise the youth, I think they have not done much because they lack funding.  They lack the resources to perform, and I hope that with the formation of the National Youth Council, funds will go down to the youth at the grassroots.  Because funds get stuck in the district or even at the Secretariat, and never reach the youth.  So, I think that when the Youth Council Bill is passed, the youth at the village level will be able to see the benefits of this Council. Otherwise, as parents, we still have a big role to play in guiding the youth of this country towards the right direction.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.  

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI (Bujenje County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to contribute towards this important Bill. I support the Bill.  In fact, last year, I asked the Government to come up with a national youth policy, because I get very worried when I see thousands of youth on the streets just playing cards. They are idle, and have no employment.  I feel that Government should have come out long time ago to evolve a national youth policy.  Therefore, by bringing out this Bill, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the hon. Minister for having come up with this Bill. At least I can now see light at the end of the tunnel. Because, without finding solutions for the youth, one cannot claim to be a leader of the nation.  The youth are part of our system.  They have undergone pathetic experiences since President Amin’s era, and after the expulsion of the Asians.  I would say, it is almost 20 years ago.  Since then, they have not been directed.  They have just been fumbling about on the streets selling mandazi and carrying people’s luggage.  Many of them did not even go to school. Yet these are the people we are relying on as our future leaders.  

So, with the coming of this Bill, I would be very pleased if the Minister gave us more light on what steps she is going to take to make sure that after electing these people - because this is giving them the political power - the youth also need the economic power.  

I would also like to appeal to the NRM Government not to use the youth as a political strategy by giving them power so that they can support you.  But we need to ensure that the youth are turned into good citizens of this nation; that they are not manipulated for political ambitions or intentions.  

Youth have suffered a lot.  I hope you have not forgotten the UPC days when they used to harass us left and right. We do not want to go back into this kind of situation.  We should, therefore, ensure that the youth are given proper information and guidance, so that they know what to do, and so that they are not manipulated by Government after Government.  The youth must be properly guided for the benefit of this and future generations.  
Mr. Chairman, although I supported this Bill, I was a bit reluctant because the youth at the moment, much as they want political power, require employment much more than political power which we are giving them now, and that is something which must be addressed urgently. I hope that this Bill is not going to destroy them, or make them arrogant once they are allowed to come to Parliament. (Interruption)

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr. Chairman, the idea behind the National Youth Bill is to get the youth organised so that they are easily accessible, and so that they can also be aware of what is happening.  It is not just a matter of empowering them with political power for manipulation.  There is a possibility of guiding the youths.  But it is not the responsibility of Government only, but of every parent and adult.  Because the youths are in our homes.  

So, I would like to assure the hon. Member that it is just a matter of organising them so that they can be easily accessible by any organ, both for development and social welfare.  

MR. KASAIJA KABUUBI: Mr. Chairman, the youth should be disciplined so that they respect the society in which they belong, and they must also be taught to realise the situation we are in.  Because there is no need for them to demand what is not there, when they know exactly that the economic situation cannot provide.  The youth are, for instance, demanding what the youth in Europe have, yet our economy cannot provide some of those things. 
I would, therefore, like to suggest that the youth move diligently.  They should not think that because we are passing this Bill today or tomorrow, they are above the elders (Laughter).  They should learn to respect us because we are trying to speak for them.  So, Mr. Chairman, since many of these points were in the first Bill about the women and those views were expressed, I stop there.  Thank you.

MRS. V. SSEBAGEREKA (Women Representative, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to start by congratulating the deputy Minister of Women in Development, the Minister of State for Agriculture, hon. Kyemba, hon. Bwambale, and the Minister of State for Defence, hon. Mbabazi, for re-assuming the Front Seat. 

In the same breath, I would like to bring greetings from Mulago Hospital, Ward 2A, from hon. Wandira, who has been lying in bed for the last three months.  He is sick – and he is the Representative from Baale County, Mukono.  

I would also like to thank the NRM Government for giving us a Deputy Minister, which means that the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth is very strong.  

Mr. Chairman, I would like to stand support this Bill.  I support this Bill because the youth will be well guided and are going to be the leaders of tomorrow.  Most of our leaders here have been youth leaders at one stage or another.  A very good example is that of the ‘kadogos’ and other leaders, although the former Governments did not encourage the youths in that direction.  I am glad the NRM Government has taken it up in this Bill, to give correct guidance to the youth.  A person’s character is formed between the ages of 0 to 7.  The rest of his /her years are called the formative years. If somebody’s character is not shaped between 0 to 7 years, then that character can never be shaped correctly.  This is when I call upon all mothers and fathers to take care of this very tender age in children.  

The youth should be given a forum.  The Youth Council is very timely because it will embrace both educated and non-educated youths, all religious and non-religious youth and also the youth who have been flocking our markets and will be mobilised into productive citizens of Uganda.  The Government should ensure that as leaders it is our duty that the youth are brought close to us - not only the under-privileged youth, but all youth should be guided, protected and loved. They need to grow up into meaningful and productive citizens of Uganda.  

I fee that time is now ripe for us to discuss this Bill, because the youth are in a big dilemna because of the AIDS scourge, recession, and lack of employment. When they hear now that we are forming a Youth Council, they will know that the NRM Government is willing to bring up good citizens.  Youth who are denied their rights can be disgruntled. At this point, I would , therefore, like to call upon the Minister of Education, that when he introduces the Government White Paper, to ensure that the education system is not for white collar jobs, but also for technological and scientific know-how. 

I would like also to stress the importance of mobilising the youth into productive groups.  I will give the example of Katwe boys.  These boys started off as youth and they have continued banging, moulding and producing things which have been found to be necessary for this country.  However, I appeal to the Government to mobilise them and facilitate them so that they can improve upon their products and contribute to our economy.  I would like also to congratulate the Masese Women Project, which is one of the most viable projects in the country.  

However, I would like also to caution today’s parents about videos, discos and some youth gatherings.  When we go out to parties as parents, we should take our children with us, because if we leave them at home on their own, they misbehave; not because they want to be bad, but because they do not know how to behave in society.  So, I would like us to bridge the gap between the youth and adults so that parents are open with the youth, and so that they know how the family wealth is spent, or what the political climate is like.  We should be free to discuss with the youth what we discuss amongst ourselves.

The Bill appears to be mainly for the male youth.  It is stated, for instance, page 7, that, ‘a Secretary for Women shall be a woman’.  I am assuming that these posts must be taken on merit, not because one is a woman or a man.  Since it is a Youth Forum, we should not stress the sex, because we take it for granted that everybody is going to compete on merit.  On the same page, part (4) it is stated that, ‘a person shall not be eligible to be elected a member of a Youth Committee unless he or she….’, and part (6) states that, ‘where a person is elected to a higher Youth Committee, it should be his/her office’.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA (Historical): I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to add my voice on all those voices which have contributed towards this Bill.  I want to support and thank all those who have participated in the drafting of this Bill.  The authors of this Bill seem to have co-ordinated their wording, both for the youth and women.  But whereas we are now discussing the Youth Bill, I am pleased to inform the hon. Members that this Bill has been long overdue, and it is our sincere hope that when this Bill is passed, it is going to serve the youth who have been mis-represented in the Government fora.  

At the same time, I would like to caution the Minister and all those behind the helm of power that when institutions of this nature are set-up, they should be properly used.  Many of us have not forgotten how the youth were once misused.  When you talk about youth, you automatically remember the youth wingers; the Sempangi group and so on.  Whereas they existence was for good intentions, they were misused by those in authority.  
So, while I continue supporting, I would also like to caution the Minister on the issue of duplicity.  When we bring a system in place, it must not conflict with the existing system.  We are now bringing up the National Youth Council and at the same time, we have the senior RC system.  The youth have their chairman, secretary and other officials.  When they take up their offices, they may conflict with the senior RC system.  The youth chairman may say, he has the same authority as the Chairman of the RC system.  So, I am cautioning the Minister and all those who may be in authority, to organise these people properly.  

We also know the youth politics.  Whereas it is important for us to mobilise the youth, they can also be an exciting group, and since it is very easy to mobilise them, they can be very useful in as far as implementation of policy is concerned.  However, if they are not properly organised, they will become counter-productive. 

In Clause 12, it is stated that, ‘The Secretary shall be appointed from among persons who are qualified or experienced in management or administrative matters’.  It is true the secretary has to be experienced and, of course, qualified.  But as you can see, this fora has its own limitations.  We are selecting from a group of youth that may not necessarily have attained a lot of experience in leadership. Being a leader dose not of necessarily mean that you can be a good administrator. You could be a good orator, or you could be -(Interruption)-

DR. S. KAZIBWE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, according to the Bill, the post of secretary is technical. It is the Council of the Youth to find somebody, through advertisement and competition, and it can be an elder of even 50 years of age.

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:  This is exactly what I am saying, Mr. Chairman. We have got to avoid some manipulation. If the elderly people get involved in youth politics, they are bound to destabilise the good intentions of this system. 

It is true that the youth are a very important group in our society, and as we review our political system, the RC system, the biggest participants in this system are actually the youth.  During our liberation war, although I would not of course, accept that we were misusing the youth, the youth were used profitably and properly to liberate this country, and so I could as well say that the youth, at their tender age, the ones we used to call ‘kadogo’, did a wonderful job and, of course, because they were well-guided, they did a commendable job, even better than the older people, in as far as discipline of a soldier was concerned.  

Therefore, when it comes to the age group - you know, when the colonial powers came to this country they found most of us were very malnourished and, a person of 18 years, was, therefore, really a small boy. But today, when you look at some of these boys and girls who are about 16 years old, and sometimes even 14 years, they look very big and their reasoning capacity is sometimes much higher than that of some of our elderly gentlemen.  

So, I propose that the age the limit for the youth of 18 years should be reduced to 16 years, depending on the IQ of the person aspiring to be in the youth fora. I, also propose that the Minister responsible reconsiders the age limit of 18 to 26 years, and adjusts it to the age limit of 16 to 26 years.  

Concerning the delegates conference, I thank the authors very much, because it is a fundamental revolution. Our NRA/NRM system, has got a Secretariat.   The Secretariat, has a format of appointment and this can also be adopted by the Secretariat so that the delegates conferences are also held by the RCs.  So that when they appoint their leaders, the youth will have championed the experience and the system will become much more impressive. With that, I beg to support.

MR. KAIJA (Kibanda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to talk about the Youth Bill.  In the first place, I would like to congratulate the hon. Minister concerned for having brought this Bill, and in fact we have to discuss and deliberated carefully so that we can shape the youth.  

It is very important because youth in Uganda have been neglected for a long time and I am very sure that if they are groomed properly we shall have a better generation in future.  For a long time they have known as very destructive.  In the sixties, we first used them as youth wingers. They were fairly mild in their activities. But when politics of intrigue and manipulation were initiated in Uganda in the 1980s, the youth entered the army, and there was real harassment of people. Any one of us cannot refute this here.  However, the youth wingers who came in during Obote II, were used to destabilise our lives, and destabilised the development in Uganda. I, therefore, feel that it is our task today as leaders of Uganda, to give guidance and to show the youth how to behave themselves.  It is through this policy that we shall have a normal follow up for the youths and we shall be able to reach them. Otherwise, they have been misused and disorganised for a long time.  

Also, since the youth a have been identified as always supporting development wherever they are, for example, the Minister has made it clear that brick-making is being done massively by the youth, and in many towns, for instance, there is a lot of brick laying and new buildings also coming up. It is a clear indication that the NRM Government has, in fact, been very close to the youth.  The youth are well represented in the RC system as secretaries for youth.  Therefore, if we can give them a forum of this nature right from the grassroots, we shall certainly, as leaders and as elders, be able to reach those people, advise them, train them and inspire them politically.  They will be gaining administrative skills when they join us in the House.  They should listen and learn from the elders because it is good to bring them into the political system early enough. Otherwise, as the saying goes, fire is a good master when it is under control, but it becomes a bad master when it gets out of control.  So, since the youth are energetic and are aspiring for future leadership, they should be trained within this framework.  

I also wish to note that a youth should be protected against any kind of manipulation like the Minister noted earlier, but this should be on the extreme because they may become untouchable and we shall fail to control them. Consequently, they may disrupt the smooth running of government.  

Election of five youth representatives to the NRC should not take place immediately, but presumably after six months, because they should know one another.  It should not be done the way we elected the NEC Members here, the same week we entered Parliament. (Applause)

I would also like to say that, since the youth are very useful and they are the future national forest of Uganda in terms of leadership, we do not have to destroy the forest when it is still young.  So nursing them, and I wish to emphasise this point - nursing them and bringing them to the national level is quite proper and it is in the right direction.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill and make a few remarks. I want to add my voice to those voices, which observe that the youth are a very important segment of society.  In Uganda, they are the majority. In fact, if you increase their number to include those in the age of 30 years, you will have nearly 70 per cent, if not more of the population of Uganda as youth.  But the youth in the past and even now, have not played their role fully because of lack of organisation.  I think, in addition to the objectives as outlined in the Bill, in this Bill, under that one we passed yesterday, one thing seems to be missing out; emphasis on the importance of organisation in the establishment of democracy.  The empowerment of women, and youth through organisations is primarily meant to enable them to have participation so that they can influence their destiny and the destiny of the whole country.  According to Ditokrill, who wrote on democracy in the United States in the last century, the multiplicity of affiliation of organisations guarantees democracy. In this case, some people who are going to be youth and will belong to the youth organisations, will be married by 26 years, they will already be married women, and they will also be belonging to the women organisation.  But they will also be participating in the RCs, which means one has chances of participation, and the higher the participation of the individual, the higher the awareness on democratic rights will be.  So, all these organisations are not purely for the sake of it, but for the sake of ensuring that you have a high index of participation and, therefore, a high degree of political awareness and also an insurance against those who fight democracy.  

Our youth in the past have been abused. I remember in 1980, when people of under age in my constituency were registered to vote. A primary four child was registered to vote and he was just nine years old.  When the day came and this child came with a voter’s card, it was very easy to get him on top of a car to show the rest of the people who were present that this person, this young man is being made into a thief because he was stealing a vote. And if leaders tried to train young people to steal votes, it does not end there, a person does not qualify to be a thief of votes only. Ultimately, he will become a thief in other fields, and for some of us who have tried to follow the genesis of behaviour, we can explain part of the extensive corruption and deceiving that we experienced in this country, to be partly a result of the encouragement of young people to prematurely engage in roles that they were not supposed to be involved in. Many people have been made into thieves with the encouragement of politicians, and they have become thieves subsequently.  When I mentioned this one day at a place where hon. Tiberondwa was, it looked like a revelation because, when you train me to think, I cannot only think about food, there are so many other things I can think about.  So, equally, if you are trained to steal a vote, you can steal a tire.  

I also feel that the organisation of youth just as the organisation of women, is giving power to the youth. It is giving power to a big section of our population in order to tame political power.  We have got a tame political power.  We men, tend to think that there is nothing wrong with what we have been doing, yet in actual fact, because we have been beneficiaries of power, we tend to ignore and to be frightened. Yesterday, I noticed many of us men were frightened because obviously, the moment women become more powerful, they will be cheating on us.  Therefore, there is a threat. Those who are complaining about the threat are genuine. It is real, because where decisions were being made in one camp, they are now going to be made in two camps, and if it is in the same home, obviously it will be a problem.  But with the youth, I think those of us who have been reading newspapers have seen how old politicians, the powerful, have been interfering with wills, especially when somebody dies without a will. They decide on who will take the property of the children whose parents did not write a will.  So, the moment the youth get organised, they will be able to talk about their properties, and what they are entitled to in the event of the death of their parents.  So, I think we are really talking about an empowerment which can do more than many of us think.

Concerning political education, one of the Members here of this House said, ‘we need to educate these people’.  Indeed it is true, but the youth can also educate themselves. In sociology we call it social psychology; peer group socialisation.  The people of the same age, meeting and discussing things that concern them and helping each other to improve on their knowledge.  So, when the youth meet in their own councils, they will be educating themselves and improving on their abilities of understanding the environment.  

I, therefore, fully and strongly support the formation of the Council.  However, I have a few remarks to raise. Everywhere in the text it is contrary to what was in yesterday’s Bill. So, I think the Minister ought to include the phrases ‘his’ and ‘her’, and ‘he’ and ‘she’ in the Bill, because some of the youth are going to be men, and I am particularly concerned about the statement on page 6, where it is recommended in section (8) that, ‘There shall be held once in every year a National Youth Delegates Conference which shall be the main policy making body in the Council’. And yet, under (c) it is stated that, ‘The Secretary for Women at the district level is supposed to be a member’. I am, therefore, wondering whether this woman will necessarily be a youth.  Now, if she is not a youth, I do not see her being a grandmother as being relevant; why it is important that it should be a woman representative at the district level.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Point of information.  The Secretary for Women the hon. Member is talking about Mr. Chairman, is a Secretary for Women on the Youth Council and not in the RC.

DR. S. KAZIBWE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, this was a typical graphical error, it should be Secretary for Women Youth, not a secretary of my age at any level. She has to be a woman youth.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: I am glad that I was right. But on the next page, it is established in respect to each Youth Council, a Youth Committee which shall consist of the following; -(Interruption)-

MR. KIGYAGI:  Point of clarification.  I would like the Minister to explain to us what the Secretary for Women Youth - I do not know what you mean. Do you mean the Secretary for Youth or the Secretary for Women Youth?

DR. S. KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, among the youth you have both boys and girls. But we know that when describing people you are either a man or a woman.  So, when the youth get their members elected right from the village level, the youth who are girls or women will have their representation in line with what the NRM system has brought.  So, it will not be the Secretary for Women of the RC who is going to sit on the Youth Council.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On page 7, I think there is need for clarification under 9(e), where it is stated that, ‘the Secretary for Women who shall be a woman’.  But this is a Youth Committee and a Youth Committee must now have a Woman Secretary for Women.  I think this one should also be re-examined, because I think there ought to be a way in which this emphasis on women must not be mis-pronounced, because we are dealing with a specfic generation, and women who are of age to will be involved in the Women’s Council; the one we passed yesterday.  So, I think there should be a bit of relaxation in that area.  

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to request the Minister of Women in Development to clarify to the House this point. The NRM Government gave a special seat to women because of their lucidity and lack of strength during the politicisation of that period.  But I think that we are grooming the youth to stand on the same footing now. We are trying to groom them into becoming equals at an early age. So, when we create the position of Secretary for Women Youth, then they will argue that they also want a secretary for male youth.  So, I feel that we should make the position balance between the female and male youth.  Thank you. (Applause)

DR. S. KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, the NRM Government believes in listening to the people and that is why the Constituent Assembly Bill is coming. When we are consulting, the meeting has 99 per cent male youth and they are the ones who pointed out this fact. They said, if you do not put the girls on these committees, they will never come. They even pointed out after the Bill had been printed out that even at the National Delegates Conference, when we are getting people to come, there should be a special position for girls, and I believe gender education has percolated down, because even in developed countries, the subject is still under debate.  Thank you.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you very much.  I think the point the Minister has just made deserves our consideration, considering the empowerment of women and girls in particular, because the distribution of girls in schools and their index on awareness is still low.  So, it may be necessary to be partial to them in that regard.  
Let me conclude, Mr. Chairman, by pointing out that all of us here were youth yesterday, and if one was to do a study, one may find that many of us in one way or another were involved in some leadership roles in one form or another, either as a prefect, or captain of a tennis or football team, or some other kind of leadership role.  Therefore, the question is of increasing the number of roles in which people are given an assignment, or a committee to chair.  And when you look at the whole of Uganda and the number of people who are on committees; there are RCs, women’s councils, and now youth councils. We are, therefore, generating a momentum of education; political education, so that when one is talking about democracy, these people on their various committees will criticise democratic principles.  It is not going to be easy for anybody to manipulate such an awakened population -(Interruption)-

MR. KANYOMOOZI:  Point of clarification.  (Inaudible)- the more institutions you have, the more democratic you become. I would like to ask seek information about a girl of 25 years, who qualifies as a youth, but happens to be a woman, and she is a trade unionist. She will have, at least, and if you were to take it further and she is in the NRC, she may end up with four votes; a stronger voting power.  I do not know whether that makes her more democratic than a man of 50 years who has only one vote.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: My reaction, Mr. Chairman, to that information is that if you are 50, like I am, 51/52 years, your index of participation compared to the youth aged between 13 and 26 years, if it is less, too bad.  Certainly, the more the young participants, the better for our society.  Because, in the process of interacting with many other people, one learns how to handle others better, how to be tolerant, and how to even emphasise the concept of democracy.

Lastly, and as a conclusion, I think we are in the process of preparing people who can uphold the principles of democracy.  If a woman, her children and husband are participating in decision-making, it is healthy.  Because, the more one makes decisions, the more they become better decision-makers.  So, I think we are preparing our society to make better decisions.  And I think I am proud to be associated with this exercise that this House is involved in.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until Tuesday 19th at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday 19thJanuary, 1993).                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            

