Wednesday, 17 January 1996   

(The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The Council was called to order.)

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995

MR MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala):  Mr Chairman, I was one of the first Members to get into this hall this afternoon, and I am grateful that you should give me the chance to open debate.  

Ever since independence the office of the President has been the born of contention.  Looking at it in another way one would also say that half of the reigning Presidents on the African continent, have got into the office on the theory of fortune belongs to the daring.  In the Cowboy language it is like saying have gun we travel.  The importance of this Bill, therefore, is that is a step moving Uganda from that direction of fortune belongs to the daring in the direction of saying we change our Heads of State in an orderly and organised style.  It is that intention that is behind this Bill.  Such an important matter that it must be done with care.  It is for that reason, Mr Chairman, that I support this Bill.

However, using what hon. Obwangor usually calls the collective wisdom of this House, I would be happy to see that it becomes law without some of the ridiculous things that are still in it, and it is those rather subtle ridiculous things that I would like to point out, to lay emphasis upon, because my Colleagues have mentioned some of more obvious things.  I will go slowly by slowly and wherever I will be able to remember I will mention the exact clause so that the Members can look at it. I will start with the matter of the candidates’ assets and liabilities.  This matter, Mr Chairman, is in clause 4 sub-section 7 paragraph (b) if the Members have the Bills they can look at it.  Mr Chairman, for what reason do we need the candidate to state his assets, his liabilities, his income, his employment, his employer and for how long he has been working? 

If this was taking place at the time a candidate has won the office of the President and we are now saying let us see how much he is worth as he starts his term of office, so that at the end of his term we can say how much is worth now?  Then we compare the two and then make up our minds as to whether he has got a benefit out of being a President or not.  

I have a feeling that this requirement for the candidate to present is without any reason unless the minister will state the reason, but the obvious reason is - it cannot be sustained!  If on the other hand this information were to be distributed around the country so that the voters look at it, one would say probably there is some reason, but to be left in the Commission’s office!  Is it going to be gazetted; what is the interest of Ugandans to know how much candidate Dr Tiberondwa owes UCB or whether UCB is going to auction his home; what is the purpose of this?  

I would like the hon. Members to agree with me that what does not have a reason supporting its being in this law should not there, and I would be delighted if they will the idea that we delete that one; and if they support that then we delete also schedule No.3 at the back of the Bill, because it is that Schedule which lists what is going to be the form of those assets -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor that what he is saying, I think, holds water, because even in our Leadership Code, you only declare you assets when you are assuming office.  So, what he is saying, it should be after you are election that you will declare the assets.  Considering our neighbours, the recent elections down in Tanzania, His Excellency Mukapa had to declare his assets on the day he assumed office, as a commitment to fighting corruption, according to his words.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I take it that he agrees with what I am saying, and assuming that the other Members also see in the same way, let me leave that and move on to another little section which has been talked about, but not in the way that I am going to talk about it.  This is the question of notifying the Commission that a candidate is going to hold a meeting.  This, Mr Chairman, is in clause 6, subsection 3; if Members could look at it they will notice that it requires a candidate to notify the commissioner of his intended meeting somewhere.  

Let me take a simple example; suppose Dr Tiberondwa has his headquarters in Kampala here, and his in Kotido with intention of holding a meeting at Kotido Stadium, so he calls his office in Kampala and he says take notice to Akabwai’s office and tell them I am going to hold a meeting at 2.00 O’clock.  So, at 1.30 p.m. somebody limps into the Commissioner’s Office with a notice.  Mr Tiberondwa is going to hold a meeting Kotido Stadium. What is the purpose?  There are only 30 minutes before the meeting starts; this Bill does not require that the notice is sent to the Commission a day before the meeting, a week before the meeting, a fortnight before the meeting, it simply says send the notice and I sent it ten minutes before the meeting.  As far as the law is concerned I am perfectly in order.  So, I am saying is that not good as saying it is not necessary?  

Mr Chairman, I think it is unnecessary unless we state the minimum period during which one must give notice to the Commissioner that one is going to give to have a meeting of this kind.  I hope the Members can think of it the way I am looking at it.  Now, I would like to move to what gave me the greatest amusement and worry.  The whole section No.7; first of all it has the most polemical of all requirements!  Section 7.4, almost every Members who has stood up has said something about that, and they have virtually exhausted whatever is in it, except one little sort of innuendo.  

Looking at subsection 4 of section 7, one would easily say it has a type of vagueness which might be interpreted backwards, in other words a candidate should not obtain or solicit financial assistance or any other kind of assistance from any government, any institution, anybody or any person who has - I am going to add in one word - ever held the intention to overthrow the lawfully established government of Uganda. Looking at it that way, the last regime claimed a lot of lawfulness in being established, and we are took part and looking for assistance to overthrow it.  So, one is going to say there are those who were friendly to the last regime, government institutions, bodies and people who held, who demonstrated intention and as a matter of fact acted in the overthrow of Obote’s government which is gone.  

Mr Chairman, are we going to add those to the ones who are now our present enemies?  We cannot!  So, what is the problem here?  The problem is that we cannot be clear.  We are still being a little bit vague!  There is no doubt that this law is not permanent, it is temporary, it is interim, and if it is interim, what about saying all those have demonstrated intention to overthrow the NRM government; will it sound ridiculous to be bold enough and say it?  Let us say it so that for the sake of - as we usually say, for the avoidance of doubt, that people are not left wondering, which are the ones we are trying to rule out.  

Mr Chairman, let me now look at the neighbouring subsections.  I want to look at sub-section 5, subsection 6, and I will end with subsection 9.  Mr Chairman, sub-section 5 says that a candidate must record all assistance obtained, and also solicited.  Now, the assistance which is obtained, I can understand that; but the assistance which is solicited might not have been obtained, and so for that reason to every place that you sent a word that you would like some kind of help you must keep a record of that!  

It might be important that for the sake of the previous sub-section 4, in other words avoiding getting or soliciting assistance from enemies, that you might then be able to know when this candidate Dr Tiberondwa was looking for assistance, where did he send request; then you finally realise that he sent one to JDL, that is the Judish Defence Link; then there must be some connection between him and JDL!  Other than that, I see no reason why a record should be kept for assistance, which is merely assisted.  Mr Chairman, now I go to the -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, those of us who are engaged in this game we know that there are some people, companies and groups who have the capacity to assist all competing candidates; in other words, you do not put all your eggs in one basket; you give this candidate, you give that candidate in case -(Laughter)

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, that is directly from the horse’s mouth; he is not taking a chance.  Mr Chairman, let us leave subsection 5 and look at subsection 6; sub-section 6 requires the candidate to submit within 14 days a report of all assistance obtained and from any source.  All assistance obtained, I looked at the world ‘all’ and I said there must be something funny here. All assistance obtained by a candidate!  

Using some simple and rather funny examples, a candidate arrives on Bukasa island and some 20 villagers rush to pull his boat from the lake so that it is landed, that type of assistance must be recorded according to this, within 14 days; and if it is not recorded the punishments are in subsection 7 and I am going to look at those ones.  The candidate goes to Kapchorwa his car gets stuck in mud, the villagers come around and say, ‘oh! Who is this one by the way; he is Doctor Tiberondwa, he is one of those ones who want to be the President! Oh, for heavens sake!  Not only for curiosity of seeing who Dr Tiberondwa is, but also for assisting a man who eventually might be useful to Kapchorwa; they come out and drag the car out of mud.  This kind of assistance must be reported!  

Mr Chairman, I said I will point at some of the ridiculous things; what sort of assistance did the Minister or those who drafted this Bill have in mind?  I am sure there must be a certain type of assistance, but the meaning which comes out is all assistance; and after the candidate had got on Bukasa island, an old woman says, ‘by the way, this island is the home of all Baganda gods, Lubaale Wannema, if you pay him a visit you chances will be enhanced greatly’.  So, the candidate tracks all the way to the shrine of Lubaale Wannema to go and ask a kind of assistance which is unusual. (Laughter)  

The candidate must report it within 14 days after the election.  Now, Mr Chairman, let us look at the punishments, and this is a very important part by the way; the punishments of failure to keep all these three requirements, the one 4, that is assistance obtained from overseas, the one in 5, that is keeping a record, the one in 6, that is reporting within 14 days.  If a candidate fails to do that within those 14 days, in subsection 9 are the punishments:  If he fails to report, to keep a record then the punishment is a maximum of UShs 10,000,000 or five years imprisonment or both.  

Now, hon. Kalule here is asking what if he is the successful candidate, he has been elected?  Because, the election must be declared within 48 hours as we still have the Bill.  Some Members have been suggesting it be within 24 hours.  He now has been declared the winning candidate and you say UShs 10,000,000 or five years in prison.  If he goes to prison then he is no longer the President elect.  If he is no longer the President elect what do we do?  Do we take the runner-up as the obvious winner now?  He does not have the 50 per cent which is required in clause 10!  Do we go back to another election, if they were only two we have to have another nomination, and if there is no other nomination we say unopposed.  Suppose they were three and the first one got 50 per cent, got elected, the other one got 25 per cent and the other one also 25 per cent, then the winning one loses because he contravened subsection 9.  So, we have to remaining ones, both equal with 25 per cent and, therefore, none of them has the 50 per cent; do we run off those two and find out which of the two now be elected?  

Mr Chairman, you will notice here that there is a lacuna here; there is something missing!  What do we do in that case?  Suppose this mistake is discovered long after he was declared the President, he is already in office; how is he going to protect himself?  Chapter 7 of the Constitution, Article 98, the famous one, let me tell you what clause 4 says;  “while holding office the Precedence shall not be liable to proceedings in any court” those are the exact words of chapter 7, article 98, clause 4.  So, he goes scot-free!  So, something has to be done on this particular Bill to find out how we get out of these oversights.  

Let me look at what has been called the level ground.  Yesterday, Prof. Kagonyera talked of how to level the ground, and he almost said everybody should try and do it.  It was not a responsibility of only one party to level the ground.  While I was here talking with hon. Kawanga, I said, that is another way of looking at it, I had not looked at it that way.  I was looking at it in a different way; at the moment this clause 8, first of all sub-section 1, says that nobody should use government facilities, I am using simple language.  Then subsection 2, says but one who is already in office could use them.  

Now, hon. Francis Butagira pointed out something here; he said;  ‘of course, if the President is in office once he goes to campaign, assuming he is a candidate, should he hire a taxi or should he use the car he was provided to use, or the one he co-owned, like hon. Mayanja said yesterday’.  I think it stands to reason to agree with proposition that he cannot do otherwise, but use the facility he has.  It would be ridiculous to do it in any other way.  

However, what is the cause of all this argument?  The cause of this argument is the intrinsic problem which is built in the laws we call interim. If we were making a permanent law, the alliance would be the first ones to support this clause.  Because if under the alliance, Mr Ssemuju won the election in whichever way and he notices that this clause 8, subsection 2, is there, he should say it is perfect it should be there, because it assists him towards winning the next election.  But at the moment because this law is interim, everybody who looks at it from that side, thinks this law was designed to help President Museveni to win the election and to assist Dr Tiberondwa to lose. (Laughter) 

The question is why can we not pick up enough courage and enact a permanent Presidential Electoral Law?  We had enough courage to make a permanent Constitution, why should it taboo to make these laws permanent so that we avoid this ridiculous arguments of whether it is level ground or not level ground.  I leave this to the hon. Members. 

Let me conclude with looking at the question of corruption in elections.  This one is in our clause 15; Mr Chairman, I should start with a violent attack on the former Attorney General, unfortunately he is absent, hon. Abu Mayanja.  After saying sensibly yesterday that this Bill was devoid of political offenses, and after even suggesting some of the remedies of that, he then went ahead to suggest something outrageous; he said section 15 should be deleted.  He had never said anything more obscene than that.  Bribery is part of corruption, and hon. Abu Mayanja is a well learned fellow who has learned laws in England, he would definitely remember the five laws the English have on corruption; the last one called the Representation of the People’s Act of 1949 -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, if I understood what the hon. Abu Mayanja was saying, the emphasis was that instead of putting in the law a provision which at best will be observed by breaking, you would rather not provide - I think he was ethnical rather than making a straight forward statement.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, let me also be ethnical; this provision names out - oh, I was quoting an Act of the British; the Act of the British called Representation of the People Act, this is the 1949 law, was looking at bribery at elections; they went to a great extent, they even named entertainment as being part of bribery.  If some one offered entertainment one would say he is inducing the voters unduly to vote for him; and among the suggested punishment was the one which hon. Abu Mayanja was mentioning yesterday, being prevented from holding public office for the next seven years, and if he does it again, being prevented from holding a public officer for ever.  Then, of course, that also goes along with being disenfranchised forever, not allowed to vote at all!  

What we have here leaves some kind of vagueness; gifts in this particular type of campaign are very difficult to distinguish whether they are a form of bribe or whether they are genuine gifts.  Let me start with two days ago when the President came for the funeral of the late Sserwanga Lwanga in our islands.  After he had pressed that something should be done in honour, in memory of the late Sserwanga Lwanga, he said, okay, you are saying a kind of a school or a hospital, talk with hon. Mbabazi; I was not near enough to say, why not Mayanja Nkangi.  But he suggested talking with hon. Amama Mbabazi.  Now, Mr Chairman, he left the people of the islands with a debt, if they do not vote for him, the memorial will never be built. (Laughter)  If they vote for someone else he will say, my fellow countrymen you can understand the situation, I was voted out of office, I could not fulfill the promise. (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the normal practice of government is that when a government takes over from a previous one, it takes up all the responsibilities of the previous governments and commitments. (Laughter)

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am glad hon. Tiberondwa says that, because, Mr Chairman, in one of my informal conversations with hon. Tiberondwa, I one day asked him, if elected President what are you going to do?  And hon. Tiberondwa said, if elected President, in the very first week of my presidency I will a brand new ship to transport people to Ssese Islands.  Mr Chairman, I was about to take the boat to go to Ssese Islands to announce this good news, when I heard that the alliance was now looking at somebody else. (Laughter)  

Mr Chairman, with these few remarks, and subject to those things that I have pointed out, I support.

DR TIBERONDWA (Igara County):  Mr Chairman, I think, speaking after my brother hon. Mayengo is a big job, because he is not just ethnical but he is ethnic himself.  What has been happening throughout Uganda in the recent months, suggest that perhaps we should allow President Museveni alone to contest for the presidency against himself.  You may recall yesterday, Mr Chairman, hon. Kiiza Besigye lamented, he talked about all the problems surrounding other possible intending presidential candidates and he pointed out that it was, actually, impossible for an individual who has no backing of an organisation to contest meaningfully in the coming presidential election.  He did say that because of the constitutional restriction against political parties, maybe, the best thing to do is for the intending candidates to form NGOs, that is the wisdom he could advise on this thing.  

A few months ago, I was holding a meeting of some supporters in my home in Bushenyi and that meeting was dispersed by Police.  I reported to the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Also towards the end of last year -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I want to give information to hon. Tiberondwa, to the effect that he, actually, complained to the wrong person, the Minister of Internal Affairs.  Mr Chairman, it is because of the instruction in a letter written by then the Minister of State for Internal Affairs that the Police are behaving exactly the way they behaved in his house.  He did write a letter in answer to some query for clarification to the Inspector General of Police.  In 1993 when the hon. Member was still a Minister of State for Internal Affairs, and amongst other things that he advised about the suspension of political parties activities was that any meeting, and he called it ‘high profile meetings’ held whether outside or inside a house should be stopped, if the Police suspect that they are being held by political parties.  

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member for that useful information.  But I was going to give a list of few incidents along the same lines, because towards the end of last year I visited Mukono and the people who hosted me had been interrogated by ISO agents, and I did report here, Mr Chairman, that when I was in Kasese eight security people, about half of them armed attacked me in my hotel room and flushed me out and checked everything, and they said that was their routine check.  

Mr Chairman, I am sure you have been reading what has been happening to my brother hon. Kawanga Ssemogerere, recently on his way from abroad he was not allowed to pass through Kampala; his visit to Hoima has been interrupted, he has been hunted over the week-end as if he was a criminal in Hoima Town.  Mr Chairman, hon. Baguma Isoke, Minister to this government, in the presence of the President in Kibaale, he said that presidential candidates who are not President Museveni should not be attended to, and advised the people of Kibaale not to attend meetings of other presidential hopefuls.  

I think, these are very unfortunate things!  You might have read in today’s paper someone from Bushenyi who asked a question while on a pilgrimage to Rwakitura, and he asked a genuine question and he has now been removed on order from above, that he should not have done this.  Mr Chairman, this kind of harassment is not going to take us very far.  

Mr Chairman, this weekend I was in Bushenyi and I met some people who are in jail, these were arrested after they had attended a meeting which I chaired, and they were told that they will be released under Tiberondwa I, regime; they are going to stay there, they have been charged with terrorism, and there they are!  I have reported this to the hon. Minister of Internal Affairs and he did check and told me that they were charged with this kind of thing, and that they are investigating, but they are there told, you are not going to come out until Tiberondwa I, is in power -(Interruption)

MR PINTO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am wondering whether the hon. Member on the Floor is able to provide names to the House by way of substantiation of these people whom he says are being arrested under terrorism.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I have already done so; I have met the Minister of Internal Affairs, hon. Kiyonga, and I have given him the names; and one of the leading names that I can remember off-hand is Mr Baingana.  So, unless the Minister did not inform his Minister of State but I did inform the substantive minister-(Interruption) 

MR ASIKU:  Mr Chairman, I am trying to seek a point clarification from hon. Tiberondwa who is a presidential hopeful.  Knowing very well that Ugandans have decided that there will be no President under any party, but there will be President on individual merits; I just want to know whether hon. Tiberondwa is aspiring and he is going to succeed as a President under a party or is he hopefully going to succeed as Tiberondwa with his merits.  Because I get so worried that I do not see within the law anywhere where either Tiberondwa or Ssemogerere will have a chance to address people with the UPC/DP alliance; I think it is not there.  I am strongly appealing to them also -(Interjection)

My appeal is, for the sake of peace; I would like, hon. Tiberondwa to use his good merits and I will also appeal to Ssemogerere to use his good men to stand as independent under Movement and if they succeed they will be leaders of this country without causing havoc.  But I the country is already being disturbed, we do understand that they are fighting for freedom, but Ugandans say we shall decide after five year, and I think within the five year we are not going to do much havoc.  Thank you very much.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, it seems to me that the hon. Members who has given me information, I think, whenever he sees me he sees a political party.  I have not mentioned a political party at all in my speech since I started, but he does not seem to think that I can also talk without being associated to a political party.  I am talking about Ugandans who were harassed because they attended a meeting, and I did not point out that this meeting was a meeting of a political party.   I am a Member of Parliament in this country and I have a right to chair meetings of the people I represent in this House. (Applause)  

On the 13th of January of this years, under letter reference 100/41 addressed to Mr Komakech who is not really a leader of a political, the Police Commander in Kitgum told him that you should not hold meetings in Aruu County anywhere at all; and this letter was given to me so that if I have an opportunity I can read it, in other words there is terrorism by the state all over the country.  

I feel very sorry because when the Movement started, as hon. Kiiza Besigye was pointing out, it was preaching democracy, stability and so on and so forth, but the organs of state, and I am sorry, the organs of state reminiscent of the other organs of state in the past history of this country are beginning to surface and to do havoc.  I am reminded of what was happening in Uganda in 1970/71; I am reminded of what happened by the security organs in 1980s; I am reminded of what happened by the security organs during Amin’s regime in the whole of that ’70, the State Research.  The same thing is resurfacing by the agencies of ISO and ESO and the Police are influenced to do the same.  Mr Chairman, it will not help us to -(Interruption)

MR GWAIVU:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, and I wish to thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I have to points to inform.  One is that revolutions everywhere have ended up in the same manner, and characteristic of that, the animal farm remains the classic.  Two, that in addition to the Police, the ISOs, military intelligence and what have you, the RDCs have become terrible!  They are making life for us very difficult.  My RDC in Jinja Benadette Bigirwa is going from village to village telling the people Gwaivu should not hold any meeting any where in Kagoma, and yet I am the incumbent Member of NRC for Kagoma, and I think by Constitution, I am entitled to hold any meeting.  But we are being harassed for reasons best known to the state.  Thank you very much.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, many of us take these comments in this House very seriously.  If true that hon. Dr Tiberondwa or the hon. from Kagoma have been harassed by the agency of the state that is indeed real concern, not for people who support the Movement only but for all citizens of this country.  However, Mr Chairman, we must not allow ourselves to also go to the other extreme that all revolutions end up in the same way.  Some seem to forget that the Americans came through the American Revolution and it still goes on.

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am seeking clarification from hon. Dr Tiberondwa, that when he is moving around the country from his constituency does he inform the government organs in those areas where he intends to go?  Because, why am I asking for this clarification?  I am sure that somebody to be a presidential hopeful he is not a small person, and he needs protection from government organs.  Definitely, such a big honourable person, if he does not have some hidden intentions, he should definitely inform the government organs who are in that place where he is going.   Short of that, then those people have the right to protect him.  So, I am seeking clarification if he ever does that.  Thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I hope you will take into account the amount of time - I will call it injury time -(Laughter)

Mr Chairman, perhaps as a way of clarification I would like to inform hon. Mrs Kiryapawo, that recently she was generous enough to come to my constituency for a sad occasion of a burial of a colleague, and I am entitled to go on these kind of missions.  When I was attacked in Kasese Hotel I was going for the burial as hon. Kiryapawo was doing when she came to Bushenyi.  In Mpigi, I was going for funeral rights; should I really get permission from Police when going for funerals and funeral rights. (Laughter)  

I would like to inform the hon. Member that presidential hopefuls are also human being, they have got friends, and I will continue to have friends whether I am a presidential hopeful or in whatever capacity I will be, I will continue to have friends.  

I was talking about the unfortunate instances of insecurity that have occurred in Uganda at different times of history.  In 1970/71; 1980-85, and now; those ones in the passed whenever they happened things happened also.  You have insecurity, things happen to a government; you have insecurity things happen to the government.  We do not want this thing to happen now; we have had enough insecurity in this country and would like to continue with peace and stability.

I have just pointed out some unfortunate instances and I hope that if you want to have smooth elections, the government will come out discipline the security agents all over the country, for the benefit, not only of those of us interested in political positions, but for the stability of everybody in this country.  

Mr Chairman, 269 seems to be a source of contention in our politics.  Article 269 in the Uganda Constitution is probably what I might call a black mark in what would otherwise be a very good Constitution.  I think the Members of the Constituency Assembly did a very good job, but this 269, I think, it is spoilt their good job.  Mr Chairman, why am I saying this?  That Constitution contains Article 29 which guarantees the fundamental human rights of an individual; and Article 269 guarantees their removal. 

Mr Chairman, soon or later I have a feeling - because we had similar experiences before, this country and God forbid, may have to pay a heavy price as a result of this Article.  It is a very unfortunate Article because NRM has done a lot of good things, but this particular point, 269 has spoilt anything that is good in NRM.  I think Article 269 is like an AIDS virus in a human body; because that AIDS virus eventually kills the host without exception.  So, I would like to find a way of going around this Article so that we can move ahead without unfortunate instances.  Mr Chairman, we should find a way of removing this Article peacefully, otherwise, some democratically minded people might use other means -(Interruption)

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for the hon. member who professes to be democratic to abuse a decision arrived at freely and fairly the majority of freely and fairly elected people’s representatives and implies that there are some people “are democratic enough” to be able to use undemocratic means to upset something that has been arrived at democratically, Mr Chairman.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is entitled to his views.  Proceed, please.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I want to thank you for your wise ruling as usual.  Mr Chairman, a lot of things have been said about the Bill itself, but I want to mention one important thing, that this Bill should have come after the Bill dealing with parliamentary elections, because at the moment we are making reference to the Parliamentary Elections Law which we have not yet passed.  In fact, there are certain areas where we say, look this one will be done in accordance with the Parliamentary Elections Law, and we do not have.  Mr Chairman, I do not know what consultations the Minister to do it the other way round!  Mr Chairman, before we pass this law and know that we have passed it without working as a rubber stamp, we should be able to make sure that those laws which are being mentioned from the Parliamentary Elections Law should also be looked at, because you just cannot say this law before you pass it.  Mr Chairman, I have one particular case -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Sir.  I want to inform hon. Tiberondwa that, in fact, the two Bills were published, even the other Bill has already been distributed to the Members who what to have a look at it, they have had it for a long time, and all the provisions we are referring to are in those public documents now which are accessible by any Member.  So, it is not correct for the hon. Member to say that they do not know about the contents of that being referred to, they are public documents duly established and gazetted.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, while I agree with the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs, that we have both copies of the Bills, the one being referred to, the second one we have not passed.  So, most of it could be changed, after we have passed this one.  Then what happens, it becomes a problem of reversing decisions in this one, because we will have finished this one; some of the Articles affecting the presidential will have been passed and then we will be stuck.


MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, while I agree with the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs, but we have both copies of the Bills.  The one being referred to, the second one we have not passed, so most of it could be changed after we have passed this one then what happens it becomes a problem of reversing decisions in this one because we will have finished this one some of the articles affecting the presidential will have been passed then we will be stuck that is the reason why we do have it. But we have not passed it into a law to be referred to and to guide us to make a conclusive conclusion.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, the Minister should accept that this was really an oversight and it is unfortunate because the laws he is referring to are still Bills and when we come to pass the Parliamentary Electrol Law we are not necessary going to pass them in the form in which they have been published.  

So, Mr Chairman, I want to bring out one clear example of this one; the educational qualifications because soon after passing this law some people want to contest for presidency may not be very sure whether they are actually qualified and I thought that this Bill is so important that I should add a schedule those of you who have seen my amendment we should add a schedule which deals with educational qualifications so that even before we pass the law on Parliamentary election people can know whether they are qualified to contest under this one.  

The last point I want to mention is the facilitation of candidates.  Mr Chairman, the facilitation of presidential and parliamentary candidates is normally done by political parties, but in this country under the existing law political parties are not allowed to sponsor any candidate and, therefore, the state not really the commission, the State or NRM under which all the people are going to contest should take care of this.  But, it cannot really -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform hon. Tiberondwa that no one is going to contest under NRM.  The Constitution we made said that, every candidate will contest under the Movement political System not under NRM.  Thank you.

DR TIBERONDWA:  I think the difference is the same, Mr Chairman. (Laughter) I want to suggest that we become more concrete and more definitive regarding the kind of facilitation that we may extend to the presidential candidates.  For example, transport in subsistence are obvious cases in which hon. Kiiza Besigye pointed out cannot manage on his own, say transport is subsistence for candidates and his accepted campaign team could be helped as they move round.  This can be in form of, it does not necessary have to be money it can be any kind.  Mr Chairman, the other area in which I think the State could help would be, posters, secretarial services, and manifestos and those kinds of things which are absolutely necessary. (Interruption)

AN. HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the sort of thing hon. Tiberondwa is talking about normally cannot be included in the body of the Bill, they are subject of regulations and if you look at clause 7.2; the Commission shall with the approval of the legislature offer such facilities to candidates as the commission may consider appropriate.  So, this legislature will approve such facilities and there is no quarrel except that we cannot put such things like; fuel, like food, may be, whatever it is in the body of the Bill these are regulation.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Tiberondwa try to wind up.

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I am going to wind up, I bit point out at the beginning, in fact, it was a point of information to hon. Kiiza Besigye yesterday that it would have been wise if these regulations were published together with the Bill, so that before we make the decision we know what the regulation say, I do hope that the Minister would be able to publish these regulation and we shall be able to debate them before we embark officially on the campaign exercise by both Members of parliament and presidential candidates.  

Mr Chairman, the remaining days are very few, I think the Minister was very slow we should have moved ahead of where we have now moved ahead of where we have now reached, we should have passed these laws along time ago I am told even registration are not yet finished we have got about six months remaining and I do not know whether we shall be able to hold both Parliamentary and presidential elections during this remaining time.  

Mr Chairman, I did suggest that one stage in this House, of course did walk  - but, I did walk out on this particular point, I said, why do we not even for the seek of economy hold parliamentary and presidential elections together, now we have got every few days remaining and I have been reading in the News Papers that we do not have enough money for carrying out these elections.  

I want to propose that as a way of reducing expenses and as a way of trying to suit within the time we have that we hold Parliamentary and Presidential elections concurrently.  Mr Chairman.

MRS IKOTE ALLELUYA (Women Representative Pallisa):  Thank you, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this Bill.  As usual when the Minister for Constitution Affairs has done his homework well and has produced an accurate and balanced Bill his presentation of it was second to none.  I, therefore, have only a few observations to make on this Bill, but at this juncture I would like to express my dismay at the beginning of the report by the Chairman of the sectoral committee on Security and Legal Affairs and my quarrel is with his analogy at the beginning of the election process to a woman giving birth.   

This is a very, very complicated process, which only a woman can understand.  This process is complicated because it raises issues such as who is the father of this child?  Was it an immaculate conception, are the parents responsible people who will build up a responsible child, and others.  At best this analogy was ill conceived. I would just propose that we say, Ugandans at the threshold of a new era Ugandans are making a fresh start with its elections.  

Mr Chairman, I see this Bill as an instrument to make the president independent to make decisions on the running of the State.  This is because the President will stand alone on his name and will stand on merit once elected this gives him independence in or her independence to rule as he feels best and I think this will help especially the political party agitators once we have a president in power who has independence to do what he feels should be done.  

The issue of facilitation has been raising a lot of dust in this House, I would like to present a proposal and this proposal is to assist those who would like to out the serious contenders and also to help the serious contenders in their campaign rallies.  I supposed that every candidate should put up his own money initially, now depending on the number of candidates, if they are 10 candidates then we divide 10 by 100 percent and then if any candidate gets 10 percent of the vote or whatever percentage we come up with, if he gets 10 percent of the vote in the elections then the Government should refund such a candidate 60 percent or a middle percentage of what he used in the elections.  

Mr Chairman, this will help us because the candidate has to put as Americans say, ‘his money where his mouth is’. Let them look for the funds and then put it in the election and if they can get 10 or 15 percent of the votes the Government should look for funds to refund part of the campaign money that he used.  We do not want -(Interruption)


MR BYARUHANGA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wish to inform the hon. Member that usually most of the campaign funds are not personal, but come to you in form contribution from individuals or organisation.  If you have received contributions for your campaign why should Government now refund?

MRS IKOTE ALLELUYA: Mr Chairman, I believe the hon. Member has been in this House throughout this week and this is a point which has been coming out daily from all the Members the problem of facilitation.  So, although we would like to think that there people who can facilitate candidate’s campaign it is not a reality.  So, I propose that there should be some refund after the election if you can raise a percentage of the electoral college so that you do not just come in to eat millions and go away and wait the time of Ugandans and Governments in the whole country.  

Now, another article, article 16; I find it is lacking in some way, because this one deals with bribery and says that a person who bribes another person, it only refers to one person bribing another person.  I think this means it opens for a group to be bribed, for example; an LC, a group such as a school a mosque, a church and so on, because if you take as I see people doing iron sheets and you give them to a church their gratitude could turn into votes for that candidate.  I think we should look into this aspect also, if we are going to be - penalty for bribing is half a million, now if I bribe one million people with one million shillings by taking a present worth one million shillings I have already cut cost because you are going to charge me half a million shillings.  This is cost effective and we must look into this article to set it straight -(Interruption)

PROF. KABWEGYERE: point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I seeking clarification from the hon. Member whether if I have need and I come to her for support - (Laughter)- I am talking of money because I have something to do, for example; my daughter is graduating and I need some support and I go to her and say please, can I have two crates of beer and he really give them to me.  Is that bribe? The reason I am asking this is, if a church has an incomplete roof and they ask like we donate on Sunday’s, on Friday’s and so on and they happen to know that you are in a position to give 10 iron sheets and you give them, is that a bribe whether you are standing or you are not standing?  Because I think the definition bribe must be clearly understood, there must be a kind of- there is a motive that you are forcing this person to behave the way you want him to behave or her to behave.  But, a church has behaved like that.

MRS IKOTE ALLELUYA:  I thank the Member for the information.  Because this brings to light even the doubt - I am failing to understand the logic behind the recent ban by our Chairman of the Interim Electoral Commission of only fundraising, because it is claimed that candidates use fundraisings to campaign.  But, even more that fundraising, I think which are community development initiative which help the people and we are saying that we should now hold the process of community development for six months until after elections.  Is the question of burials and weddings -(Laughter)- you should have ban burials, you should have ban weddings, you should have banned funeral rites, you should have ban graduations, you should ban church services, you should ban disco’ all these activities bring together people in one way or another and unless you are saying that politicians should stay away. I think that would have been a better option to ask the politicians to stay way from these activities and let the ordinary people go ahead with the functions.  But, it is really fine line just to take fundraising as the only - in this election campaign, I really beg him and all his commission members to reconsider.  With those few words, Mr Chairman, I support the Bill.

MR ONGOM (Omoro County Gulu): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for allowing me to say a few things, thank you for allowing me to give out my view on this very important Bill.  Mr Chairman, this is one Bill which any Member can put because it is already provided for in the constitution that there shall be a president directly elected by universal suffrage and we are, therefore, only here to get effect to that provision in the constitution there is one in this Bill that the Minister will proudly stand up in winding up to say it has got 100 percent support.  

Mr Chairman, many people have told us how important this Bill is, I agree with that expect perhaps for slightly a different reason many have stood up to say is very important because for the first time the people of Uganda are going to be given opportunity to elect their president directly.  Important as this is, I do not think that that in itself guarantees democracy, because there has been advance that there is a big step towards democratic system of Government, if that was the case, may be, we would even say that, therefore, the American system is more democratic than that of the British system I do not necessary agree with that.  

The importance of this Bill in my view is that, it is going to give Member of this House the opportunity to make provisions, which will make it possible for us to elect our President fairly, and it is incumbent upon us as Members of this House to ensure that this is so within by providing the necessary condition for this to happen.  

I am aware that even if you make very good law you may not necessarily be felt, already as you know hon. Tiberondwa has given us many instances where the ground is no longer in level.  Mr Chairman, it is our duty at least on paper to ensure that the ground is leveled.  For that reason I am going later on to say a few things which I think will enable us to level the ground, but what has happened so far, or what has already happened is ground for concern because it is making what is happening now is making the ground is completely an even. Already as you know our president has already gone around the country declaring his intention to stand and in doing that not sitting in his house, but everywhere, wherever he goes, but those other intending to compete against him are not being allowed to do so by the agents of the Government.  I am not saying they may be, doing so with the approval of the Government, but what is happening is happening and I am sure some of them are coming to the knowledge of the Government, but nothing seems to be done to stop it.  

Reference has already been made to what has happened in Hoima where a whole RDC said, if they come here stone them.  Surely, Mr Chairman, should they be allowed to be altered by an agent of the Government and if he does so ignorantly should he not be disciplined?  The fact that Government has kept quiet all this time, it means perhaps he did it with their approval, Mr Chairman; this is very serious.

MR MWANDHA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, this was a report which appeared in the report we do not know whether it is authentic or not since we have the Minister of Local Government can he enlighten the House as to whether this report is correct or not, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM: Obviously, it is very difficult to clarify if you can see no Minister is prepared to stand up and clarify. (Laughter)

MR BIDANDI SSALI: Mr Chairman, I accept the challenge.  I would like to clarify one, by correcting the hon. Member that the RDCs are not under the Ministry of Local Government that is one clarification.  The second clarification is that the disciplining the hon. Member is referring to is normally with a credible Government is not done through newspapers.  Thank you very much.


MR ONGOM: May be we can take it that something is being done to correct this kind of thing.  Mr Chairman, I earlier on referred by was of information to a letter that was written sometime back by the Minister of State responsible for Internal Affairs.  This letter is being used that paragraph in the letter is being used by the Police to make sure that anybody - it is possible that they are also being instructed to do so, that anybody who appears to be opposed to NRM or who appears to be supporting political parties are stopped from advancing their views to the public.  

I am not talking out of the air, I was in Kitgum earlier on this month - sorry Mr Chairman, I was interrupted by a Member who asked me what I was doing in Kitgum.  I went there as a citizen of the country to visit my relatives who are living in Kitgum if that is of interest to you.  I was informed by the former Member of the C.A. that he was approached in his own hotel room where he was sitting with other people and told he was holding an illegal meeting because they were more than three.  Apparently there is a law in this country that prohibits more than three people to sit together these days and discuss matters of the State, this is not mere talk, this happened.  This morning he confirmed to me that the same thing is still happening in Kitgum that people are not allowed to sit more that three particularly if you are a visitor.  (Interruption) 

MR BIDANDI SSALI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that while he was in Kitgum some two days ago I was also in Kitgum some days ago, I meet a number of former cadres who meet me at one of the residences in the town.  They claimed that they are prevented from giving out constitutions to the electorates, on closer scrutiny I discovered that because of the prevailing security conditions there the Police want information about their meetings so that they could follow especially from the point of view of security arrangements.  The Police was given - of the meetings which was to start the following day and the police said no, you cannot start because we are not ready to cover you.  Later on when I meet when I meet the two the two groups and hon. Watongha was one of them, it was agreed that that programme be postponed to about a week so that arrangements to do with security in relation to that particular area was made and since there was no quarrel from the former cadre.  

Let me take this opportunity to say that while it is claimed that Government is using Police and using what, to prevent people from meeting and while some Members and indeed the speaker has recognised that perhaps in some cases some of these may be, happening without official sanction of Government, there also Members of I do not know whether it is fair to call it alliance, as a matter of political strategy are trying to use some agents some of whom are government, some of which are LCs to instigate a situation meaning that if you find us meeting somewhere you came disturb so that political capital can be obtained from that, some of these are actually happening.  So, if we are talking about an even ground let us talk genuinely about those steps being taken consciously by Government in order to an even the ground.  

In case of Local Government I would like to assure everybody here, that should you find that any arm of local government is using the court of local government to un even the ground do not wait until you have the Floor here to point it out, just walk in the Ministry’s office and point it out so that some of these are handled without much political. Mr Chairman, that was the information, because I was in Kitgum just like the hon. Member on the Floor was a few days ago.  Thank you.

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May be, that is enough for the area of leveling the ground, but I would like to appeal to the authorities that the other intending candidates whose names have been thrown about in the air be allowed without hindrance to talk to the people because otherwise we can conclude that their are being stopped so that ways are made easier for the Government candidate to go through without problem.  Mr Chairman, having said that, I have an advise to offer to intending candidates who are complaining of the ground being un even  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  Proceed.

MR ONGOM: So, Mr Chairman, when contributing, hon. Kabwegyere gave advise to those candidates who intend to stand and ask them to follow the law.  I agree with that entirely except that where the law as it is in some cases makes it almost impossible or the law is being used to suppress these people even if they are not actually breaking the law, that they should find other means and other ways of reaching the people.  If they have discovered that it is against some laws there courts I think to look after that, but it is necessary that they find means and possible ways of reaching the people.  I will not like to advocate a situation whereby we disagree we must use other means to topple the Government as suggested by my Friend -(Applause)- but this can only happen if the grounds are not leveled because obviously you cannot continue to suppress people indefinitely and expect peace it is impossible in human society, you cannot expect peace where there is no freedom or in this case level ground as the Member suggested.  

We are tired of shedding blood in this country I think it is time we make an changes in government peacefully, if anybody decided to do things which will lead to the shed of blood, I can only say, hostility will condemn them and the blood of the people will stand against them.  Let us stop anything that will cause bloodshed anymore in this country and that goes for everybody including those in Government to make it possible for people to operate peacefully and fairly. 

Mr Chairman, let me now turn to some of the clauses which are causing a battle problems to Members who are - which if carried as they are will not make the ground leveled or unfair to some candidates, Mr Chairman.  I would like to in this case to refer to clause 6.3, Mr Chairman, which says “a candidate shall not hold any public campaign meeting under section 1; unless he or she has give to the commission notice of the intention to hold the campaign meetings and programme for the meeting”. Mr Chairman, I can only say that this is really impossible to enforce and I do not see how it can work.  Hon. Mayengo has graphically portrayed to us how impossible it is to make this clause work.  Mr Chairman, in my own view I suggest that the whole thing be deleted.  Mr Chairman, clause 7.1; reads that, “the commission shall provide security to the protection of each candidate.

Mr Chairman, it has already been pointed out the Commission does not and will not have the capacity to provide security to anybody and I do not think that should form part of their obligation.  The security of the citizens of this country including those aspiring candidates is squarely on the shoulder of the State that is the Government.  May be, we can only say that the Commission may request the State to provide the necessary security. Mr Chairman, that clause I think the Minister should agree that it should be killed. 
 
Another clause, which I would like to refer to briefly is, clause 4.9; which, I find rather out of place.  Already in clause 4.2; we have given what the Presidential candidate should do by way of getting support from the citizens to show that he has a measure of support, but on page 9 we are saying even if some of those fellows give him support and not qualified this candidate still stands, to me these ones seems to nullify the effect of clause 4.  I do not think that should be allowed to stand and my suggestion for amendment, Mr Chairman, I have also suggested that, that should be deleted.

Another clause which is a ground for concern is clause 8.2; that is the use of government facilities.  In fact, at first I had a quarrel with clause 8.1, where it said, except as authorised under this statute then I realised that this statute authorises necessary things for the protection of the candidate, for instance security and so forth which I support, so I allow that to stand.  But clause 2; is really a negation of 0ne completely, it allows somebody holding office of the President to use those Government facilities which are ordinarily attached to and utilised by the order of that office.  

When I consider the facilities that had given to our president which are ordinarily used to facilitate his work I do not see anything else left that will deprive the him off, what is there that is left now that will deprive the president off, if you allow him everything that is ordinarily allowed to him?  Mr Chairman, this is a clause which to mind should be struck off so that everybody is on level ground  -(Interjection)- yes, why not?  I see hon. Babu laughing to the top of his head ­-(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU: Mr Chairman, this is not the only country that is going to have incumbent president taking part in an election, there countries all over the world that have got Presidents in State Houses and recently we saw the American election, the other day we saw the French election, there are so many other elections we have seen and the presidents have been left with their facilities you cannot say because we are going to have a presidential election the president should evicted from the house, he should not use any of the facilities and at the same time he is still the president of the country.  So, when you are talking about those which are ordinarily attached to him it does not mean that he is going to use other facilities which are extra ordinarily attached to him.   If you take the American president during the campaign of Bush and Clinton, Bush was campaigning in air force and Clinton was campaigning in a train and Clinton won.  So, it does not really matter what they attach to him it is the campaign. Thank you very, Mr Chairman.

AN. HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  In 1980 elections one candidate by the name of Milton Obote who was not a President had security escort which is about twice the security given to the current president during the election campaigns.

MR ONGOM: Well, I do not know whether I should react to the latest information, but Mr Chairman, the candidate then by the name of Milton Obote whatever facilities he had was all paid for by his party not the State -(Laughter)- I would like to be informed; we have not been informed even through even the Auditor General’s Report that he used any State facilities.  I am talking about those facilities that the President will use for his campaign, I am not talking about the house he stays in the State House and all that, I am not talk about those.  I am talking about the facilities he will use to facilitate his campaign.  

As far as security is concerned, there are really suggestions that the state should provide these facilities of course as a President he will be provided suitable security arrangement which is good enough for the President.  But I am saying if you allow all those other facilities that are ordinarily given to him then actually you have nothing else left, then we might as well do away with clause 8.1; why include it there, because you have not deprived him in any way and in that case you have not made the level in that capacity to level. Even those facilities that he ordinarily uses if they are going to be used for the purpose of campaigns, then they should be withdrawn.  

I would like to refer to clause 11.2 again, it says “a petition under section 1; shall be in a form prescribed by the Chief Justice under sub-section 7; of this section and there other provisions in other sections which allow prescription of some of these rules later. My own view is that as far as possible some of these rules should have been included in the schedule.  There obviously certain cases where we may not proceed understand some of them that may arise in the course of the election, but as far as possible I think the Rules and Procedures should have been included either by way of schedules or included in the body of the law, Mr Chairman.  There other changes that I think I have suggested in my amendment it has been circularised and I hope I will be given time to support them including the contentious ones.  Mr Chair, my main contention in this contribution is that, the ground should be leveled as far as possible what is happening in the country now does not augur well for the future and if it continues I do not see the ground being leveled, Mr chairman.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.05 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 18 January 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)


















  

 
 

