Tuesday, 19th January, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

(The Council was called to order)  


 BILLS
SECOND READING

NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL BILL, 1992

(Debate continued from 14th January, 1993).

DR. BYARUHANGA (Kitagwenda County, Masindi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me the opportunity to give my views on the National Youth Council Bill. I support this Bill in its entirety, and I would like to appeal to hon. Members that we should not kill it the way we almost killed the National Women’s Council Bill, by detaching the National Youth Council from the RC system. 

The RC system is already well entrenched at all levels of our society and in the RC system, there is already a system of raising money.  For example, at every sub-county, some part of the money from graduated tax is left over at the sub-county to fund works and other activities of the people in the sub-county.  At the district level, the District Resistance Council controls all the funds of the District Administration.  Now, if we detach the Youth Council from the RC system, it will be quite difficult for the Youth Council to find funding for its activities.  At the national level, it is okay because we shall vote money for them in the budget, but at the lower levels, it will be very difficult for these people to raise money for their activities. I, therefore, suggest that although it is not proper that the chairmen of these youth committees at the lower levels, must be the youth secretaries in the RC, it is very important that the youth secretary of the RC becomes automatically a member of these youth committees.

AN HON MEMBER:  Point of information.  Provided by this Bill, already some RC secretaries for youths do not qualify to be members of the Council because they are over 26 years already.  Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I was also about to add that because in the past it was believed that a youth was either 20 years or below the age of 35 years, that is why we found many people above the age of 26 years becoming secretaries for youth on the RC.  We should later amend Statute No.9 to ensure that whoever is elected as Secretary for Youth of the RC, must be a youth as we have it in the case of women, that whoever is elected as Secretary for Women must be a woman. 

I would also like to comment on the National Youth Consultative Forum.  I do not see why it is necessary to bind the youth that they must always consult with Non-Governmental Organisations.  I think this consultation should be optional and should be kept out of this Bill, if it is so necessary that they consult the NGOs, the NGOs will be there, and they can always call a meeting and share views.  But I do not see why we are putting it in the law that they must always consult with the NGOs.  With those few remarks, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Motion.

MR. KIIRYA-GOLE (Budaka County, Pallisa): Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Bill.  Permit me to make some observations. As you know, like other hon. Members in this House, in Uganda today, the urban communities look at the rural communities as a source of their livelihood in terms of supply of food.  But there is a marked and sizeable exodus of youth from the rural communities to urban centres in search of job opportunities and soft life.  This kind of trend leaves the ageing people to sustain life in urban centres.  I would like at this juncture to caution the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth that they should formulate policies that check this kind of exodus from rural communities to urban centres, particularly of youth.  The Bill states that they will engage youth in activities that will benefit them and the nation at large.  But the hon. Minister was silent about what type of activities.  I would like to suggest that in my county, youth are already ahead of these activities which the Minister hopes to put in place for them. The youths in Budaka have already bought -(Inaudible)- machines, they have cinema halls -(Laughter).  You know, the youth like the cinemas, photo studios and videos.
THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. KIIRYA-GOLE:  I would like to suggest, Mr. Chairman, that in order to keep the youth attracted to the rural communities, there should be some social services that attract them.  We have got the problem of school dropouts, these also have got their projects. Because of the absence of electrical installations, we just see power lines passing over our houses to light a few urban centres.  I would like to suggest that in order for the Ministry to attract the youth, it should solicit some funds or generate some funds to step down these electrical installations so that rural projects which are attractive to the youths are initiated.  

While in our area we are known for growing rice, there is a negative trend with regard to the youth, particularly the school youth.  At the time of scaring birds, and that is a labour intensive activity, school children or the youth are withdrawn from school to attend to the rice fields by scaring off birds.  We need to mobilise and politicise the parents to resist and refrain from such a practice.  Mr. Chairman, allow me to refer to NUYO, which is a youth organisation in UPC -(Interjection)- Yes, they were founded by the UPC.  Yes, it is a fact!

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. KIIRYA-GOLE:  These NUYO people or members were mobilised, and they began making charcoal. Now they have turned out to be environmental terrorists -(Laughter )- we really need to conduct a seminar for these kind of people so that they stop this practice of terrorising our environment, and they should also be informed that future generations should a conserved environment. 

One activity I would like to suggest to the hon. Minister for Women in Development, Culture and Youth, is that the youth should be engaged as early as possible. They should be engaged in forming improved projects so that by the time they mature, each person has got a habitable dwelling called a shelter, instead of suggesting activities without coming up with activities that can attract the youth.  I beg to support the Bill, Mr. Chairman.

MR. TURYAHABWA (Kinkizi County, Rukungiri): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this time to contribute.  I stand to support this Bill on the strength of the objects and functions which have been clearly stated in Clause 4.  It is a good thing to organise Ugandan youth who are very many according to the 1991 Population Census records.  It would be a very good thing to organise the youth as a unified body.  This framework would reach out to all parts of Uganda.  There is always a complaint from the rural community that the feel of Government is enjoyed most in urban areas, especially, in the city. But when this framework is put in place, certainly, the youth in the rural communities will feel to be part and parcel of the democracy of this Country.  

I would also like to praise the NRM Government for recognising the potential strength of the youth, and for encouraging them to experience the democratic processes of governance.  The colonial governments in Uganda and the post-colonial governments tended to avoid youth by calling politics a dirty game, and closed the doors against the youth. I think it was dirty politics that time, but NRM Government has explained properly the science of managing society and I feel we should allow the youth to practice democracy.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.  I would like through you to inform the Member on the Floor that the youth, even in the past, were not stopped from taking part in politics. That is why they formed themselves into political youth wings where they did commendable jobs.

MR. TURYAHABWA:  I thank the hon. Member for his observation, but the commendable job was not really commendable.  Hon. Professor Kabwegyere said that they were really taught how to steal votes and eventually they would steal other things.  So, that is not commendable, Mr. Chairman.  

Another reason for my supporting this Bill is that the councils and their hierarchy will provide a channel for smooth communication; to promote good practical skills and patriotic attitudes among the youth in order to increase their participation in agriculture and industry for economic progress.  I propose that the activity which is recorded in Clause 4, sub-Clause (ii), Section (c), to establish channels through which economic and social services and amenities may reach the youth, should indeed be felt in all areas of Uganda.  The activity should focus on destruction of agricultural tools and other inputs like hoes and good seeds so that the youth can participate in our important industry of agriculture, and also to try to see that they should be informed wherever they are, through radios, TVs, or other media which reach the rural community.  

So, the Government should endeavour to distribute some affordable radios to the youth countrywide.  I wish to support the previous hon. Member who has emphasised the point of assisting the youth by providing loans to them to start self-help projects.  Once the projects have been well managed, the youth will pay back, I am sure.  

The youths should also be availed the opportunity to travel to other parts of Uganda to see for themselves that Ugandans are the same and can work together, instead of being misled by some literature in our dailies and weeklies, which often give the impression that Uganda is divided into compartments of different people who cannot work together.  

On the text of this Bill, Mr. Chairman, the meaning would come out properly for me, if the title was a possessive plural; the National Youth’s Council as we saw in the previous Bill which we passed as the National Women’s Council.  So, that possessive apostrophe in the title brings out the flavour. I would like to attach it to this Bill.  It gives the youth a pride of belonging to this Council, and in the Bill, you will find that some people who are adults will be invited to attend meetings.  So, if they have come to attend on consultation, they would feel they are attending a Council which belongs to the youth.  

In Clause 2, under Interpretations, I concur with hon. Members who say that the bracket for the youth should be extended to 30 years. I would like to point out that some senior bachelors and even spinsters, who are older than 26 years, feel happy when you do not call them women or men, so let us protect their cherished dignity.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR. TURYAHABWA:  Again on the lower bracket, the youth should be from 10 years.  I would like to inform the august House, Mr. Chairman, through you, that a child of ten years is already beginning to reason.  He has attained ambition and he is a person to groom into becoming a useful youth.

THE CHAIRMAN: Cries of order.

MR. TURYAHABWA:  Mr. Chairman, under Clause 6, I noted that the county council was missing in the list although it was mentioned in Clause 7, sub-Clause (v). So the hon. Minister should note it.  Then, under Clause 9, I also wish to support the idea of making the Chairman of this Committee not necessarily the Secretary for the Youth on our traditional RC systems, because any changes in this committee will tilt off balance the arrangement of the RC system.  I wish to emphasise the idea of this Chairman not necessarily being the Secretary for Youth on the traditional RC system.  Under Clause 15, Mr. Chairman, where effort is made to get salaries for the staff of the Secretariat, the Minister should not forget to provide stationery to RCs, and to the Youth Council Committees at various levels, if they have got to write letters and if they have to keep minutes as it is required by the Schedule, paragraph 8, sub-paragraph (ii).  
Under Clause 17, where a consultative forum is mentioned, I feel it is superfluous that this work should be done by the youth executive.  So, I concur with the previous hon. Member who has said that there is no need for this forum.

Finally, Mr. Chairman, I wish to emphasise that the youth are a formidable force and sometimes they tend to demand privileges, and to demand many things which could improve conditions of life immediately even if the means to do so may not be easy to come by.  So, I would like to advise the hon. Minister to adopt a method of dialogue to explain to the youth the importance of living a worthwhile life, with a sense of mission and creativity.  Otherwise, if we confront them, intimidate them or strap them, we may end up in confusion, which may not be easy to control.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to support.

MR. MAYENGO (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): I have looked at this Bill with mixed feelings and I thank you, Mr. Chairman, for allowing me to speak out these mixed feelings.  They may even sound uncoordinated, but that is the essence of being mixed.

Looking at the objects, first of all, the Bill is seeking to establish the Council.  The Council has objectives.  These objectives are the ones stated in the Bill in Clause 4, three of them:

(i)	To get the youth uniforms.  

(ii)	To get them engaged in activities that they are of benefit to themselves.  

(iii) To protect them against manipulation.

Starting with the last objective, I wonder what is easier to manipulate, a united group or a divestiture?  If I had been given the job to go and manipulate a group of youth, I do not think that I would opt to manipulate the ones who are unified. Those ones would know where to stand.

As I said earlier, I have come up with mixed feelings about those objects -(Inaudible)- if we are to go ahead in the setting up the Council.  For 30 years since Independence, we have been locked in an everlasting war against ignorance, and disease, and an internal war against poverty.  How about bringing our youth on the frontline to fight these enemies, by adding a fourth objective to engage the youth in activities directly against ignorance, poverty and disease?  I would like the Minister to think about it while we are still fighting disease, and we have had much worry about it - we have worried ourselves over malaria and diarrhoea.  That syphilis and gonorrhoea might reduce our population, and an even greater enemy has now surfaced on the horizon.  We are worried that AIDS might exterminate all of us.  

I, therefore, think that in the last object, the youth will be engaged in fighting against this new enemy.  There is even another enemy of slightly different quality but nevertheless a formidable enemy.  This enemy is more depraving, hon. Wanendeya prefers to call him corruption. This is another enemy that is eroding our society slowly by slowly, and it seems to have taken more horn in the upper edges than in the lower ones.  If I were to give the Minister another object, the fifth one, I would say as No. 5, to inculcate the youth with the spirit of honourable behaviour and trustworthy. With that, I would definitely not give up.  

Under Clause 4, is a long list of the activities.  When I look at these activities and also look further at Clause 19, which deals with finances, and under 19(1) (b) source of money, it is stated that such monies as will accrue to the activities.  However, I fail to see any which will be productive; to co-ordinate their communications - how much money will we have to generate?  Let the Minister go through slowly by slowly, she will realise that there is no income likely to come from inside.  Probably, knowing that nothing will come out from there, the Minister then went down to suggest that money will come from donations and grants.  This spirit of being beggars, to encourage it among the youth, right from the beginning, is a sign that we are becoming weak.  I think there should be activities for them to generate income.  Hon. Kiirya-Gole has mentioned that in his area, they have already started grinding maize, probably growing rice, and all kinds of things.  I think, let us look at the youth as a whole.  It is not a new problem, and it is not unique to Uganda alone; the whole world has seen it.  They look at it and it illustrates the different ways.  First of all, they do not place it in the Ministry like ours.  They place it in two Ministries; the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Labour.  

The Ministry of Education oversees the youth while they are still within the compulsory school age.  I saw in the paper yesterday that you are looking forward to compulsory school age.  I would say, at that stage, the Ministry of Education should be concerned.  Beyond that, the Ministry of Labour takes up the responsibility. That is the reason why in many countries you find youth employment service, a youth office, and youth clubs.  It was in 1939, when the British decided to coordinate all these activities, the youth centres, youth committees, youth clubs, and youth employment services, and they started setting up National Organisations.  The National Youth Employment Service of the United Kingdom is still in existence.  The Advisory Council on youth employment in Scotland is also still in existence, and is a similar one - well, it is still there.  And they do not only employ the youth, but employ them in activities which are congenial; activities which they like.  Why should a youth go to an RC type of meeting, for what?  What is interesting there?  The youth need to use up their energy by directing that energy into constructive channels, and in a manner which is interesting.  

In those places that I have mentioned, they are engaged in all kinds of activities such as, youth clubs, photography, and dancing.  They have the ability to do all kinds of things using their energy.  The hon. Member opposite said, their youth wingers did a commendable job. Unfortunately, most Members feel it is not quite that, but that instead, they were more destructive as a matter of fact. But that was in a political light.  It is possible for youth to be destructive in another way. 

You may recall, two years ago in Stockholm, youngsters who were coming from a disco set the 500 year old Catherine Church on fire; and they just set it ablaze for fun. Up to now, the authorities in Stockholm are still struggling to rebuild the Church, and that is another type of mixture.  

So, it is all this energy that we want to see directed in an interesting way not in this sort of political way.  I say political way, because this Council which we are proposing looks more political than ours does.  Otherwise, if it is not political, you look at clause 7, sub-Section (2), which says, when the Village Youth Council sits, only those above the age of eighteen will vote.  I am glad that hon. Sibo proposed an Amendment just to erase it. Imagine that the youth, who are in the age bracket of 18 to 26 years according to this Bill, go together in the village and the Motion is that they clear the way to the well after which they hold a disco and they discuss the Motion.  At the end of the Motion, those below the age of 18 are not allowed to vote.  Now a Motion like clearing the way to the well after which they have a disco, why should those below the age of 18 not be allowed?  My suspicion is that, probably those who drafted this thing had in mind that above the age of 18, it is when the youth will be able to understand the issues we are talking about as adults.  Otherwise, holding the disco is not important and it is not impossible for a teenager of 14 to be able to vote for the disco or against it. But, I hope that the Minister will agree with hon. Sibo’s Amendment and just erase sub-clause 2 of Clause 7.

Mr. Chairman, as I said, I have a mixed feeling on this Bill.  When the British passed their Education Act of 1944, all they did was to recognise the presence of all the voluntary efforts of the youth and they decided to provide money from the Ministry of Education to all those organisations that were engaged with the youth so that those organisations would employ some mature person to be able to guide the youth.  Imagine now, the youth of this sort suppose they had the juvenile deliquency in their midst and it is themselves trying to guide themselves!  How do we equip?  We need somebody with a skilled approach, somebody who knows what a juvenile deliquent is and how to deal with them.  So, the other fellows in U.K decided to have an officer in each local education authority who is concerned with guidance of youth and that is a paid officer, paid by the state.  This is where I said that my feelings to the Bill are quite mixed.  If you are to have it, actually have it in a much more sensible way than you have it at the moment.  I will never stop to lament the absence of the Standing Committees in this House because for something like this, we need a committee that has some bit of interest, and the ability to study this Act.  They will settle down and study the whole Bill properly and present it to us without all the shortcomings and it would cost us much less.  At the moment, this House is costing about shs. 10 million per day. I would say, 10 million - no 5 million because they start half of the time on Thursday.  Now 10 million on Friday, 10 million on Saturday, 10 million on Sunday, 10 million yesterday, 10 million today, 60 million, what for?  from the fellow fishermen who have so little money to pay the tax.  Mr. Chairman, I cannot support the Bill but at the same time, I cannot entirely -(Inaudible)- with it because the aim is noble, I would only say that the Bill be considered.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MISS NALUGO (Women Representative, Kiboga): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I stand up in full support of the Bill.  Just to add my voice on Members who have already supported the Bill, it is common knowledge to us that surely the youth have been ignored for long, but as long as I support the Bill, there are certain Clauses that I would wish us to pay attention to and I think one of them is Clause 2, which defines who a youth should be.  That is defining the age bracket of the youth to be 13 to 26.

Mr. Chairman, I feel that if we are to support the Bill with this age bracket still standing, the Bill may not achieve the desired end because of the following reasons:

(i)	In my Constituency from the survey I carried out, most of the active youth are above the age bracket defining this Bill.  And, the age bracket that defines the youth is comprised of youth students mostly and school dropouts.  So, if I am to consider the youth to start with the students, these are mostly in schools.  As you know, most of our rural areas do not have good secondary boarding schools, so most of them leave for other areas where these facilities are provided.  That means, they only participate effectively during holidays.

Again, if I am to tackle the remaining age group within the defined age bracket of the youth, the school dropouts, who are - I am sorry to say, bankrupt of ideas and cannot lead effectively.  So, that means they cannot provide good leadership, though they can participate effectively if they are guided -(Interruption)- Let me drive my point home, before I take the information later.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, proceed please.

MISS NALUGO: Mr. Chairman, what I am saying is that I do not think there is -(Interjection)- and 

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member on the Floor to say that the school dropouts are bankrupt of ideas when she knows that the actual school system in which they have been has made them bankrupt of ideas because of the wrong education system?  Is she in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: She is quite in order proceeding, please.

MISS NALUGO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank the hon. Member for his information that as long as I am a product of that education system, he is still a product of the same education system. But I hope he has good ideas and better ideas than those who did not have the chance to get that education, however bad the system may have been.

What I was saying, their ideas are not bad but there is that inferiority complex that tends to be accommodated in people who have not managed to go higher in education, unless that person is naturally gifted. But if you get education you are polished as compared to somebody who has not attained education.  That means if we are to continue with that defined age bracket leaving these other youth out, we shall not have the Bill, the Bill will not achieve this desired end.  So, I would suggest, that this age bracket be raised up to 35 years as the Statute pertaining now reads, because of the following reasons; not because I am still catered for, but because I believe youth is just a transitional stage. I believe that youth is a transitional stage, and however much one would wish to remain a youth just naturally, nature dictates that you have to leave that age group and in this Bill we are not making it so.  My wish is that we make it and it remains for generations, so that even if I would wish to remain youth, one time I will not be a youth. 

But I do not want hon. Members to take me wrongly, or mistake me for having personal interests other than national interests in this Bill by trying to have the age bracket extended to 35 years as it has been.  My reasons are that, if it is raised to that age, the age group between 26 and 35 has youth who are already graduates in tertiary institutions.  These are youth who are seeking employment, and like other Members pointed out, are loitering and are frustrated. So, why should we leave them again out there to frustrate them more?  Let us have them catered for in this Bill, so that at least they can lead and even provide the skill to these young ones that have - okay, who are in school whose thought now is not economic. Are they not catered for by their parents.  The issue about the age group that was defined, is to have them pass their examinations, which goal they have already achieved; that is acquiring academic qualification.  So, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support and I would try to request that hon. Members direct their discussions to that section.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.

MR. ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to comment on two items on this Bill. That is, the one on the objects and the other on the organisation structure.  As somebody has already said, one of the objects of this Bill which is contained in 4(1) (c) is to protect the youth against any kind of manipulation.  I think this is a very important objective for the Council, but I wonder how exactly this is going to be achieved.  I wonder how they are to achieve these objectives that will stop the youth from being manipulated both as a group and as individuals.  I wonder also, Mr. Chairman, if, by creating this Council, we are not creating an instrument for manipulating the youth.

Mr. Chairman, I would like to compare this with what many people have already commented on negatively, that is, that these days, it is a fashion that when somebody speaks, in order to be recognised that they have made any point, they have got to criticise organisations or certain things which were created before 1986.  I refer to the organisation of political party youth wingers.  It appears people have imputed so many wrong things about the youth movement.  I would like to caution here, and that really applies to this Bill we are discussing as well, that it is not the movement of political youth wingers itself that was probably wicked.  I think some people who misused these movements are probably the wicked ones.  I remember this as a youth, and one of those who took part in organising youth in our district in the youth wing movement.  The objectives were very noble indeed.  We did organise the youth because, one, we wanted to sensitise them on their political rights and also make them take part in political activities.  The second objective was to make youth contribute and help the elders towards the fight to Independence and I must say, the youth did very well.  So, when I say, they did a commendable job, I am referring to that kind of activity.  It is true that after all, some people obviously misused these organisations and I am saying that these organisations we are trying to create will not be immunised to this kind of manipulation if we are not careful.

If the Youth Council can succeed in stopping youth from being manipulated, I believe they will have done a commendable job because that is very important.  Youth are at the age where they can be manipulated easily and we have seen it in this country.  One of the way youth were very badly misused is in the institution called ‘Kadogos’.  I was surprised, that one member glorified the activities of ‘kadogos’ in this House.  He did not probably stop to wonder why the older soldiers were afraid of kadogos.  It is because at this age they can be manipulated and they could use, and they used the guns sometimes without thinking, and that is why the older soldiers feared them.  

Let us also hope that the age of the kadogos has passed and will never come back again. No wonder these other fellows in the North who were in the bush, misused the children.  It is pathetic, that most of the people who did horrible things from the rebel movement were the youth; the young ones.  It is a fact and this is why I say, this objective is very important if the Youth Council, which we are likely to create, will succeed in stopping the manipulation of the youth. They will have done a good job.  One wonders for how long!

As I said, I would also like to comment on the structure of the organisation we are setting up.  Many people have already voiced their misgivings about attaching the Youth Councils to the RC system.  I think they are right in one sense that once it is organised - I can see a lot of problems within the structure at the grassroots from the resource point of view.  We have had a lot of problems with the lower RCs because of resources.  We have a situation in some areas where the RCs do not want to work or are not as committed as they should be because they are not provided with the resources to make them perform.  And I cannot see how this is going to be different from the Youth Council the way it is structured.  The money vote here if we are not careful, is likely to remain at the Secretariat level like it does in the NRM Secretariat.  

So, here is where I would like the Ministry to be very careful and watch out and ensure that whatever money that Parliament will vote for, to run this Council, will reach down to the grassroots where it is actually needed.  That is what I wanted to suggest about this Bill. Otherwise in principle, I have no quarrel with it.  I only hope that they will guard against manipulation and before I sit down, Mr. Chairman, may I take this opportunity to thank you in particular and some other Members of the House who took time to see me in the Hospital when I was hospitalised as a result of the accident.  I was very touched by your visit and your concern. Members of the Welfare Committee went to see me in masses, I was very grateful indeed. This is when I realised how important it is to visit people in hospital.  Mr. Chairman, I say this because this is one of the rare times that I was ever in hospital, so I was not quite aware of the importance of visiting people in hospital and I encourage Members to take note of this.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU (Mukono County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First of all, I want to congratulate the NRM Government for fulfilling a political possibility.  Sometime back, early in the late 1980s, the Movement promised the Youth a National Youth Council and five representatives to this House.  Unfortunately, this has not been the case, and may not be for sometime to come. Because passing the Bill today may not definitely mean that the five youth are really coming in this House.  So, we yet look forward to seeing this happen.  Mr. Chairman, though officially I represent Mukono County, informally, I represent the interests of the youth in this House -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order pleas.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  And I am really happy to inform you that I am the Chairman of the National Youth Council and Committee -(Applause).  Mr. Chairman, I pray for some extra time in case -(Interjection)- first of all I want to thank the Minister in charge of the youth because we have had many Ministers in this department who have always failed or sat on the Youth Bill. But I must congratulate the new Minister and the Deputy for having ably presented the Bill to this House.  

We are all aware that we do not have a National Youth Policy in this country. Maybe by forming this National Youth Council and National Youth Movement, the Government might come up with a National Youth Policy which will be able to guide the Youth of this Nation.  Under Clause 2, I want to start with interpretation of the youth.  Where it is stated that a Youth should be between the age of 13 and 26 years. We are all aware that in Uganda presently, some one between the age of 13 and 25 years is supposed to be in school and these are the people we want to become our future leaders. By that time, someone cannot really tamper with National issues, leave alone his education.  In the National Adhoc Youth Council, we recommended that a youth should be a person between the age of 13 and 35 years for certain reasons.  

The whole Nation is already aware that a youth is a person between the age of 13 and 35 years, because even in the RC elections, the first time and the last time we elected the secretaries for youth at all levels, we have been considering the age of 35 years as a maximum, and that is according to the RC Statute.  However, I really do not know why the Minister had to change the age from 35 to 26 years.  The age between 26 and 35 years is a dynamic age. Those are the people you can depend on to mobilise others -(Interruption)-

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor on the issue of - which I know at least in my Constituency - of having ladies and gentlemen who are 35 years and have got children of 16 years. What would happen if the father and the sons are going into the Youth Council?

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Mr. Chairman, we want co-existence in our society.  So, even if someone is 13 years and the father is 35 years, someone of 13 years according to the Bill is not supposed to be elected.  Maybe at the village level he can come in, but when it comes to administration that is impossible.  Therefore, we are of the opinion that someone between 25 and 35 years can ably lead and guide his young fellow, because the purpose of the Bill and its objects are to unite and organise the youths.

DR. OTENG: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to have some information on various age groups.  Being a child starts when you are born and it usually extends itself into adolescence between 0 and 12 years. When you are 12 years, you find that you are sexually aware of the environment and that is when youthfulness begins.  But the youthful age usually begins at about 14 years for the women, but a bit earlier for the men.  

When you are getting a bit older, that is when you are getting out of the youthful age, you have already passed 25 years, and now when you have passed 25 years there is a period of transformation, which is not a clearly defined period, but may take five years or more.  So, if you take 0 to 35 years, that is the transformation period before one becomes a full adult.  So, I think, that we should take that biological period in consideration when we are determining the age bracket for youth and others.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  That is a real father.  Mr. Chairman, if we want to get good leaders for our country in the future, we have to train them and this is a period when we should be training the future leaders we want to have in our country.  Because it is not easy to train a corporate body and it may purchase, hold, and manage and dispose of any property whether movable or immovable.  

We have land in various districts owned by the youth and the land titles are with the Ministry in charge youth affairs.  Unfortunately, the Local Administration and some other greedy old timers have refused to give this land to the youth for commercial use, to enable them also come up.  For example, in my district, we have 450 acres in Ngogwe sub-county, 100 acres in Nagalama and another 100 at Bugerere.  I was also made to understand that a big portion of Old Kampala Hill belongs to the youth and the land title is with the Ministry.  There is a problem however, Mr. Chairman, that on many occasions the youth of this country have been denied a chance to own or even have access to this land -(Interruption)- 

MR. MUHINDO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman. The purpose of incorporation is for the organisation to be able to sue or be sued, now that this is in process, it is answering what the Member is talking about.  

MR. APILA:  Point of information.  But the question of land is not responsible for a particular group. It is the Government which is the owner of every land in the country.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Okay.  The Government is only a custodian. But once someone owns a land title, he is supposed to be another custodian, though the Government is superior with superior powers.  There is another national handloom project, the first of its kind in this country, at Ntawo District Farm Institute. It was abandoned, and is supposed to be a pilot project to train all the youth of this nation. In fact, it can produce towels, bed covers, shirt materials and many other things. But this was abandoned and nothing is likely to be done. Maybe with the formation of this Youth Council and perhaps given funds, they can do something.  

Under Clause 4 of the Bill, the objects of the Council have to organise the youth of Uganda into a unified body.

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I will not like this point to go just like that.  The hon. Member holding the Floor has castigated the Government for refusing to give land to the youth in Ngoma, Ngogwe, Nagalama and Bugerere.  As far as Government is concerned, any particular individual is free to apply for land anywhere as long as he follows the normal procedures and if the youth are not well organised, it could be very difficult for government to give land to a disorganised society because it will be the beginning of disputes once a land title is issued.  But we hope that the Member could clarify whether the groups that are interested in this land are organised or not.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  It is good that the land is in Mukono District, which is the most organised district with regard to youth issues.  For your information, the youth are not applying for the land. As I already said, the land titles are already with the Ministry responsible for youth affairs. But some squatters have refused to go off the land, and the Ministry has also not taken the trouble to send them away or even to organise some funds to be utilised on such farms.  

Under Clause 4, the Council shall consist of one representative from each district elected by the members of the conferences. We are of the opinion that members of the Conference should not elect one representative.  It should be the District Youth Council to elect their representative to the National Conference.  

Under Clause 7, a Village Youth Council shall consist of every person who has attained the age of 13 years but is below the age of 26 years and is a resident of the village. That is fine.  But when it comes to the -(Interjection)- no, when it comes to voting, we have a problem, why should we separate, it should be uniform once one is a member of the Council he should vote -(Applause)- and afterall, the objects of the Bill are to unite the youth into one unified body, and once they are one body why should we say, at 13 they are members but they do not vote?  

However, there is a problem here that defeats the objects of the Bill.  After all even if the 13 year old youth are in a Council, definitely those who are older than them cannot easily give them big positions like Chairman, because they would be lacking the experience.  This is known everywhere even in this House. For example, we have had many organisation committees, but always the youth have been denied a chance of becoming leaders.  Mr. Chairman, on Clause 8, (Interruption)-

MR. MULONDO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wanted to inform the self-styled representative of the Youth, the hon. Member, that there are two issues, which we should consider.  The Youth who are no longer minors and the youth who have matured.  The youth under the age of 18 years are minors and, therefore, cannot under the present law here in Uganda, enter any contract. Which means that they cannot even vote because that is part of the contract and, therefore, they could still be members of the Youth Organisation. But when it comes to voting, they cannot be voted and they cannot, therefore, be elected to any responsible office because whatever they are considered minors and, therefore, they are not considered as responsible under any law.

MRS. RHODA KALEMA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate the information given by the Deputy Minister of Lands and I would like to add to that information that youth is a very wide group unfortunately. I hope I will be given a chance to make my personal contribution later on or tomorrow.  But the problem is that from 13 to 18 years they are actually referred to as young persons or adolescents, and in fact, if they commit an offence they are not tried in court like adults, unless that child has committed an offence together with an adult, that is when he or she can be tried in the adult court. Otherwise, they are sentenced outside court.  So, already, Mr. Chairman, we have a problem with the age group, and the age group between 13 to 26years or from 13 to 30 years, is already a very erratic definition of the youth.  Thank you very much.   

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I want to inform the hon. Deputy Minister that I am not a self-appointed Youth leader. Our Youth Council is composed of all secretaries for Youth RC 5, all National Student Leaders and our Parliamentary Youth Lobby Group. That is the composition of the Council.  Unfortunately, he his not a member because he would have been aware of that.  
Under Clause 8, sub-section (c), the secretary for women at the district level, we are not happy with the word ‘women’ in a Youth Bill. It should read, ‘secretary for female at the district level or anywhere mentioned women, it should be changed to ‘female’ not ‘women’.  Because the women are already catered for in the Women’s Council Bill, and we have already described what a woman is in the Bill, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please, try to wind up.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Mr. Chairman, we are not happy with Clause 9, which states that, ‘The Secretary for Youth at the relevant Resistance Council shall be the Chairman’.  It should be the youth themselves to elect their chairman at any level, whether from village or national level.  In case a secretary for youth is a non- - starter, the youth should be given a chance to elect their chairman who can make things move.  Because, once someone is a secretary for youth and is the chairman, there is no way they can vote him out of office and replace him.  

And, we have another problem; the vice-chairman would be a lady. I remember in 1988, when the NRM Government issued a circular to all districts that we should elect youth councils at all levels, and they had given us some guidelines that once one is a boy the other one should be a girl.  In fact we have to look at these gender issues and we want to promote the female also to come into the limelight, since this is a training ground for our future leaders.  Normally, when we call youth councils, very few girls turn up. Therefore, that is why we want to encourage them to give them leadership and under (f), ‘a Secretary for Students Affairs’.  Here we are also afraid; once someone is not a student, he or she may not be able to cater for the students’ needs.  We, therefore, suggest that if someone at the district level or any other level is to become a secretary for students affairs, they should also be a student since they will also be allowed to join.

THE CHAIRMAN: Wind up.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Mr. Chairman, let me try to wind up.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Concerning the election of the five youth NRC Representatives, we are of the opinion that these Members should be elected at regional basis. We have five regions in the country, that is Central, South, West, East and North and it is the proposal we have, so that this Nation is fairly represented by the youth. Otherwise, once we live this to be in the pool, you can find that some young members of the Youth Council from around Kampala may all the 5 seats.  Therefore, it would be better if we are fairly represented by the whole nation.  Mr. Chairman, I had a lot to say, but since time has run out, I thank you for giving me the chance.  Thank you very much.  

MR. MBURA MUHINDO (Busongora County, Kasese): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to be able to speak on this Bill. Before I continue with the Bill, I have seen one thing. When the Youth Council is incorporated, it will have the ability to sue and to be sued and, therefore, to claim property that belongs to itself.  The last Member who was speaking has mentioned one issue that they have some of the land at Old Kampala.  I am beginning to fear that if the Muslim Supreme Council is situated on this land, then it will be immediately told to pack.  So, we would like the Minister responsible to be able to clear this before the Moslems are frustrated.

The basis of this Government depends on popular democracy, the will of the majority and a high consideration for the NRM Government, and it is for this matter, Mr. Chairman, that I support this Bill.  

It is well known that the youth everywhere in the world still have a long time to live and, therefore, if things go wrong today, they are the ones who will suffer tomorrow. According to the life expectancy of this country, some of us and many outside of this House have already reached that age. So, the people who should be concerned with the affairs of this country are actually the youth.  

The youth are very active, vigorous and promising, can be very inquisitive and, therefore, we must handle them with utmost care.  But, we must look also at them as the biggest population in our society, and ask ourselves what role they are playing in the economy of this country.  It is well known that the economy of this country is a subsistence agricultural economy, and I pose a question that, how much have the youth contributed towards agriculture in this country?  Many of us will say that their contribution is little because they are in school, but during holidays I see many of them just loitering in the towns because they fear to go to the farms, and whenever I  addressed youth councils and youth organisations, I have challenged them and said, if you want us to recognise you, then you must contribute very substantially to the economy and this economy is a subsistence economy. Do not run to towns, but you must stay in the village and contribute to agriculture, and do not leave the old people who are weakening, to feed you, because you are strong, you should be the ones to feed them. 

So, whoever is advocating for the youth, I request that this point be taken into consideration very seriously.  The other issue of course is on industry. The youth must show some concern and make a contribution towards industry. These are the two main areas that will bring this country back to its former glory. 

I must, however, recommend the youth for putting Uganda’s name on the map in terms of sports. They have done a good job and I thank them. The major activity through which  the youth of this country can be organised is education. But, going to school is not a fashion; you do not go to school and be seen, but you must go to school with a mission -(Interruption)- 

DR. MUKISA: Point of order -(Inaudible)-

THE CHAIRMAN: It was quite in order.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Mr. Chairman, as usual, I expected your wise leadership to be given the right ruling. Before I was interrupted, I was just saying that the main activity we have in the country through which the youth can be organised is education, and I was saying that education is not a fashion; it is not that you must go to school to be seen. You must go to school with a mission; have something you want to achieve in society, and that is why I challenge the youth to go to school and get skills.  Do not go to school and come out with no skills at all, because if you come out without any skills, you are just adding to the problems that we are already trying to solve. So they should go to school to get skills.  But they cannot get the skills unless they have proper career guidance.  At school and in institutions, career guidance is no longer there, so when the youth go to school, they do not even know what subjects they must do in order to become what they want to become, and I am calling upon the Deputy Minister of Education here, to take this institution of career guidance very seriously, because our children are just driving in the dark.  If you ask a student of senior four what do they want to become in the future, they will tell  you that they do not know, and if you ask what subjects they are doing, they will tell you they are doing chemistry or biology, but if you ask them what their goal is at the end of the day, they do not know, so -(Interruption)

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the role rests with parents to guide their children, not only the teachers or the Ministry of Education, because it will be a shame.  Mr. Chairman, if your child was asked what do you want to do, and she is just blank and you are blaming the teachers, do you think you are a parent responsible to bring up your child.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Mr. Chairman, -(Interruption)- 

REV. ONGORA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification, now that the hon. Member is recommending that the parents have a big role to play in bringing up their children, whether it is still necessary to have a whole director manning the Youth Desk at the NRM Secretariat, and doing nothing, and having a Minister trying to propose a Bill of this kind. So, I do not know which is which; whether we should still keep that type of person who is doing nothing and also have this one coming before us.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just want to thank the two hon. Members, okay, with your old wisdom, I can accept.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, that it is a duty, a golden duty, of a state to guide a nation through economic development and planning.  So, it is, therefore, a must and a necessity in modern state to have career guidance for the youth.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I thank all the hon. Members who have been very kind with their information. Turning to the first hon. Member, I want to tell her that I am really speaking from experience, as a professional teacher. My father did not know how to write and neither did my mother know how to write, and this is the situation many of us here have grown in. How did you expect my father Mbura-Musenyi who did not know what medicine, or engineering, or chemistry is, to give me guidance, apart from depending on my teachers.  Now, by the level of our society, the hon. Member who is a lawyer should know where we are!  So, we just have to depend on the teachers because of the level where we are. 

Mr. Chairman, I also want to discuss something about the role of Commercial Institutions -(Interruption)-

MR. BUTIME:  Point of information.  I wish to inform hon. Mbura Muhindo that his father knew engineering, medicine, and biology, except that he did not know European medicine, or European technology, etc.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Mr. Chairman, I want to thank my hon. Minister for the very fact that because you went to school, is also the very fact that you did not want to follow your father’s medicine, or his engineering or even his internal affairs.  So, when we went to school, it was a way of us trying to get something modern and when I talk about engineering, I am talking about modern engineering, and not when we used to go and get iron and steel locally.

DR. OTENG: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member who spoke to give us information that when the Europeans came, the native medicine was called witchcraft and other things were relegated to be backward So our fathers could not relate modern medicine with their medicine.  Thank you.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: So, Mr. Chairman, you can really see that - I want to say something about the role of these commercial institutions, these lower ones. We need to show the youth where to go. Many youth are just languishing on the street, not knowing that it is not only going to university that can be a solution to their problem, and this is what we have tried to show them. Most of the people who contribute to the economy; the majority are not those who have been to university or school, these are the people who are at the base, doing things. So, commercial institutions in this country should not be ignored even by government. They should be given support and I am again directing this to my hon. Minister of Education, that these institutions which -(Inaudible)- after senior four, should not be ignored because wherever you go in industry, and in other activities, you will find that these fellows are very, very useful, and we need to give them this kind of career guidance.  

Now, I want to talk about leadership. Everywhere you go, as many speakers have talked, we just say the youth are the leaders of tomorrow. Okay, they are the leaders of tomorrow. But leadership is not just an accident. We need these people to be trained and to be shown what to do, and I support the chairman of the youth interim, that the youth must be given training. We must give them an opportunity rather than just give them lip service, and this lip service I do not go with it.  We should guide them and it is through such organisations that the youth can be given a chance to know what leadership is, and also to be able to know about their country.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would also like to supplement what the hon. Member has said that it is very important that we get our youth organised like this, so that we can assure ourselves of good leadership when we are old.  Because if we do not let these people learn how to acquire skills of leadership, we will pay the price when time comes, when we are so old, and we shall get bad leaders or inexperienced leaders.  

But what is lacking in the Bill which I would have liked to be incorporated, is the objective to have the youth to start thinking with the values of society; values which have been eroded from amidst our organisations, government, structure, churches, and mosques, which have been undermined by the bad leadership we have had for the last 20 years or so, by people like Idi Amin, by mafuta mingism, by bayayeism, and things of this nature.  In this Bill, we should make sure that one of the objectives is to get the youth organised so that they can inculcate values of society into leadership.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: I thank you hon. Member. Mr. Chairman, allow me to talk about a very important issue that normally happens to such organisations. In these organisations, on many occasions they have not managed their finances properly.  Financial management in such institutions is very poor, but what are the reasons?  Some of the reasons, even when we set up this Council, is that capitalisation will be very poor. They will not be given enough resources to manage their affairs and when they fail to manage their resources, everybody will condemn them, but not knowing that they had not actually been given enough capitalisation.  The second issue is that when we set up such a Council and we take managers, because we have very poor accountants, record keeping, and very poor financial regulations in many organisations. There is no internal auditing, and budget control is not there, and therefore, they even fail to produce annual accounts because the people we put in these organisations do not know how to do those things. When you appoint a manager of an executive or a youth council, you look for somebody who has been playing very good football, yet there is nothing between football and management!  Those two do not work together, and this is what has been happening.  When you want to appoint a manager of a very good parastatal such as Uganda Railways, you go and look for somebody, maybe one who knows how to drive a train very well. But management is a profession. You must look for trained managers, and this is where we are going wrong.  As a government, however, once we have made mistakes, we go around making noise. But we should not make noise in the first place, because we have placed the wrong people in the right positions.  

So, Mr. Chairman, this warning must be taken very seriously. I do not want to see an executive of a youth council who was a very good footballer, or a very good dancer as a youth, as a manager.  I want to assure you that management is a profession. If you want consultations, you can consult us -(Interruption)-

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I just want to inform the hon. Member that in present Uganda, we have a lot of youth who have even got MBAs and they have no jobs. As I talk right now, I have seen in a lot of interview panels, young men and women between the age of 23 to about 30, seeking for work, and I can give you a small figure from Civil Aviation, of children of young men and women who are loitering in Kampala here with MBAs and degrees in commerce, but without work. I, therefore, would like to inform the hon. Member that you should not worry yourself. We have youth who are qualified.

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member has just contradicted my statement. This is exactly what I have been seeing. Why do you get a very good pilot to be Chief Executive of Civil Aviation? Being a good pilot has nothing to do with management, and this is what I am saying. If you say there are many youth with MBAs in a parastatal like Civil Aviation, you will want to put a very good pilot for a manager, this is what I am saying!  A pilot has nothing to do with management go, and get a trained Manager instead.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  I would like, Mr. Chairman, to inform the House that the speaker is a very recent graduate of the Uganda Institute of Management -(Laughter).

MR. MBURA MUHINDO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Although the facts I am making are not disputed, these are the facts and this is why our own parastatals are collapsing.  You go and get a parastatal where there is mining and you say the General Manager must be somebody who was drilling properly in the mines, and this is the point that I am making.  That being a good dweller in mines does not have any connection to do with management. Why don’t you accept the fact! So, I hope my point is taken.  
In conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I am happy that with the NRM Government, the majority of the people are now being given guidance so that the violence that has been associated with the youth is not expected.  With these few words, and unless there are any remarks, I thank you and support the Bill.

DR. MAGEZI (Jinja Municipality, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill, with some observations, and I will be very brief.  Mr. Chairman, on the age limit of the youth, having considered what actually is happening in the field, I strongly support that the age limit be extended up to 35 years.  

Under Clause 5, it states that, ‘one representative from each district elected by the Members of the Conference’.  This is for membership of the Council. To avoid a situation where the National Resistance Council in its entirety elects NEC Members from each district, we have seen the performance of that election ourselves here, and I strongly suggest that the District Youth Council should elect their own representative to the Council.  

We have got youth committees whose chairmen are elected by delegates, people who are just 18 years of age, and the rest of the nine members are elected by the youth themselves. I agree that there may be a conflict where you elect a Chairman for RC I Youth Committee, who is not a Secretary for Youth at RC I, and yet in Schedule 4, it is stated that except for a Village Youth Council, a Youth Council or Committee may remove from office any of the nine members.  

We are saying that the youth committee can remove any Member of the committee, but they do not appoint that person, especially, as far as the chairman is concerned.  I think the Minister responsible should clarify that position.

Under part 5, concerning the election of the National Resistance Council representatives, the conference is supposed to elect from the Council, which constitutes of 41 people - 39 from districts and 2 from USER, in order to make the election more democratic, and to put checks and balances. I am proposing to the Minister to accept that the conference elects from the conference itself, which is a wider forum and properly constituted.  In addition, for better checks and balances, I think these five representatives should, actually come one from each of the various regions, that it is Buganda, Western, Eastern, Central and Northern, so that each region is represented.  

Something has been said about manipulation of youth.  Maybe the word manipulation is actually on the accuser and who is accused, and I can foresee a situation where even the youth themselves can manipulate each other.  And for what goal?  And without some bit of manipulation, I do not see the objects of the Council, being realised.  So, let us not worry too much about manipulation.  Manipulation can be positive, and I think we should foster manipulation, which will bring about unity of purpose rather than just condemning it.  

So, I think that as long as youth know what they are being manipulated for, or what they want themselves to - what their goal or aim is, we should leave this clause as it is in its entirety.  

I call upon the Minister to accept some of the proposals that I intend to move as Amendments at the committee stage, because they have been arrived at by a wide consensus of youth from Jinja District.  Many of whom are here in the gallery listening to this deliberation.  I support the Bill, Mr. Chairman.  

MRS. IKOTE ALLELUYA (Women Representative, Pallisa): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The youth can be described as uncoordinated troop movements in Uganda.  While women have had amongst themselves, members with divisions, maturity, experience, intelligence, know-how, and have managed to initiate amongst themselves, vehicles of development for their benefit and society, to mention a few, UWESO, ACFODE, National Council of Women, FIDA, and in Pallisa,  PAWA, this is not the case for the youth.  The youth have had to rely on a few half-hearted efforts from the Government, and this has not had much impact.  These youth bodies are virtually unknown in places like Pallisa, but with this pyramid of arrangements which we are about to create, I am encouraged to believe that something, information will now begin trickling down.  And then what happens after we have created these Councils? I am calling upon all arms of Government and Ministries, to make a special effort to allocate something to and through these Councils for the youth.  I want to recognise for special mention here, the Ministry of Education and Sports.  
The Ministry of Education and Sports has concentrated on adults instead of the youth. In their sports programme they have concentrated or publicly at least, on clubs like Villa, Express, and Cranes, and in Cricket, on Tonados, and so on and so forth. These are adult groups.  I am asking them to look down to the youth.  When it comes to international sports, you find that foreign athletes are trained from as early as childhood, but more often at the youth stage, and these are the ones who become world champions.  

But in Uganda, the youth are left completely on their own, and when they get a few resources tend to concentrate on meagre sports or the basic sports such as football, sprinting and boxing.  Those are the three, they tend to concentrate on, but specialised sports such as cricket, swimming and so on, are never on the school curriculum of Uganda without the effort of the Ministry of Sports, and I hope, through these Councils, they will channel some of their resources towards such sports.  When there is a clinic for coaches -(Interruption)- 

MR. DAVID PULKOL: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am being reminded, that is why we need elders.  But surely the Ministry of Education and Sports is steadfastly moving away from sports being a Nakivubo affair and being monopolised by the godfathers of these clubs, and getting sports back to the sports people, given the fact that in every parish in Uganda, you have a school and most schools have football pitches or running tracks.  Therefore, the thrust of our policy, which is now in the making, seeks to shift emphasis towards promoting sports in schools.  Already, we have physical education being taught in these schools and we are now busy training experts in physical education, who will be game makers, as it were.  Already we are conducting courses for coaches, and most of these are in schools. We would like the school to be a centre point where sporting activity can take place for obvious reasons.  That is why we are stopping these people from taking expensive trips outside the country, and as a result, the Ministry has resorted to importing sports equipment.  Even as I speak now, some of the equipment is now on the seas.  This is sports equipment which we shall distribute in schools and clubs where the bulk of our youth who are currently participating in sports are.  Today, our schools have games masters and the National Teacher’s Colleges are busy training these games masters.  So, it is wrong to think that the Ministry of Sports and Education is doing nothing at all in this sector. Most of the players - even in Villa, I can quote a number for you who are still students.  But I will leave that to you to do some homework.  Thank you.

MRS. IKOTE:  I am glad for that piece of information.  I wish he did not have to wait until I provoked him.  But the Ministry of Education and Sports has really been very short in their programmes on sports, so much so that I am indebted with requests by women, for football so that they can play football.  You can see people are even losing direction!  Women now think that they can also play football.  They do not even know that there is a game called netball, which is, you know more of their concern.  

On the issue of the age of the youth, I feel that since this is voluntary work, a person who feels that he is a youth should be allowed to participate.  Some people feel old at 20 or 25 years, and others feel still very young at 50 and 60 -(laughter).  So, I personally, would advocate, if you really have to have an age limit, let it be 40 years old for the Youth Council.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. MUGARURA Women Representative, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill and I have the following observation.  Although the age limit has been legislated for, there is no limit on education.  I wish the Bill stressed the level of education of these leaders.  I have reasons for suggesting this. In February last year, when the councillors of the lower RC system were being elected, I witnessed a situation where when electing the RC IV Councillors, the good people were being eliminated in favour of illiterate youth just to hit on the past political affiliations.  So, we missed good leaders at some levels because education was not stressed.  And we know that the majority of our youth, a big percentage, are illiterate.  They have not been to school.  Even those who have gone to school, most of them have dropped out.  Now, if we insist on 13 to 26 years it means a child who starts school at 6 years, will be 12 years after P.6, and will be 13 years after P.7. Yet it is known that development - intellectual development in children, grows with age.  Wisdom and logic grow with age.  Since most of our youth who live in villages are around that age group, it means that they will be school dropouts, with limited education, age, wisdom, cognitive development and logic.  Therefore, this puts our Councils at risk.  

So, I would like the Minister to pay attention to the age limit and provide for it.  Although the 13 to 26 age limit is in agreement with international standards, looking at our situation in Uganda, I would suggest that the youth age brackets are extended from 13 to 30 years of age.  

Section 19, part (ii), deals with the youth and financial control.  The youth are going to elect themselves in their councils.  I would like to suggest that some ex-officials such as, county chiefs, sub-county chiefs or DAs, become ex-officials on these committees to give the youth guidance.  

On activities, I was thinking that these activities should be nationalised so that we should stress activities, which can be covered nationally, and so that the youth have programmes to follow; specific programmes to follow, so that we can assist this Ministry to mobilise the youth movements.  I will give the example in Kasese, when we were touring in the Constituency, sometime back on a fundraising day, Mr. Chairman, you happened to have been the guest of honour on that occasion, and we saw what the youth in Kasese could do.  They were the best producers of cotton in the whole nation.  Now, if an activity on agriculture is generalised, and a national programme is drawn up, it will be easy to mobilise the youth.  

One Member suggested that the vice-chairman of the RC V Council should be a lady.  I suggest that since the youth form the majority of our population, and the females at birth are more than the males, we need more female representation on this Council, and at this stage in development, unless we legislate this, we are not going to have them because the public is still biased against females.  
I would also like to suggest that on posts highlighted in this Bill, such as chairman, vice chairman, and general secretary, that preferably since we are building the youth for future leadership, we could try to equalise and have female and male representation for different roles, so that if the chairman is a male or a female for that matter, the vice chairman becomes vice-versa.  There is need to guard the election of these youth against adult manipulation.  We have seen adults influence some of these activities and, therefore, where a female has been identified as powerful and capable of being chairman, the vice-chairman should be a man and vice-versa. Also, where a male has been elected general secretary, the secretary for students’ affairs or for labour should be a female, so that we build a balanced society in future, and so that the two sexes are looked at equally in future.  So, I think we should not just limit women to the post of vice-chairman and secretary for women, but we should avail them more opportunities to participate in national affairs.  With those few words, I beg to thank you.

MRS. KAZUNGU (Women Representative, Iganga): I thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, though I must apologise for my voice. I rise in support of the Bill, and I would like to echo what hon. Mugarura has just been saying  that we do not know how we shall bring up a balanced society, because when you keep on saying that we should have only a representative for the female, then we should have here a vice-chairman. But I am already worried that all these five seats shall actually be taken up by youthful men and in fact, what I would want to emphasise here is that, when you are a woman, and then you are again a youth, you suffer twice; you know that discrimination.  You are first of all discriminated by the fact that you are a woman, and then as a youth.
I would like to emphasise one of the objects of this Bill, that is 4 (c), which states that it wants the formation of this Council to make sure that the youth are not manipulated.  A number of Members have actually raised their voices, about manipulation and misuse, and I would like to add on what has been making me annoyed, the exploitation.  You know in many cases the youth are asked to do certain things. Like in the case of kadogos, one Member was saying that afterall, these kadogos might not have done a good job.  Anyway, he is entitled to his opinion. But what we are saying is that these kadogos, and it is a fact, did a good job.  But when it comes to power sharing, we are now saying, that they are too young.  Why is it that we did not tell them then that you are too young to participate?  So, the issue that I am really trying to -(Interruption)-

MR. MUTEBI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Now that this point has come up the second time, I had thought that it had passed us without notice. But mentioning the kadogos is becoming an irritating matter to some of us.  That is a matter of survival.  There is no age.  These kadogos had to survive, and in their survival they had to use the gun, and if need be, nationally when we get a crisis like that, the kadogos will come back again for their survival.

MRS. KAZUNGU:  In other words, you are saying that they should be recognised - I mean we should not start saying, like one Member said, that you know, when the youth are below the age of 13 years, they are still children, and they are under parental care, and they should, therefore, not participate.  That is actually my point and in fact, I also wanted to remind this Member that much as he wants us to believe that most of these children between maybe the age of 12, 13 and 15 years are supposed to be under parental care and parental guidance, but you find that some of these do not have parents and I suppose this hon. Member knows how much child abuse has been disguise as being under relatives or guardians, so that we have even had cases, rather we are saying that we are having this problem of street children.  Most of these street children, I do not know seem to be coming out of homes - either broken homes or homes where the parents have died.  

What I want to emphasise is that we are actually having a number of children in these age groups that do not have parents because they do not have parents. We do not have to assume that they are under any guidance.  They need to come to these foras and to these councils to get information, information to the effect that should they suffer child abuse, which you know very well is on increase, they would know where to go.  Some of these children, for example, I have a case of a girl of 12 years, the girl was defiled, but she did not even know who the chairperson of her village council was, nor any secretary of the village committee, just because when it is election day, the youth are told that they are just too young, so who would assist this poor girl?  

So, what I want to emphasise here is that the lower age bracket of 13 years, I would not like to move that it could even be lowered, but what I am saying is that it should remain.  I also wanted to question the Minister because I did not get time to find out, but last year in the papers, there was a lot of noise about the state of affairs at Kampiringisa and at Bugungu. These are supposed to be the reformatory schools in the country. I do not know whether these schools fall under the Ministry of Education or whether they fall under the Ministry of Labour. But the fact that they are supposed to cater for the youth, whichever Ministry is responsible, should make sure that these schools are actually performing.  Lastly, by reminding Members of what many have already said that afterall, youth wingers here and there did a good job, others were saying that ah, they seem to have been more -(laughter)- destructive, but what we are saying is that - I am not too sure of who these youth wingers were, because I used to see and in fact, in most cases they were men.  I used to see men who were reasonably, I think older than even 35 masquerading as youth wingers.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House, and my Colleagues in the House.  It is not bad to be a youth, if you know how to go about it.  For example, in the 1960s, in UPC, we had honourable people who have become Ministers, like the hon. Minister of Local Government, the President himself, Kivejinja. There is nothing wrong about it, as long as you know how to organise yourself and have discipline, in order to move progressively.

MRS. KAZUNGU: Mr. Chairman, what I was saying is that, although a number of us here said that the youth wingers did destructive work, but I would also want to say that many of these were not actually youth. They knew what they were looking for, and they were only misusing that name, and an hon. Member was trying to give us a piece of information when the Chairman of the Parliamentary group, hon. Sekiziyivu suggested that we raise the upper age limit to 35, then one Member raised a very funny question that what happens when you are 35 and then you have a son of 16 and all of you are sitting in the same Council?  What I would like to say about that is that, it is exactly what happens with the other councils, the open councils.  You have someone elderly, aged 90 years, and he is the chairman. All the vice-chairmen are in the 60s, 50s and 40s because these are the people who have always assumed these offices after emphasising their experience, and in these open councils their great grandchildren are there; but the fact is that because they (the youth) are ignored, that is why we are saying we need this forum.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.   Thank you.


ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 20th January, 1993 at 2.30 p.m).

