Wednesday 12th January, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You are all present minus the Ministers.  Hon. Members, let us adjourn for 15 minutes please.

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  I am sorry, Mr. Chairman, for the late coming.  In accordance with Section 30, sub-Section (i) of the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993, which requires the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs to seek approval of the National Resistance Council signified by Resolution to amend among other things, the Third Schedule to the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993.  I beg to move that the Council do resolve retrospective an amendment to rule 4, sub-Rule (i), to give effect to the extension of the period of the registration of voters from the stipulated 30 consecutive days to 40.

The Constitution making has entered its second phase and this august House has the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993.  In that law, specifically in sub-Rule (i) of Rule 4 of the Constituent Assembly election Rules 1993, this House empowered the Commissioner for Constituent Assembly by notice in the gazette, I quote, ‘to appoint the period not exceeding 30 consecutive days during which the registration of voters is to take place in all villages and parishes’, throughout the country.  In exercise of the powers vested in him by sub-rule (i) of Rule 4, the Commissioner by general Notice No. 223 of 1993, published in Uganda Gazette dated 15th October, 1993, appointed the period between Monday 8th of November, and Saturday 11th December, 1993, as a period for the registration of voters.  The period was in conformity with the law and excluded Sundays, which according to the interpretation decree 1976 are excluded days when computing time.  

The registration of voters commended promptly on Monday 8th November 1993, in all parishes throughout the country.  The Commissioner for Constituent Assembly had worked out comprehensive voter projection came to 8.4 million voters.  This projection constitutes approximately 48.6 per cent of the country’s 1993, projected population of approximately 17.4 million.  Even though the Commission of the Constituent Assembly proceeded to prepare registration kits corresponding to the projected 8.4 million voters or 48 per cent of the total population, it was also conscious of the fact that its projections were on a higher side.  These projections included a comfortable buffer percentage above the actual possible voter population, which is approximately 41 per cent; approximately 7.2 million voters.

The voter registration process was very smooth and peaceful.  However, it was capitalised by four important factors:

(a) Lack of sufficient RC involvement for the first two weeks in terms of mobilisation of voters and information dissemination.  The RCs wrongly thought that the Commission had kept them out.  Many RCs were also not willing to cooperate unless, like the registration officers and their assistants, were remunerated.

(b) Inadequate prior civic education due mainly to the fact that the Commission did not receive the funds for civil education in time.

(c) A general reluctance especially among city and town dwellers who register within the areas of residence or places of work until the very last moment of a period of registration.  This was general contrary to the scenario in the countryside where there was general enthusiasm to register earliest.

    (d) Shortage of registration material especially in the districts of Soroti, Kumi, Apach, Gulu, Kitgum and Arua.  This was due to various factors - the main being the rather unstable security situation that existed in some parts of those districts.  

In varying degrees, during the period of the last Census in 1991, the Commission Projections of the Voter Population in those districts were in many parishes grossly under-rated.  This meant that additional registration materials had to be printed upon demand when the original suppliers had been exhausted.  In few cases, the registration exercise had to be halted until fresh supplies of registration materials were procured and delivered.

By Thursday, 9th December 1993, the Voter Registration Returns for the various districts indicated a generally good turn up of the voters ranging from about 55 per cent in the districts with the lowest turn-up of voters, to 76 per cent in the districts with highest turn-up of voters.  However, the National Average of the registered voters was still in the 60s in terms of percentages.  In addition the queues of people seeking registration, especially in the city of Kampala and other urban areas, started to grow extremely long.  

If the original deadline of Saturday, 11th of December 1993, had to be maintained we would have remained with a good percentage of voters that would have been un-registered.  This phenomenon would import fundamental consequences both Constitutional and Political in the Constitutional making process.  Comparative samples of the registration returns as of 11th and 23rd December 1993, obtained from the few districts and parishes, are contained in the appendix to this statement to illustrate the position.  

In those circumstances, the Commissioner urgently needed additional legal authority in order to extend the registration exercise beyond the 30 days.  To facilitate such an extension, legislative action had to be taken or rather commenced.  This was accomplished by an Amendment to sub-rule (i) of Rule 4, of the Constituent Assembly Election Rules 1993 by extending the maximum number of days from 30 to 40 of the Statutory instrument No. 84 of 1993.

The power to amend this Schedule to the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993, is contained in Section 30 of the Statute.  Sub-Section (i) of Section 30 provides and I quote, ’30(i) for the better carrying out of the provisions of this Statute the Minister may by Statutory instrument, with the approval of the National Resistance Council signified by a resolution:

(a) Amend the Third Schedule and,

(b) Make regulations in respect of any matter, which may be regulated under this Statute.

As hon. Members realise the amendment of any provision of the Third Schedule to the Constituent Assembly Statute, in exercises of the powers vested, in the Minister by sub-Section (i) of Section 30 cannot be complete -and I repeat - cannot be complete unless the Minister obtains the approval of this august House signified by a resolution.  The ideal situation would, in the normal circumstances, be to obtain the approval of the NRC at least before the statutory instrument becomes effective.  

Now, I would like to stress that the ideal situation would, in the normal circumstances be to obtain the approval of the NRC at least before the statutory instrument became effective.  However, the situation with which the Commissioner for the Constituent Assembly was faced on 10th December 1993, was not a normal situation.  NRC was on recess and the matter was of a very urgent nature.  There was practically no way that prior approval of NRC could be obtained.  

The extension of the registration period itself imported an additional strain on the financial resources of the Commission to call an emergency meeting of this House from recess for the purposes of approving people’s amendments to the rules would have compounded the already expensive exercise.  

In addition, two other amendments were included in the statutory instrument No. 84 of 1993.  One of these amendments was to enable the Commission to display the voters’ registers only at the respective parishes and not both at the respective parishes and the Commission’s offices.  The reasons were that the Commission would not retrieve the registers from the parishes until later after the display period.  The other amendment was a correction of the word ‘line’ to read ‘register.’  So that the polling stations could close earlier than the closing time of 5 p.m. only if all the voters in the register had voted.  

In view of these reasons, the necessary amendment of the Constituent Assembly Election Rules 1993, was effected by the Minister and I am now seeking a retrospective approval by this august House of that amendment, in light of the requirement of Section 30 on the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993. I, therefore, beg to move that this House resolves that the Constituent Assembly Election Rules 1993 be amended as provided for by the statutory instrument 84 of 1993 and at least this amendment takes effect on the 10th day of December, 1993.  I beg to move.

MR. BUTAGIRA FRANCIS (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the resolution.  Were it not by concern for being part of the democratic process going on?  I would have opposed this resolution.  But I want this country to go through a democratic process.  I want elections to take place.  We are having difficulties but let us make sure this exercise succeeds.  So, it is in that spirit that I am supporting the resolution.

However, I have some comments to make.  First of all, the Minister’s reason for seeking this approval belatedly, it seems to me as if there was an oversight and by the time the time was extended, they did not know that the resolution of this House had to be sought.  Otherwise democracy is expensive.  If it needed the NRC to be called back so that the thing is done properly, it should have been done.  After all we have been meeting without being paid, and we could have met.  

So, I really do not see any vital reasons for bypassing this resolution, going ahead and declaring the extension and implementing the same and hoping that you will come to this House to seek retroactive approval.  I think this is a bit too much to expect of us.  Please do not extend our magnitude, do not abuse our good will.  We have a good will but do not over stress it.  So, hon. Minister, I hope that in the remaining exercise which is going on you will restrain yourself and act within the law.

Another point I want to make, concerns registration.  We have fears that the way things are going on in the electoral process, these forthcoming elections may be flamed and let us really determine to ensure that the elections are free and fair.

In some areas the selection of registration officers was biased. (Applause)  In Mbarara, for instance, I had personally put my feet down and wrote to the returning officer, when the secret list of how those people to take part in the registration was produced, it tilted towards a certain candidate. If you were suspected to support somebody you would be eliminated.  I really wondered.  What was the motive?  I thought people would apply on merit and be taken on as registration officers.  But why this under hand?  This is the question I keep on asking myself - what is it?  Is there a possibility of rigging, is there something being hacked up?  I do not know.  

However, in some places the situation was corrected. (Interjection)  It was corrected; the returning officer was grateful and the list was collected and he himself conducted fresh interviews.  So, the situation was contained.

I am just pointing this out for the sake of this exercise.  There is no point in asking me to substantiate.  We are all interested, at the end of the day, to see that the exercise is not compromised, that the elections are carried out free and fair.  That is our concern.  Recently, when the registration exercise closed, in some areas in a place called ‘Ruhanga’ in my constituency of Rwampara, after the closing of registration, one of the monitors went there and asked for the names of registered people but the registration officer there said, no, leave the number, do not write this particular number, I want to add on six more. (Interruption)  Yes, I am quoting names and places because I understand the information is with the Commissioner.  Now, after registration, these people were still having registers.  People are adding on!

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member on the Floor is talking about election monitors in Mbarara District.  I would like to inform you, Mr. Chairman, and to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that there is not a single election monitor in Bushenyi; registrations were carried out without being monitored and there were finished without being monitored.  The lists have been compiled and are being displayed - there are no monitors.  So there is nobody to check what has been done by these officials, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  So, Mr. Chairman, I am pointing out these flows so that at this early stage - the Commissioner and the Minister concerned, the government can take very stringent steps to see that there are no malpractices and I hope the Minister should bring amendments which provide that candidates agents counter sign the forms.  We are waiting for it.  Because we want transparency in this exercise, there is no reason to say 1980 elections were rigged - only some over enthusiastic people, over zealous people spoilt this exercise and the same accusation is levelled against NRM Government.  

Yes, we do not want this and I am speaking with my open mind.  We do not want this exercise to be flawed.  That is why I am bringing these - whatever I observed as being malpractices, I bring it to the attention of the people concerned so that the exercise is done very well.  We have a stake in this exercise, it is not a government exercise, it is not somebody’s exercise, but it is an exercise in which all Ugandans are interested.  Mr. Chairman, I support. (Applause)

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support the Motion.  The reason is fait accompli so that even if you wanted to return the clock backwards, it would not be possible.  So, I support it. 

I would like to add two things that I would like the Minister to think of.  I would like our people who are in London, New York, Nairobi, Lusaka, Dar, also to register. The point here is that, with modern ways of doing things, this is not a difficult thing.  The returns will be sent through the commissioner and from there they can add to the voters’, register even in Budadiri.  I, therefore, request that the Minister should think of registering all those Ugandans instead of waiting for better methods. 

In addition, I would like to say in this connection that the students in Makerere were registered in Old Kampala and all the returns will be sent to different parts of Uganda and therefore, it would be the same thing if we can get Ugandans wherever we can make arrangements.

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you.  I just want clarification from the hon. Member holding the floor whether he is suggesting that when ways are found of how to register these people who are in New York, London, the Minister will also find ways of how these people are going to vote in the same manner.
						
MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, the Minister can find -(Interruption)-

MR. OMADI:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for people to be registered in absentia and supposing that registration is carried out, are we not likely to land a risk of people who have died abroad to vote. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.  Just proceed, do not waste time.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, thank you for protecting me.  I am not thinking of Ugandans who died even 10 years ago.  I am thinking of registration at the material time and voting at that material time rather than by people who are dead.  

As I was saying, the students from Makerere registered in Old Kampala and that registration exercise will be carried out from areas where they come from.  Even with the country, I would like - the third suggestion is that Ugandans, if they had registered in Kampala but they would like to vote from the place where they were born, they should be free to do that, in the sense that the returning officer can list the registration certificate and notify the area where that person would like to vote, because it would save a lot of moving around.  For instance, when the registration was being carried out, some people carried people from Kampala in buses, from here to Kabale and then returned them back and then when it comes to voting, again, they will carry people from Kampala to go to Kabale or wherever you are in Uganda. This can be done and, therefore, do it, because there is nothing difficult about it and there is still time to get it done.

MR. KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member that the Minister has just moved a Motion, more or less apologetically, for having extended the exercise to be approved that and then we extend for another period.  Much as the idea sounds sophisticated and attractive, I think we should be excused for these elections.  There was ample time for whoever wanted to come to Uganda to register.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you for the information, but Mr. Chairman, the elections are on March 28th and with modern ways of sending letters like DHL - this can still be done instead of saying that we will wait for the next exercise.  It is not too late in my view, and may be the Minister can think of getting it done retrospectively.  I would like, before I sit down, to emphasise the point made by hon. Butagira which point we had thought about at the time when we were voting on the Constituent Assembly Bill.  That is to make sure that the returning officers and the agents sign that document.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question, will those in favour of the Resolution moved by hon. Njuba say aye to the contrary nay?

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
SECOND READING

THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY BILL, 1993

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I beg to move that the Bill entitled The Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 1993, be read for the Second Time.  Hon. Members may recall that the Civil Aviation authority had been established by an ordinance of February 1991.  Later, this House found that this ordinance was not in compliance with the Constitutional Provisions as amended by Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 and its amendments and hence the need by my Ministry to bring this Bill to this House.  In preparing this new Bill, therefore, we have taken the advantage of an authority that has been on the ground forever a year.  This Bill has, therefore, addressed the operational problems encountered during that period.  

The Civil Aviation Industry is international in character.  The industry has been growing rapidly and steadily in volume, quality and complexity.  It operates in accordance with the principles set by the Chicago Convention of 11th December 1994 - amended from time to time and by the rules, regulations and procedures applied by the International Civil Aviation Organisation commonly known as ICAO.  Meaningful enforcement of those rules, regulations and procedures dictates that at national level, states should have established autonomous bodies to be responsible for the management of this industry.  Indeed, many countries have established such bodies or are in the process of doing so.  By establishing Civil Aviation Authority, Uganda is, therefore, acting in line with that global trend.  

This Bill seeks to provide legal framework for the establishment and functioning of the Civil Aviation authority.  It caters among other matters for the objectives and powers of the Authority, the Board of Directors of the Authority, the staff of the authority, the Finances of the Authority, the International obligations of the authority and the responsibilities of the Authority.  The main functions of the Authority is to license air transport, Civil Aviation Personnel and Aircraft, to provide air navigation services to establish, maintain and develop aerodromes and to advise government on policy matters concerning Civil Aviation generally.

Until 30th July 1991, the control and supervision of Civil Aviation Services in Uganda were fragmented in a number of Ministries.  The then Minister for Transport and Communications was responsible for ground control and political supervision of these services, provision of navigational aids services within the Entebbe Flight Information Region, aeronautical information as well as other regulatory services such as air worthiness, flight operations, accident investigations and preventions.  The then Ministry of Works was responsible for designing, construction, maintenance and general management of Entebbe International Airport and other designated aerodromes and runways.  Aeronautical and meteorological services were the responsibility of the Ministry of Environment Protection, while Airport Aviation Security was the responsibility of the Ministries of Defence, Internal Affairs and the Office of the President.  The levying and collection of Air transport charges, and the fees were the responsibility of the then Ministry of Works, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Transport and Communications.  So, due to these splits in responsibilities in the management of the Civil Aviation Services, there were serious operational problems affecting those services, which problems can be summarised as follows:  

There was a constant breakdown of communication leading to lack of coordination between the Ministries responsible for the Aviation matters.  Lack of consulted, coordinated and uniform effort towards the rehabilitation, development and sustained improvement of the aviation services and lack of systematic development strategy towards the manpower development and performance.  In light of the above, efforts have been made to streamline the administration of the Civil Aviation services and the government appointed a team of consultants to carry out a study and recommend on the streamlining of the administration of Civil Aviation and Air transport services in the country.  

The consultants carried out their study and presented their report.  Briefly, the consultants recommended the creation of an autonomous Civil Aviation Authority or CAA with a number of departments to run Entebbe Airport and all the designated aerodromes and all the navigational aids except those under the Ministry of Environmental Protection, which now falls under the new Ministry of Natural Resources.  

The second recommendation that could be internationally competitive in order to attract the staff and to retain them within the Authority.  Funding the Authority out of revenue generated from its services was the other recommendation and it was advised that the Authority should depend on this revenue unless there is a short fall and that it when government would come in.  The fourth recommendation was that this programme should be implemented in a plan initially for 4 months as an interim phase and then a start up and consolidated phase for three years.  On the basis of these recommendations, the government effectively established the civil Aviation Authority from 1st July 1991.  

Since the creation of the CAA, this authority has worked tirelessly towards the improvement of the Civil Aviation Services.  As a result, air transport has remarkably increased and to show an example, there was an average increase of air traffic when we compare the period between July, 1991 and that of December, 1992.  In comparison, in 1992, the passengers that came to Uganda and other aerodromes or left the aerodromes were 118,587 as compared to the one 1992 of 130,704 giving an increase of 10.2 per cent.  Cargo exports of 1991 were 2,664 tonnes as compared to 7,843 in 1992 giving an increase of 194 per cent. (Applause)  Aircraft movements also increased from 5,613 to 7,407 giving a percentage increase of 31.9 per cent. (Applause) 

The planes that overflew Uganda increased from 1,428 to 1,859 giving an increase of 30.2 per cent.  The only drop was in imports and the imports fell from 5,222 to 4,991 and this is accredited to the result of increased local industrial performance.  

In other words, there are some items that we now get from our local industries that we initially imported.  Repair and maintenance of safety related facilities have been carried out within the resources of CAA.  The rehabilitation of the main passenger terminal building is almost complete.  Detailing engineering designed for the repair of the air flight pavement, airport electric centre and airport lighting is underway.  Funds are being sought for the repair and improvement of the air flight facilities and for the purchasing and installation of new radio and navigational aids to replace the existing ones that are over aged.  In the meantime during its existence, the authority has appended the 11 domestic upcountry aerodromes, which it took over from Government.  

The programme of repair and modernisation has commenced with rehabilitation of Arua, Gulu, Soroti and Kasese aerodromes at a cost of Shs. 100,000,000.  I want to state and add, that the Authority did a wonderful job during the visit of the Pope in February this year. (Applause) 

If it had not been for the efficient work done, I do not think it would have been easy for the Pope to land mainly in Gulu, which had been abandoned during the insecurity time.  Plans are underway to carry out a techno-economic study of all these airstrips with a view f connecting to Entebbe every remote area in Uganda by air.   The programme, however, I would like to caution, needs a lot of heavy capital investment and justification on that investment, and therefore will not be completed in a short time.  CAA has also ably demonstrated capacity to generate revenue.  In 1993/94 Financial Year, the Authority collected 5.7 billion shillings compared to a mere 450 million shillings collected in the financial year 1990/91.  

With increasing Civil Aviation activities, the revenue collected every year will continue to rise.  The CAA has taken steps towards improving airport security and security officers have been trained under different fellowship programmes.  As a result of these measures, airline operators have gained confidence in the sensitivity of the CAA flight safety and 18 airline operators provide air services to Entebbe directly.  Those who were operating previously have increased frequencies and several foreign carriers are showing genuine interest to operate in and out of Entebbe airport.  

I am pleased to announce that it is now possible for travellers to travel out of Entebbe and connect to Europe, America or the Far East each day of the week. (Applause)

In addition to other plans, a twenty-year Uganda Civil Aviation master plan has been produced to guide the future to the rehabilitation, improvement and construction of revenue generating and safety related facilities.  This is due to traffic compared to the available capacity and holds true for most airports in the developing world.  

Finally, a number of amendments to this Bill have been discussed and agreed with the Sectoral Committee on Works, Transport and Communications.  This is all in the spirit of the new working method in the House which is intended to save time, and to reduce on costs of bringing similar and sometimes identical amendments by hon. Members.  Most amendments, although they look many, are minor in dealing with typing errors and a few corrections.  I am sure, the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee may wish to elaborate on them further and I hope hon. Members will pass this Bill in order to keep the Civil Aviation Authority afloat, and the Aviation Industry in a development course.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. KASAIJA K. (Bujenje County, Masindi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support this Bill. I support this Bill because I very well know that Civil Aviation Authority is playing a vital role for this country.  If we are to develop, we need to have an Aviation Industry which is well organised and, therefore, I strongly support the Civil Aviation Authority, but I am a bit disappointed that the Civil Aviation Authority although it came into being long time ago, it is just may be after two years, that it is now being legalised.  This, therefore, means that, the Minister responsible has not been doing his work, if he was doing his work, there would be no need of setting up an institution that has no legal biding like this one. (Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to inform the speaker holding the Floor that from the previous information, the Attorney General and his team did inform us that he is the one who mislead the government and the President to believe that the Statute that set CAA and in fact, that time it was the Office of the Vice President - he mentioned that it was valid whereas it is not.  So, I plead on behalf of the Minister, spare him.

MR. KASAIJA K:  So, Mr. Chairman, this is not the only organisation which is working with out the legal backing, there is NEC, the government of this country has sunk a lot of money, the tax payers money in NEC and yet it is not also legalized.  As we talk now, so many bad things are going on in NEC; in fact, I am talking this from authority because I am a member on the Public Accounts for parastatals.  We invited these people to come to us, but they could not turn up, because their house is not in order.  The taxpayer, who has put so much money that has been sunk in this organisation, needs to know how his money is being used.  The taxpayer is interested in knowing how NEC is running, but nobody is able to account and even it is a big shame to government, not to inform the taxpayer how the money is being used.  

So, that is one of my observations.  Now, there is also my other observation, which I would like to give to this House, that is the question I have been wondering for a very long time about the performance of these parastatal bodies in the Ministry of Transport.  I am very much alarmed, because from time to time you hear such and such an organisation has collapsed, UTC has just collapsed, the General Manager, the Chief Accountant, just disappeared in thin air.  There was no resignation -(Interruption)

MR. ELYAU:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, may I inform the Member on the Floor and the House that unless in Uganda we change our styles of appointment to be by merit and not by nepotism, we shall continue to have the same problems.  People who are there are relatives of big people, so who will have time to check them, that is the problem!

MR. KASAIJA:  So, Mr. Chairman, for your -(Interruption)

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of information.  I am trying to avoid information while Members are contributing.  But, when hon. Members start making serious allegations it definitely means people who are every where have got relatives who are big.  I would have preferred that the Member said that these who are in the parastatal are relatives of the Minister or the Deputy Minister or the PS and that is why they are there.  Because that is what he is trying to impute, and I want to reject that statement, through you to this House, that Members who are in UTC as Managers, they are referring to are not related to any Senior Official I know in my Ministry.

MR. KASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, I am really concerned, much as I represent my people, these poor people from Bujenje, we have no roads in Bunyoro, now our people are suffering while these busy people here in Kampala are misusing public funds.  All parastatals in the Ministry of Transport have got a question mark, and there is no explanation whatsoever, which is very convincing which has been brought to this House to tell us why there is confusion in UTC.  We invited UTC to our Committee, and they failed to turn up.  They said they were not ready; but up to now; and now the General Manager ended up going away, so many things are stolen, we do not know, as if that is the only one.  People’s transport, they also dismissed the General Manager.  Now, from there you go to Railways, you find these parastatal bodies in the Ministry of Transport have got problems.  I think - yes, in fact, it is good enough Members you have reminded me of Post Office.  The same thing. (Laughter)  

Now, how can we continue like this? Worse still, they even go to the extent of saying that the report of the Commissioner of enquiry for Post Office cannot be given to the Public!  We want to know, why is the Government hiding things, we want to know, we are the people who pay tax, we are the people who represent the people - wanainchi, the peasants the poor people, so we want to know what that report contains; why should that report be only for the Minister and the Cabinet?  We as Members we are entitled to get that report.  The wanainchi, the Ugandan public wants to get the report, but now they have kept it secret, after three years eating a lot of money, it came out after three years.  

So, I am very much concerned above this aspect.  Much as you can see we are trying to bring a lot of democracy is this country, but we must also be transparent, we must be seen to be transparent with whatever we are doing, otherwise even this democracy we are trying to create will be wasted.  While people are not transparent, people are not accountable; there is no for one to be a leader if they are not accountable.

MRS. MARY OKER: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would also like to request the Minister, through you, to inform this House of the tragedy, railway accident that took place that it was coming from Gulu to Kampala and we have lost so many people.  I would like a report to be given to this House as to the results of the accident and what caused the accident.  I would like to know how many people have lost their lives because up to now, we do not know, the country does not know.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA:  Mr. Chairman, now that I have talked so much about accountability, I would like to switch -(Interruption)

MR. WOGWAWABI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much.  I thank my hon. Colleague for having given way.  The issue the hon. Member is raising about the parastatals in the Ministry of Transport and Communication is a very serious issue.  We have here said, right from No. 1, in Uganda that we are all set to fight corruption, and some people have taken the effort to reveal where corruption is, and they provide even the information, but then nothing is done as long as we keep blind eyes where we see dens of corruption our problems will continue to multiply for ever and ever.

MR. KASAIJA:  Thank you hon. Member from Kagoma.  Now, Mr. Chairman, turning to the Bill, I would like to point out a few things.  Straight away I observed that I will start with the appointment of staff, and the Minister shall appoint the Managing Directors of the Authority.  I think this is very wrong, in fact, it should be the other way round, it should be the directors. (Laughter)  

No; hat is happening here, they are saying the Managing Director will be appointed by the Minister, in consultation with the Board, me I am saying that the Managing Director of this Authority, should be appointed by the Board and not the Minister.  They should consult the Minister, because you see as we have seen of late, all these problems are arising in these parastatal bodies, they are being brought about by Ministers because they want to help their friends who helped them in campaigns, who helped them in the bush, you see?  They want to give them some sort of honorarium you see?  That is what is creating problems, instead of having the right people in these places; we are having wrong people because of nepotism.  

So, I am suggesting, for the good of this country and for posterity, I am suggesting that for the post of Managing Director, it should be the Board to appoint him other than the Minister, and also they are talking also about the Deputy Managing Director also being appointed by the Minister.  So, I also say no, it should be the Board, since the Board is he policy maker, why can you not give it power to do everything, why should the Minister; you have appointed the Board as a Minister and then again you are interfering in their work!  Where is the transparency, there is no internal check.  We have to plug all these loopholes to make sure that all of us you know, we are human beings, and we also tend to make mistakes, there is nobody who does not make mistakes.  So, what I am saying is that a Minister may not also think that he is supper class or first class, he cannot make a mistake.  So, it should be this time the Board to take over that role.  

Another point on this Bill, they say the Board should be appointed for five years.  This is too long.  I suggest three years, five years is too long and even a Managing Director appointing him for five years also I suggest he should be also three years.  Because you see most of these people have become institutions, they are appointed in that place they do not want to leave.  We have seen where a Managing Directors refuses; he does not even respect a Minister.  Immediately he is there, he only knows that I am so and so, because I am related to so and so, that is the end of it because I know No. 1 or No. 2 that is the end.  Then the man does everything, and yet he is misusing the small money of the poor people of the peasant.  Because this country is 90 per cent peasantry!  Why should the peasantry continue to help - to fill the bellies of the Ministry!  You see!  So, Mr. Chairman, with those few points, I sit down and I thank you very much.

MR. KABUGO (Nakaseke County, Luwero):  I should also like to press my concern about the duration taken since this Authority came into being.  It is a long time, and the Authority is supposed to enter into sensitive contracts which calls for the National Economic Wealth, in this case, I feel that the Board - I mean the Authority should have already been given the legal backing in order to operate without fear or favour. 

It is not long ago when Uganda Airlines had a disaster and if this happened and the Insurance Companies came to know that the licensed Authority had no legal backing, we would have lost the claims by the relatives of these families, but it is good that the companies did not know, so in this case there people were compensated.

Turning to the Bill, Clause No. 9, sub-Section 4(c), I notice that the Board Members may be appointed irrespective of age and somebody is free to stay and remain a Board Member up to the age of 70.  I take it that this is a long time.  We cannot expect someone however brilliant the fellow may be, to still have very useful thinking and capacity of deciding on an Aviation Industry when he is between the ages of 60 and 70.

CAPT. BABU:  Point of order.  Is the hon. Member in order to suggest that the person of 70 years cannot think properly when the Vice President of this country is over 80 years?

MR. KABUGO:  Thank you for that information, but can the hon. Member give me an assurance that the hon. Vice President can serve on this Board and effectively serve on the Board?

THE CHAIRMAN:  No.

MR. KABUGO:  Mr. Chairman, in this case, I suggest that since the Civil Aviation Authority is sensitive and very complicated, the Members on this Board - the age should range between 55 and 65, rather than to extend it to 70 and the other point is that on Clause 15, sub-Section 6(d), I find that this same thing is happening.  So, I feel that we need to review this issue and see that we reduce the age; and the other thing is that the Managing Director can resign from his services by giving only one months notice.  This is too short a period for a man who has been handling a very big Authority, with a complex of departments to simply resign within one month and expect him to give you a comprehensive hand over.  I take it that this organisation should also be given consideration for the Managing Director to give three clear months notice and this period will give time even for the new person, to be given proper hand over rather than one month.  Because one month’s notice is normally let to junior staff who are carrying limited responsibility not to compare to somebody who is heading a big authority like Civil Aviation.

The other matter concerns finance. It seems that the Bill requires the organisation to prepare its budget and estimates and submit it to the Minister for his approval; and in the same Clause, there is a provision whereby some members of the Board must be financial consultants and accountants and some people who have been in such services for a long time; and I take it that, the Minister should simply be given a copy but the approval should remain with the Board members who know the complications and the requirements of Civil Aviation.  With those remarks, Mr. Chairman, I beg to support the Bill.  

CAPT. BABU (Kampala Central Division, Kampala):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to thank the Minister for presenting this Bill. I stand to support the Bill and at the sametime, but I would like to inform you that the Ministry was kind enough to present this Bill to the Sectoral Standing Committee for Works, Transport and Communications.  And we went through it thoroughly with the Ministry staff and the Minister, and we came out with certain amendments which the Minister will present later, agreed upon between the Sectoral Committee and the Ministry, and a lot of his amendments should be attached to the Bill now, and as we go along, you will find that most of the things that some hon. Members will be talking about are already taken care of in amendments which were brought about by the Minister.

I would like to thank the Minister, and I would like to thank the Deputy Minister especially, who spent a lot of his time with the technocrats of the Ministry.  They spent a lot of time with us; and they worked with us, and were quite kind to guide us through the Bill.  The Bill is welcome, after two years of this body having unfortunately been caught by the amendment of Legal Notice No. 1 and Section 4 of the Constitution obviously that was carried out by us and, therefore, made the ordinance which has already been written null and void.  

I would like to thank the Minister for bringing it now, better late than never, but since it is here, I think it is pertinent that we should talk about Civil Aviation in this context as part and parcel of the process of developing this country in which the NRM Government has embarked.  I would like to thank the Government for having given this authority particularly a lot of support and for the job well done so far by this authority even without the Bill, those who have gone through the airport, like I have, will appreciate that there is a tremendous performance, and this performance can be measured with the performance of the previous department of the same Ministry. (Applause)  

I would like to quickly go back in the history of Civil Aviation, just a little bit.  My friend asked me whether it was part of the Bill and I wanted to start off by saying that, since the past makes the present and the present makes the future, I thought that a little bit of history in Aviation will help us to concretize what we are going to pass here.  Civil Aviation Authority is an off spring of the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication having come from two different Ministries.  But this was a study that was carried out by the Government of Uganda under the ACEO and UNDP.  But the history of it stems from the former East African Community, when our colonial masters made sure that the Aviation Industry concentrated in a particular country and the other two countries Uganda and Tanganyika then had less in terms of Aviation.  And, therefore, the Headquarters of the Aviation authority, in the whole of East Africa was in Nairobi, for many years the other two countries were just appendages of the Aviation Industry.  This went on until the Aviation broke up, when it broke up, the other two countries had nothing to show everything remained in Nairobi.  

Therefore, we must thank the present Government that has come out and made sure that Aviation as an Industry is given its place by establishing a model that has been decided upon by an African Body called AFICAC.  A resolution was reached after the Western World had merged and formed blocks of Aviation Industries, marginalising the Third World Countries in the Aviation Industry, and therefore it is an important point that must be realised when we are talking about Aviation, particularly in this part of the World with the incoming of the Civil Aviation authority and sincerely believe that Aviation will improve and will be taken to higher levels in countries like Uganda, and Aviation will be given the attention it deserves.  

For many people, Aviation is by the way one of those industries, but a service Industry of Aviation in a country like Uganda if well developed, and taken to very higher and great heights, would play a very important part in the economy of this country.  It can generate substantial amount of money.  

Today you find a country like Britain, British Airways alone generates quite a huge sum of money as an industry, it plays a very important part in tourism, it plays an important part in transportation.  In fact it is an industry that must be emphasised if you want to improve the service industries in this country.  It is, therefore, very important that this model that is being presented to us today, the Civil Aviation Authority, be given all the support you can so that they can start building an industry that will go to greater heights in the future.  

In some countries where they are even building aeroplanes today, government has made a deliberate policy to actually build the aeroplanes.  I would like to quote a country where we just visited recently Indonesia, which has deliberately set up industries of building aeroplanes. Another country is Brazil where this is happening.  In the future, if a good Civil Aviation Authority is set up, we do hope that they will be able to convince government as the economy improves, to make sure that we also plunge into that modern age, and I hope that will happen soon.  Hon. Gole says not in our lifetime, he might be surprised.  I did not know we would have two radios within two years; we now have Sanyu and Capital who knows what we will get next?

I do not have that defeatist attitude that some hon. Members might have - I think we can do it given a chance, given the facilities we can also build aeroplanes.  

With that little synopsis on Civil Aviation, I would like to say that the Committee worked very hard and went through this Bill and we came up with several amendments, and these amendments have already been circulated to all Members.  They will be part and parcel of the Bill as you read.  If you read the Bill by itself you will find a lot of mistakes but we have corrected most of those mistakes as a Committee, and I hope it will help you to go through the Bill quickly.  Mr. Chairman, with that, I would like to support the Bill and I would like to thank you.

MR. OPIO (Samia Bugwe, Tororo):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me permission to debate this Bill.  I have looked at the Bill and all the amendments and I would like to start by saying that I support the Bill.  I have some areas which I think will need some amendment too despite the amendment made by hon. Members.  The first one is I think - when we look at the Bill, it suggests that we have the Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director.  In my opinion, I think that the creation sometimes causes more problems than solutions.  I think that heads of departments are very conversant enough to be given responsibility of acting when the Managing Director is away; and I would think that given some of our experience, the Deputy Managing Director sometimes becomes redundant because definitely when the Managing Director is there, he does a job, when he is away he will choose one of the heads of department whom he thinks can do the job to do more of the job and this remains acting but not doing much.  So, I would suggest that the Minister looked at this to see whether - definitely he has the responsibilities for this Deputy Managing Directors, the officers whom we would call managers are now being called Directors, so many of them!  You see five or them.  Now, I am saying that there is no need to call these people Directors, are they going to be sitting on the Board?  They are not going to sit on the Board.  So, why give them that mission of Directors, we should as well call them Managers of finance and so forth.  So the idea of Directors, I think is not right to be used at this time for this type of Managers.

Another area in which I think we could move some amendment is the way we are told the Authority may raise funds for the discharge of funds.  Now we are told that the owner of the Authority will be the Government; now if we as a Government and under areas where they said will be looking for funds they put there the word ‘stock’; I would like to find out from the Minister whether this word stock is another word for a loan, but if it definitely is going to be stock, then it means that it is not the government which is going to be the shareholder, there will be other shareholders.  

So, I would like that clarification if he thinks that a stock is just a loan, then he is understandable, but if he thinks that the shares shall be floated, and the Authority shall get funds from there, then we would assume that, there will be other owners of the authority apart from the government.  That I think we need some clarification, if he wants to have the Authority to be partly owned by the Government, and partly owned by shareholders we would like to debate that as well.

Then there is a question of the - when he talks about the Authority using the assets as one of the ways of paying of the interest, I think may be what the Minister is thinking about is to say that the Authority will be making money and from the profit, they will use some of that money to pay off interest.  But to say that the Authority will use assets to pay off interests, I think we need to get over that and see whether that is what we mean, that is Section 25 of the Bill.  That is 25(4).

Now, 25(4)(b) is talking about the Government being the sole owner and at the sametime, he used the securities.  Now it says other sources of money will be debentures and other securities.  Well, we do not know whether he is talking about securities as the shares, which will make us again think about the Authority also being owned by other shareholders.  So that word securities to us in confusing, whether it is part of the stock or whole the bold funds we should be made to know.  

Now, we are told that government will guarantee the loan and then after that, we are told that the loan plus the interest shall be charged on the consolidated fund.  Now, we are saying, what does that mean?  It means that the Government apart from guaranteeing, it is also going to pay the loan and may be the interest because, why do we charge the consolidated fund when we know that after the Authority has earned money it could use the earned money to pay off the loans and the interest, is it another way of saying that apart from being told that the Authority is going to be autonomous, it is at the sametime going to be funded by Government.  

So, we want to be told very clearly and I suggest that since we have said that this is an autonomous Authority, if it goes in to borrow money, they should use the earnings to pay off the interest and the loan and if it is under capitalization, there is a way of the government coming in to be asked to capitalise or to ask government to guarantee so that they get the money and pay other than charging the loans and the interest on the consolidated fund. 

Now, they say that the Authority shall provide the Minister an estimate which should be, we think, what the Government shall get - it is the Board which should be discussing and, providing the estimates, and then it is the estimates which should be approved by the Board.  The Minister when he gets the estimates there is a problem, of course, in the amendment they get rid of the word decision, and say they should raise objections or reservations.  I think what the Minister has to do, is basically to study and make recommendations other than being limited to objections and reservations as amended.

Now, when we talk about the financial provision, the Bill seeks that the government should be the shareholder as it has been, but when you look at the Section 19, the Bill is asking in fact the shareholder to provide the subsidy.  Now, it is saying there will be a government subsidy, now we are saying is this Bill that we are to create ask for a subsidy again?  If as I said earlier, the Authority is lacking funds there are ways which it has been suggested under some articles here 26 where they are going to borrow, and Government will guarantee instead of saying that there will be a subsidy by the government again when it requires funds.  

So, apart from other areas where Civil Aviation experts will be, I am suggesting that we again look at especially the financing of this Authority, we must clear out minds whether it is going to be autonomous and if it is autonomous, how are we going to make sure that it is properly capitalised, and if it is under capitalised we do not resort to the consolidated funds or the subsidy but look for proper managing and a professional way of capitalising the Authority.

When it comes to the Authority itself, we are told that one of its functions will be to make sure that aerodromes are established and of course, I would like to alert you that the aerodrome in Tororo has ceased to be an aerodrome, it was a place for rearing sheep and goats, now it has even turned into gardens.  So, we would like to appeal to the Minister hopefully, that apart from the aerodrome he has mentioned, Tororo is one aerodrome, which is almost turning into a cultivating area.  So, someone says, it is a farm. 

Also, before I end, I would like to say something about UTC, from the observations we have made. A Minister may be politically making good decisions, with appointments, but professionally we are thinking that he is not doing very well.  Because, if you look at the appointment he has made for UTC after every two years, there is a turn over and sweeping, but we wonder whether he does some professional consultations or professional study.  Because currently - I am not allowed in Parliament to talk about someone who is not here, but surely the replacement, are we really confident that what has happened in the UTC with regards to replacement is capable of turning round that organisation, although some of us would have thought that that organisation is over due for receivership if it was a private one; but government institutions never go to receivership they have to be brought up.  

But definitely, I do not think that suggestions which have been made and announced on the Radio are going to help to turn round our UTC, and a mere sacking of people is demoralising, it makes a young man who is between thirty’s think - thrown out of the system other than because of his problems, but because of the system which is supposed to serve.  I would like to ask the Minister definitely to think about what he had done in UTC and see whether what replacements he has suggested are worthy what we ask to hear and support.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKWERA (Agago County, Kitgum):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Bill, but before I do that I would like to say that two years’ period was a very good trial period for Civil Aviation Authority.  To some of us these two years period provided officials of the Civil Aviation Authority and the Authority itself, the opportunity to prove themselves that they would be able to serve this nation properly and indeed they did that.  

I will give an example of what I mean because sometime last year, the Karongo Hospital Mission conceived an idea of building an airstrip, especially for emergency services to the hospital and particularly because it is not possible now to go to Agago through roads.  Now, when the construction of the airstrip started, the Mission did what they thought was a very good job and when I got the news, straight away and I went to Civil Aviation Authority to cross check and may be launch the airstrip.  

When the Civil Aviation Authority got there, they found out mistakes which could be very costly, and straight away they mobilized themselves and they did a very good job because on the ground there were no things like air traffic signs, safety control mergers were not there and they provided all those and we were very grateful to the Civil Aviation indeed.  So, when time for an inauguration came, the Minister was there and the first pilot to land there made a wonderful remark and he said, ‘even the Jumbo jet can land now in Karongo’.  So take a trip to Karongo and see that Airstrip.

Returning to the Bill itself, I have made some observations especially on the number of the Board of Directors.  The Bill has provided room for five Board of Directors only.  I feel this is a very important Authority and so far as I have said before and from other remarks they have already started doing some good job and earn huge revenue for government.  

I would, therefore, like to suggest that authority of this nature should have a room for bringing more good brains - consultants of good brains on the Board.  I would, therefore, like to suggest that the number of board members be increased from five to nine. 

Considering the amount of work that is going to be undertaken by the Authority, we are trying to avoid a situation where two or three people sit down and make a major decision that would expire tomorrow but if you have got a consulting brains and to concentrate to do a good job you will avoid the area of making big mistakes which can cost the government a lot of money.  

In the Bill here, there is a lot of talk about drawing from Consolidated Funds, government giving guarantees and where these guarantees and drawing from Consolidated Funds is concerned, we need a lot of brains to sit down and think of the action we are going to take.  So, I would suggest that this area be looked into.

I would also like to add my voice on the appointment of a Deputy Managing Director. In my own experience these Deputy Managing Directors or Deputy General Managers have been more of problems to the organisation than of any use.  They go on under-studying loopholes where to overthrow the man on the chair so that he sits.  

I would, therefore, like to suggest that we leave the heads of departments - if you block them all the chances of promotion by putting a deputy there, you are frustrating these heads of the departments.  Let them stay there, if a Managing Director is going on a Safari, let him pick one of his next executive to act and that is how they learn; their training ground.  But if you put there a deputy, he is going to block these people and the same will continue and you frustrate the people along he line of management.

So, with these few remarks, I strongly support the Bill and I would like my Colleagues to support the Bill and get Aviation Authority going.  Thank you very much.

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA (Butambala County, Mpigi):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support this important Bill and I would like to go straight to Clause 1; under Clause 1 I was going to say that this Parliament is going to be just a rubberstamp but it is good that the Minister has clarified this point.  However, we were a bit confused when we looked at the Civil Aviation Ordinance 1991 and also the Bill as the Minister has clarified this, so I better go straight to the Bill itself. 

I want to refer to Section 4(2)(d) which is a repetition when you look at Clause - under that Clause (d); they say,’ the authority may acquire, hold, manage and dispose of moveable and immovable property.’  And the same words are repeated under Clause 8.  It is said under (b) ‘to acquire, hold and lease out and dispose of all types of assets including land assets, floating assets.’  This Bill is very big but it is wordy; there are a lot of repetitions when you go through the Bill very carefully.  I wish to request the Minister to consider omitting some of these repetitions.

Also under Clause 7(2) on page 11, Mr. Chairman, nothing has been said about training of the authority officers.  I think being a new Authority, it needs training of its staff.  I would request the Minister to also consider putting items for training under Clause 7, and it must be specific.

On the Board of Directors, I was thinking of the period being reduced from five to three and also consider the continuation; because if there is no continuation, and the Directors are put there for five years, they will all go and there will be no continuation, and the Managing Director will also be appointed for five years.  

Supposing they are appointed at the same time and they end at the same time, the continuity may not be there.  So, I think the Minister should consider having at least three people retiring after three years and he appoints another one.  That may work; but here you consider a period of five years, and they are there, the Managing director is also there for five years; but they will go at once and there is no continuation.  I think the Minister should consider the continuation of the authority or the Board.

I also rush to another Section, Clause 5(2) the last part.  Here they say, ‘secretary may’. I want the Minister to remove that, ‘may’ and say ‘shall’ because when the Managing Director is not there or his Deputy or somebody, this one they say ‘may sign’ should be ‘should’ sign because otherwise if he refuses, it means the work will not move.  It is may, may not but shall is more definite, it is better in the legal terms actually.

We move to remuneration of the members under Clause 14.  The Government is responsible for these authorities but wherever you go in an authority in a government organisation, the allowances are different.  I think time has come for government to consider standardizing the allowances of all the Directors.  Because in some authorities the Directors are enjoying fat allowances while in others they get very, very little. (Interruption)

MR. MASABA WAFAANA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, standardising allowances will be very difficult because some organisations have more funds than small organisations and I am sure government has analyzed these corporations depending on their profitability.  Thank you.

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank the informer but I insist that there must be standardized allowances.  Those people are working for government from government bodies so I see no reason why some are getting very big allowances while others are getting very, very negligible allowances.

Under Clause 18(3), they talk about the Secretary of the Board or the Authority.  I think the Draftsman or the Minister did not consider the Company Secretary.  There are people who are trained to do this piece of work and here they are talking of lawyers but in companies of this nature there are also company secretaries who are trained to do this piece of work.  I think the Minister many consider also putting there a company secretary to compete with the secretary he is referring to under Clause 18(3).

I also want to talk about the operator’s certificate under Clause 45.  If the certificate is issued and the operator misbehaves, there must be a Clause canceling such a certificate.  I have gone through this one, there is no cancellation of the certificates once it is issued but the authority may have a problem after issuing a certificate to an operator and that operator misbehaves there is no Clause to cancel the certificate.  I would like the Minister to consider that or put a Clause under that one.

I would like to end by commenting on the appointment of the Director.  The Managing Director is appointed by the Minister and under Clause 15(3) they say that, ‘the Managing Director is answerable to the Board.’ There is likely to be conflicts of the decision and this Managing Director will have one leg in the Minister’s office and another leg in the Board of Director’s office.  I would like to support somebody - hon. Member from Bujenje who said that the Board in consultation with the Minister should appoint the Managing Director.  

Otherwise, if the Minister appoints him it means he is answerable to the Minister and he will not be able to take the directives from the Board of Directors.  These big names put there under Clause - the Directors of Accounts, those are very big - sound very big but I do not know why the Minister considered having the Director of Accounts instead of Chief Accountant, Director of what and at the same time there is a Board.  I would like -(interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member and the other Members who have been holding the Floor on the issue of Directors of departments; models of management and organization charts are international models and this particular model was a result of a study carried out by an international firm through IKO and the Uganda Government and what you see in the law right now is exactly rightly a copy of the recommendation by that International Body.  

And organisational charts revolve and in our amendments we have put there a small provision which now gives the Board of Directors powers to review the organisational chart and about two months ago also there was an advert in one of our papers where Civil Aviation Authority was going to review the organisational structure.  And I think this is very important information that this is static, it will be reviewed by the Board and if the Board so feels that management can be improved by changing the word director to Manager then I do not see any problem.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. OKWERA:  Point of clarification.  I see clarification, Mr. Chairman, first of all, I have no quarrel with the names of these Directors or Director, but the point of clarification I am trying to make is, whether these Directors who are heads of departments are going to be members of the Board also.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of clarification.  I just want to give that clarification.  The Directors who are heads of departments are not members of the Board.

MR. LUBEGA WAGWA:  It is true as the Minister has said, but now the confusion is the Board of Directors and these Directors and yet when it comes to remuneration, these Directors the modern companies as it has been said by the hon. member of Kampala Central may be right but we have different remuneration.  But here the remuneration may be too little compared to these big names, which they have put in the Bill.  With those few remarks, I wish to support this Bill.  Thank you.

MR. KAWANGA (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I support this Bill and first and foremost, I wish to congratulate the Civil Aviation authority for having done so well in so short a time.

Two years ago Uganda was almost a leper in the aviation industries, most people preferred to avoid it.  Within two years Uganda is now an attractive place for the aviation industry.  We should congratulate everybody concerned.  In fact, I would wish to add that for those who keep being critical they should always remember where we came from.  There is a tendency to forget where we have been coming from.  If you criticise, you should at least be able to say but where have we been before?  And as somebody said, it is the height to which people rise those matters but not the depth from which they came.

This is a beloved son or daughter of apparently the Minister of Transport.  So, in an effort to dress it up, I think they have over pampered the baby and I think they may be spoiling the whole thing.  I will give some indications; one of them is the Clause 15 which says, ‘there shall be a Managing Director of the Authority who shall be appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Board.’  I think I know what they want to mean; but what does it mean in practice?  How does the Board - how do you appoint somebody in consultation with?  Surely we should say what we want.  I think the word should be ‘the Managing Director should be appointed by the Minister on the advice or on the recommendation of the Board.’  That one makes sense.  

Otherwise, this question of consultation can be very, very faulty.  What does it mean?  -(Interjection)- Yes, in fact, it can cause a lot of problems.  So, I think hon. Minister this should be put in the way I have been putting it elsewhere.  Just to show how it can be a source of confusion, you read Clause 15 sub-Clause (6) which says, ‘the Minister may after consultation with the Board terminate the appointment of the Managing Director.’  When he is appointing him, it is with the consultation of the Board, but when it comes to dismissing him, it must be after consultation with the Board.  But I think we know what we mean and we should say it the way it should be.  

Now, the other one is Clause 17(2), which says, ‘the Deputy Managing director shall be appointed by the Minister in consultation with the Board.’  I think again this one should be put in the language we would want and perhaps at this juncture, I would want to point out why perhaps there is a need for a Managing Director for this kind of organisation.  The Deputy and Managing Director; the reason is that, the Civil Aviation Authority is more or less an International Organisation.  It deals with an International Organisation on a day to-day basis.  

So, surely people who deal with the organisation would want to know who is at the other end of the table and in the absence of a Managing Director they should be able to refer to a Deputy Managing Director who is always in the position rather than appointing one of the heads at every juncture.  You know, people ringing may say but who is that fellow I am talking to?  So, perhaps for this kind of organisation there is need for Deputy Managing Director.

For Clause 18, sub-Clause (2) which has been amended, the present one reads, ‘the Corporation Secretary shall be a person who is an advocate of the High Court of Uganda and who has been entitled to practice for at least five years.’ 

After that beautiful Clause, there is a very weird amendment and I do not know why that amendment has been made because it makes matters uncertain.  The amendment reads, ‘the Corporation Secretary shall be a person who is eligible to be enrolled as an advocate of the High Court of Uganda for at least five years.’  Now, if somebody has been eligible for enrolment, why is he not getting enrolled?  Why do you employ somebody who has been eligible for that long?  He is not enrolled and not making it.  Surely, if you want - you are dealing with a professional body, deal with people who are on the roll or that you want, so surely, we should have those who are enrolled as advocates to be Corporation Secretaries. (Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  That particular Clause for the sake of the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House is very ambiguous.  In modern management we have people who are trained as Secretaries and they study law as one of the requirements and therefore, unless we are going backwards and we do not know what we are doing.  I know that this law was being framed with the advice of people who are consultants but I would doubt their competence in modern management.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of information.  Further information is that being eligible to be enrolled as advocate of the High Court could be evidenced where someone could have been a professor at the University for so many years without practising as an advocate or as we have an Attorney General today who spent several years in another university not being able to practice.

MR. KAWANGA: Thank you very much for that, but when they come back to this country for goodness sake, let them get enrolled because if they have not, they are good professors but not enrolled advocates.  Now, with regard to the question of people who are trained as Secretaries, I know about them, but in which institution do we train them?  That is why we have a problem here and two, the functions that are attached to this post, make this kind of qualification a necessity, but be that as it may I would wish to retain Clause 18, sub-Clause 3(f), which talks about the Board or Managing Directors to be responsible for; and in case of (f), the word should be representing the Authority in the litigation you have just removed the word ‘or’ and the Corporation Secretary can retain this function without having to amend that little Clause.

Now, I move to Clause 19 and I think again this is the problem of these well brought up children, because there are already people who are occupied in certain positions, the law was meant to cater for them.  But for goodness sake, there is no reason why Clause 18 is part of this law.  These are titles, these are offices, you can have them without having to include them in Clause 19 and in fact, that is why you have a problem.  That is why in the amendment they put here a Clause which reads: ‘The Board may on the recommendation of the Managing Director amend or make a new organisational structure of the Authority,’ but now if they have already catered for them by law here; how can the Board sit down and change the organisational structure?  So, really what they intend to do cannot be done by including these Directors all in this sub-statute and I suggest this Clause should just be deleted and it would serve the Corporation better than what we are trying to do here.  

Of course, there is another one, which is unfortunate, and in fact, I want to move the amendment and to suggest that the whole Clause should be deleted and can be deleted without bringing any harm to this Statute.  The other one, which is worse, is Clause 24, the Amendment is terrible.  Clause 24, sub-Clause 2, ‘The Minister shall notify the Board of his decision on the estimates submitted to him within one month of the submission of the estimates.’  Amendment reads: ‘The Minister shall notify the Board of his objections or reservations on the Estimates submitted within one month of the submission of the estimates,’ and then what?  You draw up a budget you send it to the Minister for consideration, he records his objections and reservations and returns it to you, to do what?  Just to know!  Surely, is that the intention that the Minister should be informed, he shows his objections after one month the Board looks at it and that is the end of the matter.  I think that is not the intention of this Statute.  I think either the Minister has a decision on the matter, you know, one way or the other, and I think that is what it should be - in my view, I think the original Clause should remain, the new one is extremely dangerous and finally -(Interruption)

MR. KYEMBA:  Point of clarification.  I want the hon. Member to clarify the point he is making on Clause 24(ii) because when we finished number 24(ii), 24(iii) says, ‘no expenditure shall be made out of the funds of the Authority unless the expenditure is part of the expenditure approved by the Minister,’ and I thought - if that is what he has meant, the comments of the Minister in that case would be important to take note of.

MR. KAWANGA:  Of course, what the next Clause talks about is approval of the estimates by the Minister.  So, the intention was the Minister to approve and then the subsequent action comes.  Now, when you amend (ii) to talk about objections and reservations, then Clause 3 is redundant and I do not think that was the intention.  So really I want to suggest that the Clause as it exists in the Bill should remain; and it is in the same -(Interruption)   

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  The hon. Member is saying that the amendment is worse than the original and is saying that the original should stand, but what the amendment is doing, is specifically saying what the original is saying, because the Minister shall notify the Board of his decision on the estimates; the other one says that he should notify as to whether he has accepted or refused and this amounts to a decision.  You see, the whole thing is saying the same thing in different words.  So you better - if you want an improvement, let there be an improvement, but this one is not different from the other. 

MR. KAWANGA:  Then if you are saying the same thing why amend?  What was the reason of changing the words ‘decision’, ‘objections’ or ‘reservations’?  Okay, I mean I do not see any reasons.  

Finally, with regard to the next amendment, there is a question of referring the matter to the Minister for endorsement.  The Authority made with a prior approval of the Minister; that is according to the amendment.  Clause 25, I think the word, there is - ‘and the estimates as approved by the Board shall be submitted to the Minister for his endorsement.’  I find a problem with that, why do you sent estimates to the Minister for his endorsement?  What does it mean?  In fact, what I think they wanted to mean as approval!  Why just send it to him for endorsement, I suggest it remains as it was before.  

So, in fact, it is in that vein that the amendment which again the Minister circulated about in sub-section 3, to substitute the word ‘approval’ in the first line with the word endorsement is misplaced, because really there is no word endorsement in sub-section 3, and the word approval only occurs in Clause 25, sub-section (i), which talks about ‘The Authority may with prior approval of the Minister, borrow funds.’  When it is for borrowing funds, it is approval when for other things it is endorsement or objections or what not.  Surely, we should have used the same language in the same Statute.  Now, with these few remarks, Mr. Chairman, which are really technical, I support the Bill.

MR. TURYAHABWA (Kinkizi County, Rukungiri):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for giving me the opportunity to contribute on this Bill.  Allow me to bring you greetings from Kinkizi for the New Year and this honourable House.  I also want to thank the NRM Government for showing reconciliation by welcoming home one of our former leaders, Gen. Tito Okello from exile.  

When we criticised the Referendum Bill, we thought it was very skeletal, but this Bill is long, detailed and technical.  So, I think it has got a lot of information to make hon. Members support it.  During this time when we are considering the new world order, Uganda cannot afford to be left behind in the matter of Civil Aviation Service.  In paragraph 3 of our memorandum here, I note that if the objectives of this Bill are all fulfilled, we shall, as Ugandans, have a new face in the world and be attractive to our comrades the world over.

I wish also to observe politically, Clause 8 of this Bill which gives powers of the Authority, I am a Member on the Committee which discussed it in detail but I would sense that in Clause 8, sub-Clause 2(a), there was a desire to have this Authority practised as independently as possible; (a) says, ‘without limiting the generality of sub-section 1, the Authority shall have power to enter into contracts subject to financial limitation set by the Minister.’  I feel that there was a desire to have the Authority carry out or carry on with the spirit of privatisation that we are practising now as a Government and let the Minister not tie the hands of this Authority so much as this sub-Clause says.  So, I hope the august House will look at it and react to bring us into a consensus.  

I also support this Bill, for its intention to up-grade aerodromes up country.  There has always been a tradition for government to start development projects from the centre, working outwards to the borderlines.  So, I think the activities of this authority will be above that kind of method of work and look beyond and provide services, which can facilitate air transport.  I have in mind, aerodromes, like the one in my constituency, Kayonza Airstrip which used to be very useful during the 1960s; but later on has over grown and been neglected.  

So, with this Bill, I think the Authority will, may be come to Kayonza and upgrade the Airstrip with a purpose of increasing the traffic to Bwindi Forest National Park where very many tourists are now coming to view and track the gorillas.  

When you talk to the tourists who come and other Ugandans who come, they complain about two things; the first one, is the long distance from Kampala to Kayonza on bad roads especially, between Kabale and Kayonza.  They wish this road could be worked on and improved to facilitate the tourist industry; they also complain about the long distance which could be handled by improving Kayonza Airstrip and they fly, because they have got the means to do so.  

I also want to link other forms of transport like land, transport with air navigation where the plane lands or whenever you need some vehicles also to transport the passengers who have landed.  So, I think areas, which lack good roads especially, our districts in Rukungiri where we have been waiting for programme to work on the roads, to be facilitated and this project takes off and improves on our roads.  We need bridges and every time we have the Minister talking about the importation of bridges, I do not know when these bridges will land in Uganda and have some bridges for three places in Kinkizi, like Ntugwa bridge, like Izi bridge and like Bukomero bridge.  So with these few observations, Mr. Chairman, I support this Bill.  

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman for having also noticed that there was overwhelming support for this Bill, and through you, Mr. Chairman, I want to thank the hon. Members for their contributions.  But most important of all, for the over whelming support they have given development of the Aviation Industry in the country.  Of all the Members that have contributed, there was none that did not support the Bill and with that, I thank you very much.

Having said that, I want to touch on a few points that were raised.  One, is the delay of the Bill to come to the House and hence the legality of the CA as an Authority operating without law.  What, actually, happened is that when the ordinance was cancelled, we did make an effort to bring in this Bill in the 6th Parliament.  

Unfortunately, the 6th Parliament ended and we went to recess and naturally or according to procedures, that First Reading of that Bill ended with that Parliament and we had to start it again during this Parliament.  I do not agree with hon. Kabugo about the Rome accident, because the Rome accident occurred on the 17th October, 1988, long before the Civil Aviation Authority was formed; much as I was worried that you are trying to create us more claims on the Insurance Companies but I think we are safe and the claimants are safe with their money.  

The other issue that was referred to is the upgrading of aerodromes.  What we should ask ourselves is what do we need these aerodromes for?  Or why should a plane fly from aerodrome one to two?  First, there must be passengers or cargo and second, there must be an aerodrome where it can land.  So, the CAA will consider the upgrading of those aerodromes according to the needs, they must be economically justified, their existence or the up-grading and I am sure the hon. Member from Kinkizi hon. Turyahabwa will agree with me that as soon as the tourists are adequate in numbers, there will be need for upgrading some aerodromes, because there will be need to have Charters.  

What I did not mention is that there must be planes to fly to those aerodromes, at the moment Uganda Airlines has got one leased plane and one of its own and it is not operating local or internal flights; so, unless there are adequate Charters, there might be no need for CAA to do that.  I have taken the comments of hon. Opio and I hope he will bring any necessary amendment during Committee Stage.  

I have also taken the comments of those who are talking about the positions of the Deputy Managing Director, but I am sure there is need in the structure of the Civil Aviation Authority to have a Deputy Managing Director.  The only reason that was given was a fear of a coup, he will undermine the Managing Director, let us have heads of departments, we have heard a similar report from other parastatals in respect to lack of a Deputy and therefore causing problems in that parastatal and I think it was one of the Parastatals that hon. Members were queering about.  

So, I think there is need for the Civil Aviation Authority, in its structure and operations both internally and in international organisations, to have substantive posts of a Deputy Managing Director, it makes even management easy when the Managing Director - part of the work of Civil Aviation is not only internal - there is a lot of travel by both of these officials, the Managing Director is always traveling on duty and it is not good to always be appointing a Head of Department from Aviation, Head of Department from Airports to keep acting, let us have continuity.  I took note of the period you have talked about in respect to the terms of the Boards, and we are free to consider them during Committee Stage.  

I did appreciate the point of continuity of some Members of the Board, but I do not think it is correct to legislate permanent positions of Members of the Board if in case you find that all members of the Board have not performed to the expectations of what you expect them to do.  It will be limiting the Minister and the Government to keep some Members of the Board even when they are not performing and I do not think we should legislate for that.  

Hon. Kawanga, I have noted your proposed queries of the Clauses 19, and 24 in terms of the approval.  The main thing that came to the Committee Stage was that the Authority is independent and let is approve its budget and get on with work and the Minister just endorses.  The Committee was against the Minister having to delay the operations of the Board.  But if you feel so strongly about it, I think you are free to bring any slight amendment at Committee Stage.  I want to thank also the sentiments and the support we received from the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee and his Members and I think that is why this Bill has gone smoothly through Members.  There was a comment made by hon. Wagwa on training but I again do not think we need to legislate for training.  Training is part of management, training is part of career development, and training is part of any institution that is being reformed.  I think it is expected of management to develop institutionally and any management that does not do that, is not expected to be a management.  

Heavy comments were made about parastatals under the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications.  I think we finished the PERD Bill and we had I think over - I cannot remember - over thirty something or forty parastatals, they might be fifty which we classified.  Half of those were long dead and these were not under our Ministry.  I am not going to condemn the other Ministries.  What hon. Members must accept is that parastatals went down as the country went down.  Morals went down as the country went down; the quality of management went down as the country went down.  All I can assure you is that the Ministry is doing its best to improve on its parastatals and these parastatals are among the parastatals that have survived from that time up to now.  Those that are not performing - you passed the PERD Bill here - are classified to be divested and in a short time and in line with the programme of PERD, we shall divest them.  So, give us time, let us correct the ills of the past, let us improve those that we are going to keep and let us divest those we are going to divest in time.  

Without wasting your time hon. Members, I want to thank you very much.  I have noted that you have all supported the Bill apart from some light amendments that you might have queried.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Bill entitled: ‘The Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 1993’ be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to)

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 5.40 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 13th January, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

