Tuesday, 12th January, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

P R A Y E R S

The Chairman (Haji Moses Kigongo) in the Chair

The Council was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, I wish to welcome you back from the long holiday. I hope you have used this time to carry out full mobilisation of the people in your constituencies and you have come back with vigour to tackle the challenging work now in the pipeline.

On a sad note, it is with deepest regret that I have to inform you that while you were away, we lost one of our Colleagues hon. Arthur Kiiza Amooti, Council Member for Burahya County, Kabalore District.  We shall miss his services.  Let us stand up for a minute’s silence in his memory.  May his soul rest in peace.

BILLS

FIRST READING

The National Youth Council Bill, 1992 

THE MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman and hon. Members, I beg to move that a Bill entitled The National Youth Council Bill, 1992 be read for the First Time.  I beg to move. (Applause)

ii) THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Ateker Ejalu): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Trade Union Laws (Miscellaneous Amendment) Bill, 1992 be read the First Time. 

iii) THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill entitled The Constituency Assembly Bill, 1992 be read for a First Time.  Sir, I beg to move.

iv) THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr. Amama Mbabazi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill entitled the National Enterprise Corporation Bill, 1992 be read for the First Time.  I beg to move.

BILLS

SECOND READING

The National Women’s Council Bill, 1992

THE MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Dr. S. Kazibwe): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that a Bill entitled: The National Women’s Council Bill, 1992 to be read a Second Time.

As we stand here in this House today, as the hon. Members sitting here in this House today, I believe over the long recess to which I warmly welcome them back and wish them a happy New Year, they have seen the fruits of the promotion of women in development.

The history of our country is such that sectors that have been excluded from political activities are also the sectors which have been playing a very big role in the development of this country.  We are talking about an agricultural country, a country predominated by peasant agriculture and the people who are involved in this peasant agriculture, in sustaining it; the weeding, the harvesting, and many times, the marketing in the formal sector, are the women.  

Culturally, our society has been dictated and I believe it may go on for a long time that women are not to stand up in public and speak.  Thanks to the NRM, I am here and I am speaking. (Applause) Women are supposed to be advisors in the back-door; women - mothers of the nation - the people who nurture your children and who nurtured you too, are really so backward when you talk about backwardness, that I believe you hon. Members in your mobilisation have seen it fit that we come up with a system of making sure that all women in this country participate in the development of the country.  What is pertaining now is that the mobilisation which has been going on by both men and women members of this House, has brought fruits and dividends.  What has been happening so far until the NRM came into power is that in 1978, a Decree was put in place to set up what is known as the National Council of Women. What we have found from our research is that the women who are mobilised under the National Council of Women make up less than 25 percent of the total population of the women in this country, and we have seen that this has been a major drawback for us to mobilise women.  We have also testified to the fact that our constitution stipulates freedom of association and these women’s groups are constituted on professional lines, religious lines and interest groups. But we believe that for us to move our country forward, each one of us has a duty to participate in the development of this country. 

The research we have done in the Ministry has also shown that the drive to stamp out illiteracy, to mobilise people for better production, and the drive to make people more accountable to themselves and to the nation, is not taking root because the primary teachers, who are the mothers, are illiterate. They have no access to land or ownership of land. They feel that they take no particular part in decision-making in this country.  The NRM has seen it fit that we make sure that these women wherever they are, whatever their educational status, the part of the country they come from, their religious affiliations, and whatever education or profession they belong to, we should bring them together and unify them so that they participate in the programmes that are geared towards the development of our nation. 

So, the Bill I am proposing to be read a Second Time, is to establish a National Women’s Council, which is going to be a unified body, where all government organs are going to have access to information pertaining to women, such as what the needs of the women are. These will be voiced by the National Women’s Council.  

We also want to engage women in activities which are beneficial to them.  What has been happening is that with the few NGOs which have been doing some work, it has been difficult for the woman who does not belong to any particular NGO to raise a voice if she feels that anything is going wrong. So the functions of this Council will be to unify and bring national consciousness among these women who are the mothers; and who are the initial teachers of our children.  It will also help us to integrate programmes that are all over the country so that we, as a legislature, and as a government, can be able to know which area of the country is lagging behind after the women and the local community have identified their needs.  

The National Women’s Council will comprise of a representative elected from the District; two representatives from NGOs; and two women students elected by the National Students’ Association.  This is at the national level. But how does one get to be at the district level; to be in a position to be elected to go to the National Women’s Council? 

We are very happy to note that at this present moment the RC system has been embraced by our people. The purpose of this Bill is not to set up a parallel structure, which contradicts the existing structure, and which comes up in the programmes for women only. Because our aim is not to develop women on their own, but to develop them so that their activities can be integrated in the overall programmes right from the village level up to the national level.  So we propose that in the district, there will be a village women’s council; a parish women’s council; sub-county, division or town women’s council; county women’s council and then a district women’s council. I believe, this is also in line with the spirit of decentralisation which has been voiced by Members in this hon. House.

The executive committees from district level will comprise of a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, a secretary, a publicity secretary; and a secretary for finance. A district women’s representative will sit on this executive to act as a go between, to advise women on what is going on in the legislature and to include whatever they are planning, in the National Programmes.

I mentioned earlier that we are not setting up a parallel structure.  Culturally, ours is a system that has ways and means of linking up different elements in society.  It is proposed in the Bill, that the chairperson of each committee at each level be the secretary for women who has been given the mandate of the whole village to actually be secretary for women on that village.  This is a very useful linkage because once women have come up with their priorities and programmes, this chairperson who is also the secretary for women at the various levels of the RCs, will be able to link up whatever is in the women councils, so that they are married. They will marry with the programmes that are pertinent in the village. 

We propose further, in line with the Bill that was passed here recently, that anybody above the age of 18 is an adult.  We also propose that in order for anybody born a female to be elected to any committee, she must have attained the age of 18 years. Medically this is also feasible because, physiologically this woman is already mature. (Laughter)

The National Executive Committee will be comprised - when the National Women’s Council sits. It will elect from among its numbers a chairperson; a vice-chairperson; a general secretary; a publicity secretary; a secretary for finance; and one of the two NGOs, as well as one of the two student representatives, to sit on this National Executive Committee.

In line with democratisation, it is only pertinent to observe that whereas we have popular democracy, the people who should have the right to exercise this popular democracy should be in a position to make a decision out of their own rights. (Interruption)

MR. FRANCIS BUTAGIRA: On a point of order. (Inaudible)

THE CHAIRMAN: He got permission from the Clerk so you can proceed, please.

DR. KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, as I was saying, in line with popular democracy, the people who are going to exercise their democratic rights in this country should be enlightened so that they chose out of their own right, without any influence. It is our intention, therefore, that when we organise the women, they will be educated so that the democratic process that has been initiated will continue for the good of our country.

With those few words I beg to move that The National Women’s Council Bill, 1992 be read a Second Time. Sir, I beg to move. (Applause)

(Question proposed)

MR. ELYAU (Kalaki County, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill. But allow me, before I talk on the Bill, to inform the Government that as I speak now, meningitis has struck my place and about 37 people have died. I am, therefore, urging the Government to do what they can to help us because people are losing hope.
Turning to the Bill, it is quite true that women today in Uganda need to be mobilised, although we have had the Women’s Representatives here in the House. In some of our areas, women are still not aware of what they should be doing. I, therefore, support this Bill because I can see it goes down to the roots of a village. By then women will be very much aware.  Women have been waiting thinking that it is the men to start anything.  So this Bill, I think, will help a lot of our women who are idle, especially those in areas where people think they have nothing to do with this country apart from cooking and going to the garden.  

I thank the Minister for having been very much active. This Bill should have come a long time ago.  I will tell you, the women have been cheated, moreso the widows.  In my area, Kaberamaido and Kalaki, since the 1980s, women were getting things like sewing machines. These machines ended up with people who were powerful in offices. They decided to take them to Kampala for sale. So I think this time if women are sensitised, they will not lose anything in their favour.  Even today in Soroti and other areas, orphans who are female are not able to go to school because they cannot be mobilised to do something useful.  They should be able to attend schools, should have tailoring schools, and should be having a lot of things to do.  

I, therefore, urge the Minister to make sure that in the next year’s budget, all these idle and already dilapidated centres which are called community centres and were built in the 1960s and 1980s, should be repaired so that women learn some skills. Those that have been left, some people have been speaking about this, should be put to use.  When we get things like sewing machines, and classes for literature in the evening, these women will be very useful.  They are eager to learn but very few people are mobilising them.  In my county, some of us are eager to help the women, and we volunteer. But a woman needs another woman to tell her what to do, because we men think we are forcing some theories on women.  

As far as the RC system is concerned, people are very grateful. We had a very good Christmas, this time apart from meningitis, people have not fought at all. People have been well organised.  They are happy and are looking forward to continuing in that happiness, except that some areas in Teso are threatened again by raiding, of which I think Government should take up strict measures. Raiding is a menace. Already the raiders are taking food and clothes. Something must be done quickly so that people remain peaceful and hopeful.  

I do not know what we can do this time if we are going to organise our people to start doing some agriculture. I wondered if the Minister of Commerce is aware that people were hit hard when they heard that the price of cotton had dropped to only 300/=. I thought this was a good step, but it is discouraging the cotton grower.  In my place, people were saying that the next time they would not grow cotton, or even this year. But I told them it was a question of announcement and would be discusssed when we meet in this House.

Maybe if this price is adjusted it will help us because that is a major area to involve women so that they can also do something.  In my village, women have grown cotton and recently there is a group with about 10,000 kgs.  In store.  So, if the cotton price was reconsidered, maybe to be retained at last year’s price, this would encourage us to tell the people to grow more.  Otherwise, we have already been put off completely.  It is a very worrying situation. Though its known the common market has fallen, I think the farmers should be protected.  Government should come in and protect the farmers. This is the only way they can contribute to national cake.  

Lastly, literacy is a very important issue. Girls who have not been to school should be given a chance to go to school. How can they get educated if they are not given free education - because these people cannot raise the money to pay.  In Kalaki, I know a family, which has about eight children; four girls and four boys, and the parents were killed.  Now, who will look after these children?  It is quite difficult. We have tried to send those in secondary school back to school, but the ones in primary schools are having a problem.  I wish the Minister will consider this, so that everybody in Uganda can in future be able to read and write; so that they can read about their country, and know how to calculate in order to manage their economic activities.  With these few words, I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

MR. SIBO (Nominated Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The Minister for Women in Development has referred to the existence of Decree No.3 of 1978, which is the existence of a National Women’s Council. Unfortunately, there is no provision for the repeal of that. I saw the repeal, but I was wondering whether it was coming from a Member or from the Minister himself.

AN HON. MEMBER: Herself.

MR. SIBO: Herself.  I beg your pardon.  If it is coming from the Minister then I take note of the Minister’s intention to repeal the existence of Decree No.3 of 1978.  Now, having said that, Mr. Chairman, I would like to express my doubts with respect to the efficacy of this Bill. If you notice, the existence of the Women’s Council in Decree No.3 of 1978, depended very much on the existence of the Women’s Voluntary Organisations, and it is those organisations that were being martialled into the top organisation of the Women’s Council.  In this particular case, there is a political structure coming from the bottom to the top. The functions of the organisation as spelt out in this Bill, are exactly the same functions as were spelt out in Decree No.3 of 1978. In that Decree, there were no funds provided.  They depended on funds being voluntarily raised from the people themselves. 

However, to be able to organise the women in Uganda into a unified body; in order to engage the women in activities that are of benefit to them and the nation; in order to inspire and promote among them a spirit of unity; and in order to provide a unified and integrated system in which the women will communicate and co-ordinate, and so on and so forth, which are the function of the Council, it will require funds.  I am not quite sure whether the Minister will be able to provide funds for these activities.  These activities require substantial funds and she will require funds, probably from voluntary organisations.  These voluntary - currently the Voluntary Women’s Organisations, will continue to exist. Even if we repeal the existing law, and we do not repeal the existence of these women, women’s organisations will continue to exist and will continue to attract voluntary organisations.  I also understand that as we speak now, the women have seen this Bill, and having seen it, they have decided to form themselves into an Association, the top Association instead of the Council, which is indeed a kind of resentment for the existence of this Bill: and thereafter, there will be a certain amount of opposition.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Point of information.  I will not be getting up to inform, but I would like to inform the hon. Member that in actual fact, the formation of an umbrella organisation has been the assistance of the Ministry, so that we can streamline the affairs of women in the country.  There is no resentment. The formation of the Association is not a reaction to the formation of this Bill.  It is because they are trying to become a complete NGO under the names of National Association of Women’s Organisations and not to counteract the formation of this Bill.

MR. SIBO: I thank the Minister for her information.  I would like to believe what she says, but I am not quite sure whether that is correct, because the formation of that Association itself indicates that you have taken away the Council. We will form ourselves into another body.  So, I do not know. However, that being the case, and I hope she is right, they will continue to attract the voluntary funds and the structure that she has set up - she is proposing to set up in this Bill, may not be able to attract funds from NGOs and, therefore, she will depend entirely on Government contributions.  The Government contributions may not really be able to carry out the functions as set out in this Bill.  That is point Number one.

My second point on this matter is that the structure itself has not been given - it is similar to the existing RCs.  The RCs have currently got what I call a political cult. They do not have powers to apply sanctions, but have got the cult to apply certain sanctions so that you have got to move with RCs if you are really going to move within the community. While the women, it will continue to be a voluntary effort, and a voluntary effort in a political structure, may not be forthcoming in this kind of Government political structure.  It may not be forthcoming and that is what I fear.  

I believe again the third point on this, is that the Minister is going to need a pretty big establishment to run this structure, and this establishment will require a lot of funds; because if you do not have an establishment to run this structure, they will just die away, and that is my fear.

The fourth point I feel I should express, is that, while I believe the Minister that this structure cuts out all possible sectarian interests, which I think is a very welcome proposal, but I think these sectarian interests do bring in a certain amount of contribution to the women’s interests; and I think they should be taken care of also.  So, I would like to suggest to the Minister that in her efforts she should try and operate along the structure of the Women’s Voluntary Organisations instead of trying to ignore them as it is.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BUTAGIRA (Rwmpara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am an admirer of the women’s cause, and I support the cause, but I have my reservations on the wisdom and efficacy of this Bill; and with considerable hesitation and reluctance, I have been forced to oppose it.  

What will this Women’s Council do that the Ministry is not doing?  We created the Ministry for women, has it failed? If so, you should tell us so that it is scraped.  There is a tendency of compartmentalisation of our society. On the agenda paper here, there is National Youth Council Bill, 1992, which has been read. Next time maybe, we shall have Men’s Council Bill. (Laughter) 

We may also have an Elders’ Council Bill, the Disabled Council Bill. How far are we going in this exercise?  This Bill assumes there is a sort of partneristic attitude.  We are trying to partnerlise women.  We are assuming they are inferior; and, therefore we should create these councils. I think this is discrimination in reverse gear.  We have created the RC system; a system where at any stage there is women. We begin here in this Chamber. Each district has a woman representative. Then you go down; a secretary for women, down the ladder up to the lower level.  All these are meant to do what?  I think they are meant to co-ordinate and organise women for development. The very purpose of the Bill for which the hon. Minister is trying to achieve.  Hon. Sibo has raised an important issue.  Will this work? We have created so many corporations here, we create things, and they never take off.  Only sometime back, we passed a Law Reform Commission.  That Commission, I am told - because I have an answer here - could not take off because of lack of funds.  Where are you going to find funds for this one? Are you going to go begging outside? 

So, we should really be serious when creating these institutions.  I think we are passing a legislation, we seem to be - there is sort of - I think now it is not only a habit; it is becoming a disease of creating all sorts of legislations; and if you come to sit down and go through all the laws we have passed, and see which ones are effective, you will get alarmed.  So, I would rather say that the Ministry responsible for women creates an important base in the Ministry itself; a secretariat within the Ministry that can  cater for these sort of things which this Bill is trying to do; and then it would be under the supervision of the Minister concerned. But creating a separate body altogether that is not going to work. It will make this legislature a laughing stock. So, Mr. Chairman, I oppose totally the creation of the Council for Women.

MR. MUKWAYA (Historial Member): Mr. Chairman, I am a supporter of the struggle for women’s liberation and a very strong one. I am a very old ally of the struggle for the liberation of women, especially in Uganda; the emancipation of women. Before I make my small contribution, I would like to recognise the ladies, especially those who are in this House; those who have come out strongly to air their views and to mobilise the other women to fight together so that the women’s cause is understood from the national level to the grassroots. 

Mr. Chairman, allow me to recognise the contribution by hon. Mrs. Gertrude Njuba and the hon. Olivia Zizinga, right from the bush days up to now.  Allow me, also to recognise the challenge created by two great ladies, that is, Mrs. Ssekitoleko and Mrs. Kalema, during the elections, which brought them into this House.  But above all, I would like to recognise the great work done by hon. Miria Matembe. (Laughter)
 
Hon. Matembe has ably championed the cause for the rightful cause of the women and their emancipation. Although the Member who was standing here before me has some serious reservation about this Bill, I think the Minister and whole Government have studied the issues he was talking about and realised that actually it is important that the women have a structure which is going to consolidate all their activities, and to even give them a very strong political platform from where they can air their views.  According to me, this Bill has four important areas which we should think about very seriously.  

First of all, the Bill seeks to organise more strongly, all the women from different spheres of life and activities; all of them and their activities.  So, it is trying to re-organise the women so that when actually  - even if separately, they have different activities, when it comes to their political issues at national level, they have a strong and united forum where they can air their views and they are properly understood.  

The second one is to consolidate what the women have so far achieved in their struggle for liberation and emancipation; to consolidate whatever they have achieved. I think the women have really achieved some great things, and these need to be consolidated so that they do not wither away with time.  

The third point should be to guide all the activities of the women so that their potential in national development is properly integrated like the Minister was saying. Women have a great potential, but they are not properly guided in their activities, which is unfortunate for our development. But if this Bill is passed and their activities are properly guided, and integrated in our economic development, I think this will be one of our biggest achievements.  

Number four, is to promote their political capacity in the public life and public management of our society; an area which has attracted very competent and able participants like the ones I have so far already mentioned earlier on.  

I think it is pertinent that this House considers this Bill very seriously and passes it without hesitation.  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move.

MRS. MPANGA (Women Representative, Mubende): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for that time I thought you were only going to ask me to discuss women.  My neighbour here says that they are not applying for Membership of women; they cannot be because God decided a long time ago. 

I would, however, like to congratulate the Minister for bringing up this Bill, and I would like to appeal to everybody to give it good support; because if some of you who had doubts were women, you would know that if you have children and one of them eats fast while the other is a slow eater, you have to protect the slow eater so that the development of the two can move at the same pace.  Women in political terms are also eaters because we have been denied by culture to be there, and we are thanking NRM for bringing us out.  But to give us political power without assisting the women to take up the challenge is not enough.  Because if you go to the villages, as many of us have done, you go to a meeting and they call the women. Somebody says, ‘let me introduce the people with whom I do this work at RC 2...’ and when it comes to the secretaries for women and they search for her, they say ‘oh, she is doing her job…’  and in many cases she is not there listening, because she is cooking for the Minister or for the visitors.

So, when we create these Councils, we hope it will be a good avenue for the women to bring out their thoughts, bring them as issues into the main RC work, and then they will come up to the national level and be heard. But I hope the Government will not give us only a token. Hon. Butagira has said you created a whole Ministry of Women, but how much money do you give us to develop that ministry? If we compare with the national councils, these councils for women will go right down to RC1; and though they will definitely need money - and please, from the Ministry of Finance to everybody, give us money to develop these councils, as a token and a thank you for the work we do in development.  

Definitely there will be a lot that can be organised; and if you want to hear what the women say, you will not look for hon. Miria Matembe, Mrs. Zizinga, hon. Mrs. Njuba or the other honourables; but you will go to the National Council to find out exactly what the women feel. For instance, if you ask me today, I am expressing my own views and the views of the people I know. But if we have a women’s organisation, we shall have an organised way of knowing what women think about certain issues, and secondly, we shall have a way of reaching women, to explain to them what is taking place at the national level.  Definitely, the Decree of 1978 must be repealed, and I would like to appeal to the Minister and everybody alike, that we should give a good explanation for these councils so that women will feel they still hold their freedom of association, and so that those NGOs that we have said are interest groups and are sectarian, will go alone. I would like to assure the men folk that the association which we recently formed of NGOs, is fully aware and gives support to these councils; because we know that this will be a way of reaching everybody.  

When you organise - let us say a Moslem Women’s Association, you cannot force other women who are not Moslems to come in, but when the meeting is open to everybody in the women councils, all of us will be involved, and with the help of the elected leaders, there will be an avenue through which they can develop the women folk.  

I also hope that the election will be done by the women. I am not quite sure whether this is quite distinct, because if you say, I am a women’s representative from Mubende - but I think there are more men who chose me than there were women.  If I am to be a women’s representative, then the women must have more say in the election of that representative.  Thank you very much.

MRS. J. RWABYOMERE (Women Representative, Kabarole): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Bill. But permit me first, to briefly congratulate the Minister for her clear presentation of this Bill, and her support of the ideas therein. 

Permit me also to react to hon. Butagira’s questions. Hon. Butagira has questioned the wisdom and efficacy behind this Bill. As far as wisdom is concerned, three years ago in March, 1989, hon. Members of Parliament sat with the then National Political Commissar as women representatives elected in the district, and dwelt on issues of an organisational structure for women in this country. Therefore, the wisdom is behind the District Women Representatives in this Parliament.  

As to the efficacy, I would like to inform hon. Butagira that in the last three decades, there has been some noticeable attention, worldwide, in as far as the role of women in development is concerned.  What we are doing here started only recently. I believe, it was six years ago.  So, I think as far as wisdom and efficacy is concerned, hon. Butagira should know, so that he can grasp the concept of women in development and, therefore, the wisdom and efficacy behind this Bill.

There is no doubt that this kind of organisation and law will adequately place the women folk of this country within the revolutionary threshold and beyond.  This is as far as the political implications are concerned. From the economic point of view, this organisational structure will help to integrate the women in the economic development of this country.  If I may be allowed to quote the words of His Excellency the President, in as far as integrating women in development is concerned, “The integration of women in the development process is not a matter of ethics, but of sound economics.” 

This Bill and what happens thereafter will call for the re-examination of the concept of the idea of development. That is the conventional idea, which is measured purely in quantitative terms of capital specialisation, income- generation, trade balance and industrial output. This criterion is not actually relevant; it is not a relevant index when you are assessing the women’s role in development.  This is because various sectors of the home economy do not reflect the contribution of women in quantitative and statistical terms.  What does this mean? There is a gross under-estimation of women’s contribution in the areas of industry, training, education, trade, formal sector employment, national income and other easily measured areas of economic activity.  Therefore, what is more relevant to us here is what - in what constitutes development - must include; and I repeat, must include the recognition of the increased input or value added of the labour force of which women form a significant part.  This will also assist hon. Butagira to grasp the concept when emphasising the role of women in development.  For example, between 60 to 70 per cent of the labour force in this country, in the informal sector, is by women, and according to the latest census out of 14 rural people, eight of them are women.  So, from the economic point of view, it really goes without saying.

From the social point of view, the extent to which women are free to make decisions affecting their lives, and that of their families, may be the key to the future of this country.  For example, when you are addressing critical problems of health, education, family planning and population growth rates - all these are serious issues that actually, threaten human existence, and there is no way  that you cannot look at the role of the women in these areas. 

As far as the sections of the Bill - I support in a very special way, the nobel objectives of the Bill in the Memorandum, particularly in section 4, the objective of unity - to bring the women of this country together; and the saying goes if you educate women you educate a nation, that is a motto for the box, and it equally goes for unity; if women unite you will end up uniting the whole country.  I support the composition, the appointments and the financial lay out and regulations.  I, however, would like to propose an Amendment in section 4(d) on objects and functions of the Council, to which Amendment I will seek the Minister’s indulgence at an appropriate time.

Finally, but most important, I have the impression that the reason we are debating this Bill is to facilitate the forthcoming representation in the Constituent Assembly, of the women. I would also like to appeal strongly to the Minister to address the numbers of women representatives from the National Council, in the Constituent Assembly Bill.  Because there is a clear contradiction. While in Parliament we are represented from each district, in the Constituent Assembly the number is only eight; at least, if that could be multiplied by three or five times. 

I have also just noticed that there is a contradiction between the interpretation section of section 2, and section 8, regarding the term “Chairperson”. I seek the Minister’s indulgence to put that clear, and I welcome and support the Amendment by the Minister to repeal Decree 3, of 1978, so that the existing National Council of Women can take advantage of section 5, subsection (b) of this Bill to be represented.  Mr. Chairman, I thank you for your indulgence.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI (Lira Municipality, Lira): Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Bill wholly, because even in the book of Genesis, Chapter 1, God created male and female in his image.  So, I think women should not be advocating - thinking that they are not equal to men in any way.

I would like to limit myself in supporting this Bill to the title, then part 4, Section 8, (a) and (f) and section 20. There is already in existence the National Council of Women. This is just mere word play by making that alteration and making it read the National Women’s Council.  Maybe, when the hon. Minister is winding up, she may want to impress upon me that this is a better title than the original title.  In part 4, in the past some hon. Ministers were accused whenever they brought Bills here that were seeking for employment of relatives.  But in this particular one, when I went to that section where the secretary to man the secretariat is to be appointed by the hon. Minister, this time it is modified to read, ‘on the advise of the Council’, which is very, very good. That means now that even if the hon. Minister, on humanely speaking grounds, might have somebody in mind, this time that person may not come in.

We are making a law. In section 8, subsection 1 (a) and (f), there is mention of the Resistance Council.  I am a professional student of the RC system. I like it. But is it likely to be covered in the draft Constitution that women will be represented even after this particular time when we are here through the RC system to the National Assembly?  If not, why are we creating something that will require bye-elections thereafter?  I think we can have better representation even if we do not mention that the NRC Women Representatives should be on the Committees. 

Then when we come to section 20, on the accounts, I have a big quarrel here with the inefficiency demonstrated in the Auditor General’s office. We seem to be giving the Auditor General a lot of work! I am saying this because the last time the books of accounts of Lira Municipal Council were audited, was in 1984. It is on record, and the Minister for Finance, or the Minister for Local Government can ring and find out, and give me a reply while I am still in this House now.  The last time the books were audited was in 1984.  So, why are we giving a man who cannot put his house in order, a lot of work? We could go in for an independent external auditor -(Interruption)

MR. KIGYAGI:  Point of information.  May I find out from hon. Rev. Atwai whether the books are written -(Interruption.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order. Give information please.

MR. KIGYAGI:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, may I find out from hon. Rev. Atwai whether the books of the Municipality are written, because to audit the books they must be written.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI: Normally, the books are written, as an administrative measure, under the supervision of the Municipal Treasurer, and it has to be verified by the external auditors, who have up to now not done their work, and how we are operating, is best known to us. 

So I think, this particular Bill is a straight forward Bill.  We need to recognise the women.  Even when a Council is formed, it does not mean that the hon. Minister or her Deputy are not working. This is a council to advise them; to help them perform better.  So I support this Bill, wholly, Mr. Chairman.

MR. J. MWANDHA (Bugweri County): Thank very much, Mr. Chairman.  I bring you greetings from the people of Bugweri and best wishes for a New Year, which we hope will be prosperous. 

I have one very strong observation about this Bill.  This Bill does not recognise the fact that women in this country have been organising themselves for a long time. We have the Mothers Union, the Councilate Guild, the Muslim Association of Women, the Women Lawyers, the Women Engineers, and we have women in various categories, organised in one way or another. The list is a long list of women who are organised.  This Bill - perhaps in the course of her reply, the Minister will explain how this Council is going to co-ordinate the activities of these already established organisations. In my view, if this Council succeeds, I think it is important that it works with the existing organisations.  

So, I think that is a very serious weakness in this Bill. As it has already been said, we had already a Decree and it is only the change of name that could be retained, although the Decree is repealed.  Because I believe the National Women’s Council could stand better than the Women’s Council.  

So I think the Minister can look at that one and see whether she can accept that change.  For the first time, we have found that in the law we are making here, a person who is going to head that Council is being referred to as chairperson. I do not know whether chairperson is feminine.  In my view, the word ‘chairman’  would not make any difference, whether -(Interruption)

MRS. M. MATEMBE: Point of information. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The small information I wish to give to the hon. Member holding the Floor is that internationally things are changing.  Long ago the person who used to sit in the chair was necessarily a man. Things have changed so much that these days you, the person sitting in the chair, is either a man or a woman. Therefore, the neutral word that is now internally accepted for a person occupying a chair in that capacity, is the chairperson. (Laughter) In fact, Mr, Chairman, I would be calling you so. But for the lack of international exposure and knowledge of our people of the changing world, I have to stick to the other word.  But really we have to change to the right word to be used.  Thank you very much. 

REV. ATWAI: Mr. Chairman, although the chairperson is being advocated for, in the Advanced Learners Dictionary which has been revised several times, the word “chairman is being retained and it is defined to mean anyone sitting on the chair and guiding the meeting.  Unless, we are going to change mankind to womankind; mankind still means both.  Thank you. (Laughter)

MR. MWANDHA: Obviously hon. Matembe would like you to be referred to as a chairperson. But the explanation given by hon. Matembe is self-defeating, because a chairperson assumes that one day there will be a man to be the chairperson of that Women’s Council - (Laughter.) So, Mr. Chairman, I really seriously request the Minister to agree to amend that and call it ‘chairman.’ It is a much more acceptable title everywhere inspite of what has been said, and a chairperson in this respect does not convey the meaning hon. Matembe would like to convey.  So we better be serious about this one.

Let me come to Clause No.4.  One of the objectives of this Council is to improve and promote among women, a spirit of unity and national consciousness.  Surely, I do not think that this is the kind of objective the Minister would like to see.  Because it implies that men are more united than women.  I doubt whether that is correct; and that in fact, women are less national conscious than men and, therefore, this Bill should attempt to make women more united and have national consciousness. I know that many women have national consciousness, just as many men have national consciousness, and this provision does not in any way improve the situation as it stands. So, I believe that the objective does not mean anything and could be deleted from this Bill.  

The other one, to establish channels through which economic and social services and amenities may reach in all areas of Uganda.  I do not know how the Minister is going to do it though this Bill. Because first of all, she is assuming that women are not getting economic and social facilities and amenities, and it is only through this Council that this is going to happen.  I think it assumes that these social and economic facilities are going to men and are not going to women and, therefore, the Council would ensure that they will now go to women.  I do not think that the women would even want that.  The women would want these social amenities and facilities not only to go to themselves, but also to their husbands, their children and other people.  So it is self-defeating to say that this council is going to deliver these facilities simply to women, because it will not even be acceptable to women, since the women want to share these with the men as well as with their children. So, again, this is an objective which does not carry very much and I could not believe it.
	
With regard to the various appointments to the composition of the Council, there is a provision here for getting two people from NGOs to sit on this Council.  I would like to propose that the Minister should have the option to decide who sits there, in addition to the various people who have been mentioned.  I think to mention NGOs as such, gives the impression of a begging mentality, because these people are likely to give you money and so forth. Therefore, let them be represented on the Council.  I feel, let the Minister have the option to choose whoever she wants to sit on this Council; purely on merit.  It could be a member of an NGO or it could be a man or anybody else, as long as he/ she supports the cause for women. So, again I think that this particular one should be changed.  

Then there is a provision that you have to have on this Council, female students from sister organisations. Okay. But I think it would be better to go in for female youth representatives, because afterall, soon the Minister will be coming again to form a Youth Council, and I think it would be better that rather than have students, who are also useful, it is better to get representation from the Youth Council.  I would also like to propose that, in addition, we could get women from the Workers’ Unions because this is an area where I think women need to be mobilised; they need to be supported; and I think it is important that the workers’ unions are represented on this Council.  I will also propose that this NRC could also be represented on that Council.  

The last point which I want to make with regard to this Bill, is much more of an appeal.  Many hon. Members may have read in The New Vision of yesterday about the circumcision which is taking place in Sebei.  I think this is something that has got to be condemned in the strongest possible terms, and I would like the Women’s Council to fight circumcision among women.  With those comments, I support the Bill. 

MR. D. RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support this Bill and I hope that when it is implemented, it is going to unite our women in all their small groups, to have common objectives and forge their unity in this country. When you look at our women folk, both educated and uneducated, they have very little say in some of the management areas, and moreso, the men have almost 75 per cent say on what the women should be.  You will realise that in the villages, most men do not want their women to join clubs or councils like this one. I do not know why.  But I can foresee a task by the Ministry of Women in Development, Culture and Youth.  While they are mobilising the women, I think the onus is on them to mobilise the men as well, so that they allow their women to join these councils and clubs, because that is where they can be educated, even at the lower level; that is where they can meet and discuss matters that concern their welfare.  But in many cases, men nowadays stop their women from joining these councils, even at RC level. So, I think this issue should be noted by all Members, so that we help the Ministry of Women in Development to oblige the men to allow women to utilise themselves in all fields of activities without being hindered.  

In supporting this Bill, I have got some observations, especially on Section 8.  While I understand that there are some inconsistencies, this is in the office of the chairperson or chairwoman.  They say it is the secretary for women of the corresponding Resistance Council, who shall be the chairperson. As you read, it sounds okay.  But what happens, when this very chairperson is inefficient; will these women vote her out?  I would say no.  Legally, they cannot because they never voted for her.  She was for voted by another system of RCs, including men. Now that she becomes a chairperson of a Council with composed of several councils for women, how will the women fight her out if she does something wrong ? I think this is something that cannot be ignored.  We should consider it, because it can bring lot of confusion.  Women will think that the RC system is imposing a chairperson on them without their consent.  So, I think the Minister should explain that and if need be, it could be amended.  

Another thing I am considering is the time factor. Two years is too short.  In the first year, these people are learning what to do with their Council, and within the next six months they are thinking in terms of electing another Government.  So, that has also not been given serious thought.  I propose that at least the years should be increased to three or four years.  In any case, even if you elect the chairperson as secretary for women under the NRC or under the RC system, these two years do not march with the RC system.  So if that happens, this Council will have to be broken up before the term for the RC system ends. This could again cause some confusion in the organisation. I think it should also be ironed out.

In Part 4; the Secretariat - I am happy that the secretary will be appointed by the Minister after the Council has advised her.  But what methods are they going to use? Since this is a managerial post, this post should be advertised, and interviews should be held so that the Council selects the most able and most efficient person to lead them, so that it is not done by calling on few individuals; and people will know that they are good and why they will not be able to manage the office of the secretariat.  So that office should be advertised and interviews should be held so that they select the best. 

Then there is the issue of vacating the office. There is a provision which states that when a member in the Council fails to attend two consecutive meetings, she should be sent out of that Council.  I think that one is a bit harsh, because you will find that this Council will be doing nothing but electing new members every other week or every other month. I think twice is not so offensive, and in any case, this person should be given a warning either in writing or in the Committee, before they just expel her, because if it is done quite often it will destabilise the Organisation.  

It is also stated that if a lady is convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude within the proceeding six years, she should not be accepted in the Council. My question is; what is the miracle about six years?  Must it be six years? It could be less, because six years and the word “Turpitude” is such a broad term, which can be misinterpreted and somebody can always make allegations against somebody, and you can imagine, the lady concerned has to wait for another six years to be on the Council. I think this is a little bit too harsh again. It should be reduced to about three years.  

Concerning finance, Section 16; from the beginning, we are told that this is a Corporate body which has got powers to borrow, powers to sue and even to be sued and, therefore, it is a fully-fledged management enterprise.  But then, it is stated that before they get a loan, or before they organise themselves in the finances, they must refer to the Minister - the line Minister - and they must also refer to the Minister of Finance.  Is this not bringing again bureaucracy.  Is it not bringing in bureaucracy for these Councils?  If a Council is a corporate body, why can’t the Headquarters of this Council not study the projects they want to handle and go to the banks and negotiate loans and overdrafts. Why do they have to go back to the Minister to get an overdraft of one million, when what you have as an organisation - you have got enough assets - can allow you to get one million.  So, I think again, these are delaying tactics in order for the organisation to put off their decision.  So, if you want these Councils to perform properly, let us give them the right to take decisions and act.  Afterall, they have got that secretary who should be a very experienced person in management and, therefore, before they go for loans and overdrafts they must have studied their needs and, therefore, there should not be a need of stopping them to make a decision, because the Minister has not said. Suppose the minister is away for three weeks on safari, do they have to wait and possibly even miss the chance of getting an overdraft?  And if the Minister is here, but then the Minister of Finance is out, then you have again to go and consult with the Minister of Finance. I think that is a wrong way of ensuring these Councils become more effective.  So, they should be given a chance to manage their affairs properly.  

My last comment is on co-ordination of projects. At the moment, under the RC. system, the women have got projects in their cadres of RC s - RC 1,2,3,4,5. If we bring in the Women Councils, how shall we co-ordinate ? Is there not going to be an overlap? Who will be the supervisor of these projects?  Will the projects of the RCs be incorporated into the Council’s Projects?  So, that is another question I am putting to the minister. There must be a dividing line, otherwise you can get a lot of overlaps and pull and push - this is my project as RC. Then the Women Council will also say, this is my project, and you get these quarrels here and there.  So, Mr. Chairman, with these observations, I support the Bill. 

MR. ORYANG (Gulu Municipality, Gulu): Thank you Mr. Chairman, for allowing me also to add my voice to this National Women Council Bill, 1992.  First of all, I would like through you, and through my hon. Colleagues, who are ladies to Betsy my heartfelt commiseration upon all the women of the nation. (Interjections) There has been what we call affirmative action being meted out to the women folk.  Affirmative action if it is over done, can be counter-productive.  We would like to see more and more hon. Matembes, hon. Ssekitolekos, hon. Betty Bigombes, coming up and doing what some men cannot do. But when we lean too much on this affirmative action, I am afraid,  we are going -(Interruption)-

MRS. MATEMBE: Point of information. I want to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that women have been doing what men cannot do.  Namely; to go to a labour ward and push out a human being.  I think that is one very great one -(Laughter)

BRIG. MOSES  ALI: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, my information to our sisters is that they should allow people to discuss this Bill without interruption unnecessarily, because it is a very important Bill determining their future and they cannot run away from us talking about their problems; whether in this House or outside; so we should be given time to talk about their problems.

MR. ORYANG: I want to thank you hon. Members who have contributed, and who have given me points of information.  Mr. Chairman, if I may now turn to the Bill itself, I think the same objectives as that of the National Council of Women established by Decree No.3 of 1987, is being repeated here.  The only difference is that the structure of the new Women’s Council is different from that of the National Council of Women, which structure, as a Member had previously mentioned, poses competition with the RC system now.  I would like to know  whether in mobilising women through the Women Council the mobilisers, be it the Secretariat or the RCs, will not find conflicts or interests.  How will the women under the Women Council work through projects that are probably initiated by RCs.  Are these to be dropped altogether? We want something very clear. I see an hon. Member shaking her head but this is a national problem that we are creating.  It is going to need co-operation, alright -(Interruption)

MRS. SSEBAGEREKA: Point of information. Excuse me, I would like to erase or allay the fears of the hon. Member holding the Floor that these Women Councils will in no way conflict with the Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) or RCs or Voluntary Organisations, because these Women Councils are something like what you would call the women political wing - you see! The RC secretaries chair the meetings of these Women councils and the Non-Government Organisations operate on their own.  The projects can be independent of each other but there is no friction at all in the field.

MR. ORYANG:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope I am right, if I heard the hon. Member saying that this is supposed to be a political women’s wing.  I hope the hon. Member is serious because that poses competition with the RCs directly. It was mentioned here by an hon. Member that Uganda Council of Women, the present one, is now busy forming an Association.  I would also like to know from the hon. Minister whether the formation of this Association is either a resentment or perhaps taking precautions to guard against the coming into power of Uganda Women’s Council. I was talking about affirmative action.  You see, in Uganda, there is really no discrimination against women.  (Applause)  

It is true, the only practice we experience, which is because customs-die-hard in the country, is some of the cultures that need serious revision and wiping out.  For instance, the issue of circumcision of women and things like that, need to be seriously studied and discouraged.  

Apart from that, as it is already known, there are functions that women have to do that men cannot do and vice-versa.  Some of these if you try to wipe out completely and let a woman do, you may go against nature.  (Laughter) When I say this, I did not want to say that there should be no women ministers or no women Members of Parliament.  Indeed, women do perform better than men in many instances, but it does not mean that women do better than men completely  -(Laughter) Some women do better than some men. But not all women can do better than all men -(Applause)  

I would not like to take much more time, but I will conclude by saying that this Bill is very important, in that I would have, through the National Council of Women’s Decree, I would have it revised to activate women activities other than set up a new law system all together, thereby probably antagonising women who have been very active and involved in the Uganda Council of Women, which we sometimes used to nick-name ‘Uganda Council of War’. I think if an Amendment or improvement of Uganda Council of Women’s Decree was brought here, there would be no quarrel, but now that it is a new Bill - setting up a new system, the questions which are to be addressed are; Will there be no competition with the RC system now? Will there be no antagonism from the very devoted women who have been practising under Uganda Council of Women? And then the question of funds is to be addressed when we are setting up a new corporation. There is that element of funding from consolidated funds, et cetera. We are hard-stretched for funding of our Organisations. Setting up another one is an added difficult which could be avoided by revising and revitalising Uganda Council of Women.  With these few words, I would like to say, I am not sure whether I support this Bill now.  (Laughter)

DHUGIRA OPOTI (Women Representative, Nebbi): I thank you Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  I rise up to support the Bill.  Of all men who have, maybe, partially or completely, opposed the Bill, none has got up to refute what the Minister stated when she tabled the Bill.  

The objective of this Bill is not really totally advocating for these women’s struggle, but it is just asking for the recognition of the women’s activities in the nation.  By nature, women we do accept, are the backbone of this nation, especially when it comes to agriculture.  There are so many other things which women do and we know they do them, but nobody has ever come up to recognise them nationally. Before, in the past, women were water pipes in the homes; they collect firewood and bring it home; they cook; are nurses in their homes; are mothers and wives, and everything.  We do accept these roles. But we do not recognise what they do and that is why the women have always accepted their position.  

During our mobilisation meetings, you find the men, the RCs, complaining that it is very difficult to mobilise the women, because if a woman MP calls a meeting, the meeting is attended by men; and when you ask where the women are, they will say, these women of yours are very difficult; they do not accept to come to meetings.  We do accept that and that is why this Bill is being made so that we shall know where to point the finger; that is, the Women’s Council. Because it will automatically raise awareness of women’s participation, politically, socially and even economically.  To debate the issue of the chairman and the chairperson and what have you, is a none issue.  The issue is, there will be somebody sitting in the chair and for that matter, this person is a woman, and that is all.  Being a chairman, or a chairwoman, that is the chairperson fitted in that chair. So to debate the issue of our chairman or chairperson, is a none issue I do not accept it.  I have the option to object, Mr. Chairman  - (Interruption)  

So, in passing this Bill, we are going to intensify and raise the awareness of women in political and economic participation.  It will also help our male colleagues in their fields, at the county level, to mobilise the women.  Because it has not been easy for them to set up projects for women, much as they are interested, because it is common knowledge that these days, most of these NGOs they are coming to are to assist women. But it has not been easy for the Council Members hailing from counties to organise women. With the creation of this Council the CMs or the RC 4 Council will at least have a body that will be charged with raising projects for women at county level, and it is wrong to say that this Council is going to work parallel with RCs.  Because the Chairperson is going to be the secretary for women affairs at the committee level of every RC. So, it is going to be the duty of the chairperson, who is the secretary for women affairs on the committee, to report to her council, which is going to be formed by this Bill, and it is also through the secretary for women affairs that the village Council or maybe the county, or the parish council will get to know exactly the views of the women in the village, or in the sub-county, or even in the district.  Because, as you know, because of lack of political awareness, very few women have come out to participate in politics. Much as there is room for nine women being on the Executive of the RCs, they have not taken up this challenge because they are just not aware, and even if they are aware, they feel it is not necessary.  So, the chairperson who is also secretary for women affairs, is going to act as the spokesman of the women in her village, or in her county, or in the district, and she is also going to act as the person who will carry the ways of the women into the committee. 

Recently, during the recess, I held a meeting with women leaders. One complaint the secretary for women affairs raised was that, just because she is alone and she does not know which, she cannot direct the voice of the women, and she is really supported during council meetings.  But if a women council sits at the district level and resolves that they want something done and the Secretary RC 5 is only to carry the resolution from the women council, then it will be very difficult for the RC5 or the DRC to reject our resolution like that, because that will be hailing from the voice of the women.

Lastly, Mr. Chairman, the creation of the Council is also going to set up the hierarchy of work. It has not been easy for the women to operate from NRC and RC 5 down to the grassroots. Many times, you find a step is neglected, and if the council is set up, we are automatically going to have a road or a leader of communication from bottom to up and from up to bottom. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MISS ALIU (Women Representative Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity. I rise to support this Bill. I have noted in this House, whenever we debate something to do with women, a lot of laughter is always generated and a lot of jokes.  But I want to tell Members that this is really a very serious issue. It is not an issue to laugh over or treat lightly.  The National Women’s Council Bill, 1992, has been presented in order to give us a structure in this country, where we bring women of all categories together to participate in the women affairs of this Nation. 

Hon. Butagira asked why it was necessary to create a council and not just have a desk at the Ministry. A desk is a desk, but a structure which goes down right up to the grassroots, is more useful, because today, the culture is a culture of involvement and participating in whatever affects you. (Applause) So, we cannot just settle for a desk, we must have these women involved and participate in what affects their lives. That is why the Council is very necessary.

There has been another issue raised. People have referred to this as women’s issue. I feel it is a women’s issue in the final analysis, and is also a national issue.  As we debate it now, it is a women’s issue alright. But in the final analysis, all of us in society and the nation are the beneficiaries.  So, let us look at this National Council as a necessary structure for today. Perhaps in few years to come, we may not even need it. But it is the vehicle to enable us reach where we want to go.  

The National Council is created along those lines of the RC. I think we all agree how successful the RC system has been.  Because it involves the lowest, rising up to the highest, and when it comes to collection of information or this part of information, everybody along the line gets to know what is going on, and I believe, as the National Council, we are now debating the Bill, because its creation is very appropriate.  People have referred to the NGOs which have been in place for a very long time, and I think they have not succeeded simply because they were sectarian. For instance, if you do not belong to Mothers Union, Catholic action or the Moslem and the others, you do not benefit, however, good their programmes may be.  But we hope this structure will bring all people together at the lowest level up wards, together in a group, and enable them to create a common strategy, because what we really want is a common strategy to look at these issues and see whether we can solve them. If we leave them hanging in the various organisations we are not likely to move very fast.

I also want to allay fears of an hon. Member who said we were a compact mentalising society. If we are not, this Government must be commended for addressing various areas where they feel must be addressed so that we all move as a team.  Women and the Youth have been left behind and have been neglected. That is why we talk of a Women’s Bill and a Youth Bill. But why do we not talk of a men’s Bill?  We men feel that we have come to a certain level where we should pull other groups to come and join us and it so happens that women and the youth are the greater part of our population. We cannot afford to neglect these groups and we must address them even if it means creating the structure like this. This structure is very necessary. It is also going to assist us to collect data on women, because so far, policies have been made in this country without any data to back it up. In fact, we have been making policies and programmes from the top, but we have never involved this grassroots woman. Nobody has ever gone there and asked her what she needs, or what she wants?  We start from here and implement downwards. But at least this will give us a chance to listen and get from them their views and know what they want, to enable those at the top; those who are managing us; the Government, to know how best to go about creating these programmes and projects which will help these women to come up in their effort to develop and to develop the Nation as a whole.  I agree, and this is where I have misgivings when hon. Members mentioned the issue of funds. Experience has taught us that relying on consolidated funds may not get us started. So, I only hope that when Government puts a structure in place it is also willing to fund it adequately. Otherwise we shall have this Bill and we shall never have it moved if it is not funded adequately, to enable it achieve what it has been set up to do.

Finally, I want to appeal to Members of this House and tell them that, hon. Mwandha mentioned an issue which is very senstive; the one of circumcision in Sebei. When he mentioned it, some people laughed, yet this is a very painful exercise to our sisters and daughters, and I think we must address it as a Nation -(Applause) We cannot let the 20th Century continue to leave and turn our backs on some of our brothers and sisters who are here.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. KULANY: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate Members’ comments on circumcision. But the problem is actually a cultural practice.  So, people outside need a lot of education and I want Members to realise that it is a cultural problem. So it will take some time. But we are struggling to see that it ends. 

MR. WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  The statement expressed by the hon. Kulanyi is a fact, and it is only time that will heal and hopefully solve the problem.  It also applies to the men where I am born in Budadiri.  When you tell the young men to go to hospitals, of course they will not agree. So it is again may be culture and it has to take time. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU (Kagoma County, Jinja): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I think, before we either support the Bill or not, let us try to understand the present situation.  The present situation of our women in Uganda. Some of us are talking as if we are beginning from zero. We are not beginning from zero; we are beginning from a position where we have very many women properly mobilised, and doing a lot of work in the villages. But there are just problems, and I want to point out these problems.  There is the problem of fuel, and we have a lot of women involved in handwork and many other activities. These people need to be equipped with proper skills to improve on what they already know.  

We have women running various projects in the villages, and I have had the opportunity to travel to almost two thirds of Uganda; that is outside my constituency, and we have problems of leadership training. There are a number of women who do not know what to do, just because they have never had the opportunity to be trained in how to lead a club or how to lead a group of people.  These are our women. The problem we have in Uganda is that the women are the backbone of the economy. They are very many, but we have also to accept that the majority of our women are uneducated, and what we are doing by inserting institutions of this kind as stated in the Bill, is just to give employment to the few educated women in Uganda. We are not helping the majority of our Ugandan women. We need to ask ourselves, what do our Ugandan women need?  Our Ugandan women need education. They need training in management skills so that they can play a very effective role in their social and economic development. As we speak now, many organisations in Uganda give us the objectives laid down on this present Bill.  What we only need is to facilitate our women to do useful work, because these women need funds.  But instead, we are giving away funds -(Interjection) 

Mr. Chairman, I am sorry to refuse that information. There is a tendency in this House that whenever we are discussing women issues, our colleagues the women Members of this House, tend to think that because we are men, we do not know what is happening.  I am a representative of a whole constituency. I have, 63,600 women in my constituency, and these women are properly mobilised. They have a number of things they are doing, and a number of projects they are running. But they lack funds and training in management, leadership, etc.  I do not think it is this Bill which is going to provide these funds and the leadership and management skills that we need.  For a long time, our women have been exploited; very much exploited. Not only by their husbands and the community, but even by Government. I am not shy to say this. What do we see our women doing? We see our women dancing and singing as if that is all they can do.  So, what we want to do is to create an enabling environment for development -(Interruption)

MR. KATEREGGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I want to inform the Member holding the Floor that also men have been performing dances like women; together; not only in Kyankwanzi, even on televisions, we view them daily. We see men and women dancing. I also want to inform the Member holding the Floor that the best way of providing or educating women in leadership, is to form an organisation like this one, which can do the job better than the Ministry.

MR. WOGWAWABI GWAIVU: Mr. Chairman, I wish to thank the hon. Member for that information, but if he had just a minute to care he would realise that the organisations that can do exactly what the Bill is asking to do are very many.  We have a women desk in the NRM Secretariat. This desk is also going to do the same thing.  The Women in Development is there specifically for that. My argument is that we need to facilitate our women as they endeavour to improve on their economic and social status. We want to facilitate them with funds. There are very many women in the village there and they lack money. If we have extra funds as now in this Bill, we certainly need funds to be put in place for implementation.  If those funds can be - instead of giving them to the few educated women we have in Uganda, why can we not give the same funds to the many women who need these funds?  So, for those reasons, I do not support this Bill. 

MR. KAVUMA (Kyadondo County, Mpigi): I stand to support the Bill for a number of reasons.  First of all, I think it is a very revolutionary piece of legislation that must be supported by all forward looking and well wishing Ugandans. (Laughter)  

For the first time in the history of a third world country, a National Parliament of Uganda is debating the question of uniting Ugandan women into one strong organisation.  I am not persuaded at all by the argument that there are many other organisations dealing with these things and, therefore, there is no need to unite them.  In fact, the multiplicity of those organisations has been a problem and a hindrance to the development of women in this country.  Some of them tend to be to inward looking, and in fact they become discriminatory.  They do so without maybe, very bad intentions, but because there has been no structure that unites them, they find themselves dealing with matters that are not of content but rather of form.  The women of Uganda as we all know, are the largest productive community in this country towards our economy.  I am, therefore, pleased and all the women in Kyaddondo and Mpigi are very happy to see that they are now getting a legal foundation for their total emancipation, not only politically but economically and socially through the format of this Bill.  

Of course, I add my voice to those who disapprove some of the archaic cultural practices still practised in parts of this country. The argument is persuasive that it is a matter of time.  But even if it is a matter of time, it is the duty of the leaders to push so that that time comes earlier than later.

Another reason why I support this Bill is because we are now legally fulfilling -  I am talking about us as the National Resistance Movement, covering everyone of us here  - a long outstanding commitment by the Movement to ensure that Uganda’s women are properly prepared and facilitated to take their rightful place in society, in order to be able to play their role in our national development in a more organised and effective manner. Some people have been saying that the other name sounds better than this one.  My appeal is, let us address issues rather than whether a man is called Sam or Ahmed. We want to address the content.  What is this organisation going to do?  The question of whether it is called a better name tomorrow or today, I think should not take too much of our time.  

On Section 9, one hon. Member was urging that instead of talking about a student woman representative, why not talk about a youth.  My small information here is that not all women students are youths.  So these women may decide to choose a woman student who is not a youth, to come and represent them on this very important committee

I share the views of those who are worried about the apparent frustration that is likely to come out by subjecting the operations of the Women Council in matters of finance to many approvals. First from the Minister, then from two Ministers.  I have no quarrel with Ministers, but I think in business - and I can see this is a foundation to promote business - some decisions need to be taken very quickly and our Ministers sometimes are too busy to act within the time span that is required.

Mr. Chairman, with those few words, I fully support this Bill and I have every wish for it, to see it through this National Resistance Council.

MRS. NTABGABO (Women Representative, Kisoro District): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Allow me to wish a Happy New Year to all the hon. Members.  (Applause) I congratulate you for the hard work you have been doing and a work of development.  It is development we are after and that is why we have brought this Bill to you to discuss.  I would like also to congratulate the hon. Minister for presenting this Bill.   Really it is for our discussion; all of us as a nation who wish to develop.  It is an important Bill, which is taking us from Stone Age to modern life. (Laughter)

I invite hon. Members to agree with me that Uganda is still backward and being backward, we have to develop it together.  Let us not play with this Bill because it concerns women.  But let us look at it as a national issue.  If we look back into our history, tradition had it that a woman and a child will eat last after the man has eaten the best. 

I do not know whether this is only in my area, Kisoro, but I believe in the whole of Africa, we share some similar mannerisms and we are not going to deny it.  We have passed that stage today as I talk now.  If you look back in your home as a father, you are not going to eat before you are sure your kid has eaten the best food and most of our hon. Members are in food nutrition because they want their children to develop well equally.  There is no man today who wants to marry a woman who does not know how to prepare good food for that child.  So what are we doing today?  We are trying to address a problem where many women are still backward in Uganda and we want to bring them up under one organisation, where we can reach all of them at the grassroots level.  

Some hon. Members have said we have got so many NGOs, so why are we bringing this one?  Are they not going to conflict one another? I am saying ‘no.’ Because all women now, as hon. Member has said over there, are now mobilised to a certain stage.  They need leadership.  So they know what they are doing.  But are they getting enough? This Bill is addressing the role of unifying them as a nation by bringing some knowledge from the North to the South and Central; to all women so that they come up as women of Uganda to assist them to know how to address their role as a nation, not as a small group.  Here we are attacking circumcision, because we know some women somewhere in Uganda are undergoing cruelty which we want to phase out gradually.  It has already been addressed today and we are going to abolish it.  But it is a slow process.  How are we going to implement that process? 

We have to address every women all over Uganda to realise that it is wrong for some people to go through some stages which are being condemned by men as well as women.  So, I support this Bill with these observations.  I would like to say that if in your home, if you respect your wife, she will respect you accordingly. Likewise, if you antagonise her, you will meet resistance.  We will try to teach those who do not know how to respect their husbands or how to embrace their role; what we should know in our role.  But we are trying to help one another.  

So, I want hon. Members, especially men, to look at this Bill not to make us rebellious.  Some people have got bad manners, they are rebellious.  But you will find many women who are good.  So it depends on the luck you have.  But we want to address a nation, so that every woman wherever she is, she knows her role in respecting a husband; to bring up her children correctly to work hard; and to supplement the family income, which I am sure most Members support.  

I think this Bill needs the support of hon. Members. The inheritance culture, hon. Members will agree with me, has made women unfortunate and it is very sad these days when there are so many deaths occurring.  A man dies, the women is left; she cannot mortgage any security in the bank for a loan because she does not own anything.  These are the things we are trying to bring up to address our problems together as a nation.  Let us teach women how to own property without breaking their homes; how to work together with their husbands; who will own what and how will they share this property, so that in case one of them goes, another one will go on looking after the family.  That is our concern and personally that is my concern.  We want to build a nation.  We do not want to build this as a man or as a woman so that we have to fight; and when Bill comes about women, men have to attack it.  I think, this year I wished you a Happy New Year because we need this year to be very happy and address necessary  issues, especially women issues. Thank you very much.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  I adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m. 

(The Council rose and adjourned at 4.50 p.m. until Wednesday, 13th January, 1993, at 2.30 p.m.)


 

