
Thursday, 13th January, 1994

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, as you can see, we cannot really do anything when we do not form a quorum.  This time I want to have the names of those who have registered; so that we can send the names to the electorate. (Laughter)  Hon. Members, let us adjourn for 15 minutes please.

(Adjournment for 15 minutes)


 BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE CIVIL AVIATION AUTHORITY BILL, 1993

(Clause 1, agreed to)

(Clause 2, agreed to)

Clause 3

MR. MUKWAYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to move that Section 3 be amended to include the definitions of ‘crew’ and ‘passengers’ to fall in line with Section 53 of the Bill.  It is important that the crew is properly defined to know who is in charge of the Aircraft and in case of security, we can isolate where the problem would arise and passengers are not defined, and it may cause problems later on.  So, I propose that we insert immediately after operator in Section 3, the following: ‘Crew’ to mean ‘all persons working on the Aircraft including pilots or operators and passengers’; immediately after crew, which means ‘all persons being conveyed by the Aircraft who are not members of the crew’.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I do not recall where we refer to the word passengers in this Bill and secondly, I think passengers is well defined in dictionaries and is clear and I do not think there is any need to define it in this Section.  So, Mr. Chairman, I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 3 be amended as proposed by hon. Mukwaya.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, in Section 3, I have distributed two small amendments that we agreed on with the Sectoral Committee.  One amendment is on page 7, the definition - it is written as ‘appeal tribunal’ it should be ‘appeals tribunal’ by adding an ‘s’ after appeal.  And the second amendment is on the definition of the Chairman towards the end of page 67.  In the Bill, it states the Chairman means the Chairman of the Authority it should have been - it should read as follows, ‘the Chairman of the Board of Directors.’  

(Question on amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 3, as amended agreed to).

(Clause 4, agreed to).

(Clause 5, agreed to).

(Clause 6, agreed to).

(Clause 7, agreed to).

(Clause 8, agreed to).

Clause 9

MR. KAWANGA:  Mine is an amendment of Clause 9 (4)(c).  Mr. Chairman, Clause 9 (4)(c), refers to the age of 70 years in respect of a Board Member; there is no magic in the age of 70 or any other age about the Board Member, and I suggest that the Clause should be deleted and it will not cause any harm.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I accept the amendment.

(Question on amendment put and agreed to).

MR. KABUGO:  I would like to move an amendment on Section 9, sub-section 2; the period of appearing in the second line which states five years to be reduced to three years.  The period of five years is very long and I take that if a Member serves three years and he is found to be eligible, he can be re-appointed and continue for at least six years and this should be the last time for him to serve on that Board.  

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I do not accept the amendment of the hon. Member for one reason.  The period does not state five years; it states the period not exceeding five years.  So, it gives an option for the Minister to appoint a Board for two years, three years or more.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. KABUGO:  Exceeding is very vague, we need the Minister to be specific, because the letter of appointment addressed to the Director must be specific and if you say you are appointed to serve on the Civil Aviation Authority for a period not exceeding five years -(Laughter)- it does not mean anything - I may even turn up the offer.

MR. WANENDEYA:  I support the amendment moved by hon. Kabugo.  Mr. Chairman, the point is that, the people must be specific and in most cases, appointments are for a specific period of time; rather than being vague and say, for a period not exceeding so many years.  So, it should be specific and say three years or four years or five years or whatever it is, but it must be specific and that is the way laws are being made in most places.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ETYANG:  Mr. Chairman, my understanding of the proposal is that, no Member may appoint for more than five years.  As for the specificity of the time when he is going to be there, I think the letter can also state that you are appointed a Board Member for three years.  I think that is the specificity the hon. Wanendeya is seeking; but not up to five years.  

Having said that, I have had some experience, even Civil Aviation or Uganda Airlines.  This Body is a Body that should be encouraged to be there as long as possible if only it has got to attain international competition; and this is where we lose some good members of the society.  If a member is seen to be a very competent Member of the Board, I see no problem in the Minister concerned appointing him for five years.  

On the other hand, you may find a problem with a member who politically or otherwise may be imposed on a Minister whom on basis of that, the Minister may say; I will only put you for two years.  In both situations, the circumstances are taken into account where, in fact, up to five years, takes into account all these positions we are having in mind.  I think I go along with my Colleague and support his opposition to the amendment.

(Question on amendment put and agreed to).

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, my amendment is in respect of Clause 9, sub-clause (1) in the light of the submission made by the Member from Agago yesterday, I suggest that the Board of Directors should consist of eight members plus a Managing Director making it nine.  He gave the good reasons yesterday and I think five is too small, I think nine would be an optimum number.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I have discussed this issue with some Members who feel strongly about increasing the Board.  In fact, according to the amendment I had, there was a typing error; it should have been reading seven.  I do accept the proposed amendment of a Board with a Chairman plus eight others. Of those eight, one of them is a Managing Director.  So, I accept the amendment, Mr. Chairman.

(Question on amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 9 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 10

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that Clause 10, sub-Clause 11, be deleted; just as we have deleted the other one, this is a consequential amendment about the age of the Director.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, having accepted the first amendment following automatically, so, I accept this one.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 10, sub-Section II be amended as proposed by hon. Kawanga.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, if you look at Clause 10, sub-Section 4, that sub-section does not mean very much.  I read, ‘when appointing members of the Board, the Minister shall ensure that at least one member of the Board:

(a) Has a recognised qualification in financial analysis;

(b) The same member has a minimum experience of 10 years in a senior position in Aviation Industry; and

(c) The same member has been a legal practitioner for at least 10 years.

There must be a mistake, because I do not know where the Minister will find that Member who have all these experiences with those years and therefore, rather than keep it in here, we delete it.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I think this is a problem of how we understand English.  My understanding is that, on this Board, you have one member with financial experience, one member with a minimum of ten years experience in industry and other member in Legal Practice and that is how I understand it and it seems that is how most of the hon. Members understand it, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Whom are you giving the information to now?

MR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I am afraid I disagree with the Minister’s information.  The interpretation by hon. Mwandha is the correct one.  Therefore, we need words which will imply that at least there will be three Members on the Board, if that is what the Minister wants, who have these qualifications, but the way it is worded, the interpretation put on it by hon. Mwandha is correct. (Applause)  

May I propose an answer, Sir?  I propose that this Clause be amended to read as follows.  That when appointing members of the Board, the Minister shall ensure that at least three members of the Board shall each have the following qualifications - that will cure it.  I am just working to save the day.  If we say that in appointing the Board, the Minister shall ensure that three of the members have the following respective qualifications, I am sure that will cure the Clause.  I beg to move.

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Mr. Chairman, hon. Kanyeihamba, the former Attorney General and my Learned Friend, associates himself with the interpretation of hon. Mwandha and they are both wrong.  Secondly, we do not accept oral amendments.  The interpretation to be attached here, at least one member of the Board, if we mean has to have all these qualifications, would not have been narrated a, b, c, d.  It means for each of these three qualifications there is one member, you see.  So, the interpretation by the Minister is correct interpretation.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Mr. Chairman, I regret to disagree with again my Learned Friend there.  This reads as follows; when appointing members of the Board, the Minister shall ensure at least that one member of the Board has:

(a) A recognised qualification in financial analysis;

(b) Has a minimum experience of ten years in Senior position in the Aviation Industry; and

(c) Has been a legal practitioner for the last ten years.

They all refer to one person and, therefore, possibly what could be done -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Cries of order.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI:  Is that one could include of course, as hon. George Kanyeihamba’s amendment of course hoping that I will not be ruled out of order; because so it is written.  One could say that at least three members should be appointed and each one of them will have at least one of the following requirements - at least three, but each, you know, one of them will have at least one of the following.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, do you agree with that?

MR. NASASIRA:  Yes; I agree with it - if he is going to be clearer.  I thought I would have taken hon. Kanyeihamba’s second one.  His first one definitely was worse than this, but I think his second one - it was shorter and clearer.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mwandha, do you agree with the hon. Minister for Finance, please?

MR. MWANDHA:  I accept the proposed amendment to my amendment by hon. Kanyeihamba.

MR. BIDANDI SSALI:  Mr. Chairman, I am not contesting the English, but I am only saying that really this is not a substantive amendment, it is a drafting point; it is just to be left to the officials who will be putting the final position and come out with what we all now know this provision means that there should be at least, three different members, each qualifying in one of these; the whole of this House has agreed on that.  So, it is just a matter of changing the drafting and it is not substantive, it is just drafting, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 10 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 10 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 11

MR. KAWANGA JOHN (Masaka Municipality, Masaka):  Mr. Chairman, I propose that Clause 11 (1)(c), within that Clause the words, ‘with the opinion of the Minister’ be deleted.  It reads; ‘even the opinion of the Minister, the Member becomes involved in the conflict of interest.’  So, he should remember himself if he knows he has a conflict of interest not waiting for the opinion of the Minister.  So, the words are not really necessary in the Clause, they should be deleted.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I have agreed on that amendment with hon. Kawanga.  So, I accept the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that those in favour of hon. Kawanga’s amendment say ‘aye’ and to the contrary ‘no’

(Question put and negatived).

MRS. LUBEGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to move that part 3 sub-Section 2 we add (d) immediately after (c) and 11(b) should be amended - the amendment or the addition should be ‘if the Member of the Board gets involved in conflict of interest he or she should resign his or her Membership of the Board.  I am saying this -(Interruption)- protect me, Mr. Chairman.  

I am saying this because I have seen a danger that once a Member is appointed on this Board and the following day he becomes a Director of some Airline Company, whether it is local or foreign, it means this Director has straight gone into business and in business he always fights to maximise profit; and the only way this Director can maximise profit is by probably frustrating the other Airline Company.  

So, I think it would be better if this person left the Board and fully went into business.  It is like me becoming a Member of the Board and the following day I become a Director of some Airline Company, definitely I might naturally love to make money; and the only way I would make more money is by probably keeping out the other Airline Companies.  

So, I would really discourage the idea of this Member being on this Board and at the same time becoming a Director of some Airline Company somewhere.  Because this will be defying the Government privatisation and investment policies.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.                                                                                     

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. Nasasira):  Well, Mr. Chairman, considering the statements expressed by this House, I do not see any hesitation except that we remove the word ‘physical.’

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that will those in favour of hon. Mwandha’s amendment say ‘Aye’ and to the contrary ‘No’.       
                              
(Question on amendment put and agreed to).
                                                  
(Clause 11, as amended, agreed to).

Clause 12                 

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I pray that Clause 12(2) and (3) be deleted.  Clause 12 (2) says, ‘the Board may delegate any of its powers, except its main powers.’  A person of defence does not make sense; and two, the Board should have no business delegating its powers; either it can do its job or it cannot.  I pray that the two clauses which talk about delegation should be deleted.

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Mr. Chairman, it is not true that the Board cannot delegate powers.  What happens, the Board delegates powers to management especially the top management.

Secondly, they have put incidences where the Board should not delegate powers.  When you make policy, you do not participate in the day today running of corporation.  Therefore, you delegate those powers so that management continues implementing the policy.  This is what it contains, and it should not be deleted.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support hon. John Kawanga because it is in the memorandum.  Point number four; the Board is supposed to have an effective planning.  And it is not the same Board running away from that planning and delegating it to another person.  So, this means that the Board is there not to do the very things for which the Minister appointed.  I beg to support him.  

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to oppose the amendment on the grounds of the model.  And the model here is the delegation of authority regarding to powers.  The Board represents the Minister, and then that Board is responsible for the overall management; and they have to give the Management certain powers, and then the Managing Director also delegates powers further down to different levels.  It is a model and, therefore, when you say delegation, it means you are giving part of your power away.  And there are certain things that must be done.  So, I would like us to go back to the model management rather than just assume that you cannot delegate powers.

MR. PINTO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I very strongly support hon. Kawanga’s amendment; and I want to bring clarity of policy administrative authority.  The Board is responsible for policy and does not delegate that role to amendment.  Management is in fact carrying out administration or policy as given by the Board.  So, we should delete this provision as proposed by hon. Kawanga.

MR. JOHN KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to add that is a very cardinal principle in law, that a delegate doesn’t delegate if the Ministry has delegated to the Board, the Board has responsibility to run the affairs.  This question of people working under their supervision, but they are not taking over authority given to them by the Board.

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Mr. Chairman, I am very aware of the - but in this subsection if hon. Kawanga seeks to delete there are the incidences where you cannot sub-delegate have been specified.  Therefore, if you say that the Board cannot delegate, you therefore block us because the prick of delegation in company law is that the Board delegates and, therefore, passes on authority on those actions which management should person within their limit by this very principle of delegation.  So, I do not see why hon. Kawanga is so hard about deleting this section.

DR. MAGEZI:  Mr. Chairman, actually I do note that in clause 3; interpretation, we have no definition powers or main powers of the Board.  This is left to the Board to decide whether what they are delegating is not main powers and there are minor powers.  And, therefore, to avoid any confusion, we have several Boards that are operating in this country.  It is the first time that I am looking at the provision in the Bill, to say the Board may delegate any of its policy powers.  And therefore, I conclude by saying that I support the proposed amendment, because it is going to cause confusion since the powers are not even defined.  

DR. MAGEZI:  Mr. Chairman, in order to show the support for the amendment by hon. Kawanga; one has got to read Section 12(1).  Because in Section 12(1), the Board powers are determined.  To determine the general performance of the authority, to approve business plans, determine the approved estimates of income and expenditure in due performance and mostly the employment of assets.  

Now, if you say that they can delegate some of their powers, it means you are leaving management to monitor employment and utilisation of assets.  You are saying that they can determine the general performance of authority.  In other words, you are actually taking away the powers of the Board, and therefore, that of the Minister and giving it top management and create the crisis.  So, I support the amendment, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NASASIRA:  I accept the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 12 sub-Section 2 and 3 be deleted as proposed by hon. Kawanga.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 12 as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 12 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 13 agreed to).

(Clause 14 agreed to).

Clause 15

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I move an amendment to the effect that the Clause should read, ‘There shall be a Managing director of the authority who shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board of Directors.’  This is - ‘by the Minister in consultation with’ - is not clear what one means and what kind of consultation should be carried out, but recommendation is much more specific.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment in the same Clause; except that mine is different.  So, it would be an amendment hon. Kawanga’s amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us finish Kawanga’s amendment first.

MR. NASASIRA:  Hon. Kawanga’s amendment does not change the idea behind this Clause or the idea what the Ministry had behind this Clause.  It is still in conformity with what we intended, he is just changing a few words.  And we have no objection with that amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 15 be amended as proposed by hon. Kawanga.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, as the Minister said, the amendment by hon. Kawanga does not have any effect on that, I am bringing in an amendment which changes it quite a bit.  I am proposing that the word ‘Minister’ in close consultation with the Board, appearing in 51 be deleted and be replaced by the words, ‘Board after advertising the posts in press, and the successful candidates shall be given terms and conditions of service, that may be specified in the instrument of our appointment.’ 

In this House we have argued and argued that the Board once put in place should be given the authority to carry out the work that they appointed to do.  And one of this is actually to appoint staff including the Chief Executive of the Board.  But if the Minister is going to appoint the Board, and the same Minister is going to appoint Chief Executive, then you know very well that if there is a conflict between the Board and the Chief Executive as indeed has happened in this particular Ministry - in one of the parastatals in this particular Ministry, you know very well that the Board will say, we are appointed by the Minister; the Chief Executive will say; I am appointed by the Minister and conflicts upon conflicts will continue derailing the parastatal.  

Therefore, the Minister should not believe that he has got a better way of identifying the right person other than the collective responsibility of the Board of Directors, which has been properly selected by the Minister in consultation with Cabinet, which is normally the case.  Therefore, I move that this amendment be accepted, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KASAIJA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also had an amendment, which was similar to Mr. Mwandha’s, which was saying that the Board of Directors should be the one to appoint the Managing Director.  This one, purely we have seen it practically it is extremely difficult to have a Minister put a Managing Director and at the same time he is appointing the Board.  You find that a Managing Director at one time becomes so big-headed and the Board finds it extremely difficult to discipline him because he thinks ‘after all I was also appointed by the Minister.’  So, in order to make the smooth running of these organisations, it has come to us even as our Committee.  

We have in our report recommended that - our Public Accounts Committee on Parastatals - we have even put it in our recommendation though this House has not had the chance of debating our report.  But the Minister should appoint the Board. (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Kasaija, let me remind you.  Both of you are out of order because we have just passed Kawanga’s amendment on page 15.

MR. KASAIJA:  No.  But I have got my amendment, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I have wanted to move my amendment before hon. Kawanga moved his.  You gave me permission to move the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  But he is trying to move another amendment. 
                         
THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I reject this amendment on several grounds.  I think some hon. Members should be consistent, on principal, about what is the responsibility of the Minister; of the parastatals and of he others.  Yesterday -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Minister to refuse a cardinal principal of our NRM Government when most of these parastatals after having had experience of losing, we all agreed here that top positions in parastatals would be advertised and therefore if we go and say the Minister should appoint a Managing Director, are we not going back, Mr. Chairman?  Is he, therefore, in order, Mr. Chairman, for the hon. Minister?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is in order.  Proceed hon. Minister.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. Nasasira):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As I was saying it is only yesterday when our Ministry and my Minister was attacked for some of the parastatals that might have been mismanaged and it is the same today - the same hon. Member coming back and saying, let the Minister have the control over who becomes the Managing Director of an Organisation.  Yesterday, I was saying we do not agree with appointments. 

The principal we are following which I think has been the spirit of this House, is that the Board advertises for the posts of a Managing director or another Manager.  The Board interviews and the Board recommends to the Minister who has been the best candidate and that is the principal and the practice that has been followed and it is in line with hon. Kawanga’s amendment which I accepted Mr. Chairman.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I think I am exonerated by the Minister because what he has just said is totally different from what is in the law.  Therefore, in a way he is accepting my amendment. (Applause)

MR. NASASIRA:  I am not, because his amendment combines two things.  It talks about the method of getting candidates for the job and at the same time then talks about the approval of those candidates.  If his amendment is combined - it does not serve one purpose, so I will not accept it in that condition.

(Question put and negatived).

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I had circulated some amendments on Clause 15(2).  I am asking that we should delete the word ‘or’ appearing in the line - Mr. Chairman, I am sorry I have mixed up the two things, I will correct that one.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment on 15(6) b.  For the same reason as I gave when I proposed an amendment whereby the Minister wanted to exclude people on grounds of physical incapacity.  I would like to propose that the words ‘physical or’ be deleted. 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Wherever it appears?

MR. MWANDHA:  Of 15(2), sorry but one is on 15(6).

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, while I accepted the first amendment in respect of a member of the Board, I think when we come to the Managing Director where his duties are totally different in capacity from that of the member of the Board, we have to think twice.  What does the member of the Board do?  A member of the Board comes to the Board, sits down and discusses policy for the organisation.  The Managing Director works for the organisation sometimes he needs his physical ability and so on and so forth.  

Secondly, I think the word physical should be seen as - in terms of limbs or having one arm as one hon. Minister pointed out.  Suppose a Managing Director becomes blind.  Do you terminate his services or do you not?  Suppose a Managing Director when he cannot hear or not?  So, I do not think I would accept his amendment in this respect, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, if the Minister wanted to really use this term, he should have defined the extent of physical incapacity.  Suppose the Managing Director of this organisation had an accident and afterwards after recovering he was limping.  He is physically incapacitated.  He has a physical disability.  If a Minister wanted to get rid of a person on the grounds of physical disability, the Minister does not even need to mention it.  He can use many other reasons for actually terminating a person rather than putting in the law that whenever somebody has a physical -(Applause)- inability, he should actually lose the job of Managing Director.  Let me mention here - I was appointed personally, in this government as Managing Director of a Parastatal Body.  I ran it efficiently for three years.  Okay.  Now, how can anybody say that a person who has a physical inability should not have the opportunity to run a Parastatal Body?  This cannot be correct.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, that is covered well by using the word ‘may’ instead of shall.  You will leave the option to the Minister; he may terminate you if he thinks that disability is extensive.

MR. NDEGE:  Mr. Chairman, I concur with my brother, hon. Mwandha that the Minister may misuse the interpretation of physical.  Therefore, other uses of health ground to some other term - rather physical inability is not just blindness or being dumb.  It could be anything, it could be impotent, and it could be anything.  So, I think we reject and accept hon. Mwandha’s amendment.  Thank you.

MR. MARWAS:  Mr. Chairman, I have failed to understand why the Minister is refusing the amendment; simply because when we talk of physical incapacity - is he going to labour?  Is he going to use his physical to work or is going to use the mental capacity; because if it was going to dig a pit latrine may be we could say we cannot have a man who is physically incapacitated but this is a man who is going to move in his car, move to an office, use his brain and work.  What is the use of legislating on the physical incapacity?  The Minister can have any other discretion.  If the man is blind, if the man is what, but he should not legislate.  It is even against human rights, if we have to put in our law such legislation. (Applause)  So, I support the amendment by hon. Mwandha.

MR. MBABAZI:  Mr. Chairman, whereas I am sympathetic to hon. Mwandha’s point, I think there is a bit of confusion here.  He is mixing up physical incapacity with physical handicap.  Because you can have physical handicap and you limp as a result of an accident.  Now, handicap - but on the other hand to have physical incapacity means you are physically incapable of performing that job.  

I agree that may be physical capacity may be too wide but on the other hand what he is proposing, for example, excludes impossibility of someone who is blind or he is bed-ridden as a result of an accident or some disease from being covered by this Clause.  So, I would suggest that we keep physical incapacity knowing that this does not cover physical handicap.  

MRS. MATEMBE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I just wish to emphasise what hon. Mbabazi has said, because the operative word in this statement is the word incapacity - because incapacity means he is physically incapacitated.  Therefore, he is incapable of performing the work; but if you say physical - the hon. Members have got to know these words and the real meanings, because the handicap - when you have a physical handicap - it can be a handicap which may not disenable you from performing your duties but if it is an incapacity can they go and look for the meaning of that word in the Dictionary.  It is not the same as handicap, Mr. Chairman.  Therefore, the hon. Minister is right to refuse the amendment.  I support him.

MISS KADAGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also concur with the submission of Mr. Mbabazi.  Incapacity - you no longer have the capacity to do something.  So, my brother here should not worry.  This will arise only if a person has become unable to perform.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I do agree, Mr. Chairman, that the definition as it is at the moment that is incapacity - is too wide and is capable of being misunderstood and misused but we must find a word with a phrase that actually covers the Minister.  I happen to agree with the Minister, I also agree with submissions by hon. Mbabazi because at the moment, for example, I have a relation who got into a comma for physical reasons about a year ago.  She does not know what is happening in the world, but if we are not to determine her physical incapacity in this Bill and she had been a Managing Director, she would continue being Managing Director.  We could not dismiss her because you could not terminate her services as mental because she is not mental.  It is purely physical.  Someone has hear attack and becomes - really I think we are dealing with definitions -(Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, I am on the Floor.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, physical incapacity is legally defined just as mentally incapacity is defined.

MISS BIRABWA KIWANUKA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member on the Floor that if this lady (I assume she is a lady) was in a coma then the effect was no longer physical, it must have become mental? (Applause)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether the hon. Member informing me is a doctor but I have been informed by my doctors -(Laughter)- my doctors who are treating this lady - that what she has is a physical incapacity which has brought her to this stage.  

Without really wasting too much time of the hon. House, I think we must distinguish between physical disability and physical incapacity.  Physical incapacity means that legally you are incapable of performing the functions for which you were appointed.  Physically inability - you are capable.  Hon. Mwandha who has moved this Motion we worked together - he was perfectly alright.  He performed his duties in those areas where he was because the physical disability he had, had nothing to do with his other ability to perform duties; but you can have a disability which is physical which will affect very severely your performance of the job you have been appointed for.  

So, while I agree that the present wording is wide, nevertheless, there is a condition for which a Minister should be allowed to terminate services because of physical incapacity.  Let us find that right place to describe that condition but let us not make bad law because of physical phenomenon rather than incapacity.  I thank you, Sir.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I am rather disappointed by the explanation given by hon. Kanyeihamba.  If he had this relative who was in coma for a year, the Minister could have terminated him on grounds of absence from duty.  The fellow cannot come to the office because he is in a coma, and he is in hospital. 

But what we should avoid doing is to try and create any vagueness in a law like this one -(Applause)- and a Minister - may not be our Minister here - this Minister is very reasonable but who knows what other Ministers will be there?  But somebody could easily use that bit of the law against the person who is doing a good job on the grounds that the man has some physical disability, therefore, he is incapacitated.  

What I remember has been happening in other laws that we have passed.  A person can actually be terminated for his inability to perform.  That is a very general term that is used in many laws.  Inability to perform can cover anything.  If the man’s inability to perform is because he is in a coma, the Minister has powers to terminate him.  If a man is unable to perform because he is so crippled that he cannot go to work, the Minister may have a right to dismiss him - to terminate him on grounds of inability to perform but here once you bring in physical incapacity or inability or whatever the case may be.  These are just words.  Somebody is going to use those words and actually wrong against the interest of somebody in future, unless we put it right now.  I submit, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, my biggest dilemma with hon. Mwandha while I see his sentiments and feelings is that he did not come with a proposed amendment to this clause.  Now, he is talking about it but which amendment do we take?

MR. MWANDHA:  I have an amendment to delete the words ‘physical or’ so that the Minister can actually terminate the Managing Director for mental incapacity.  This one is accepted in law.  Insanity - if somebody is insane, there is no way you get him to do a job of Managing Director.  So that will be perfect, but when it comes to physical incapacity, inability, I think, Mr. Chairman, we would be dragging the matter too far.

MR. NASASIRA:  I am not yet convinced because removing it totally also leaves the Minister un-protected.  What if somebody turns blind on the job or he becomes deaf?

MR. OKURUT:  In this dilemma, may I suggest to the Minister that he uses the word ‘infirmity’ rather than physical incapacity.

MR. OKWERA:  I am surprised that we are taking a bit too long on this very simple matter.  This is a common term that I will use in giving out appointment for top management officials except that the word capacitation is what is confusing us but usually when an employee becomes physically and mentally unfit to medical certification, such employee’s service are normally terminated.  So, I do not see any ground for labouring on this point.  Just let us take away the word incapacitation and substitute it for the word ‘unfit.’  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know what physical incapacitation a person would have, no to be able to be a Managing Director for this organisation.  We all know that President Roosevelt who won the Presidency of the United States four times was a cripple in a wheel chair and he did a good job.  He was a cripple and what we want to also understand is the use of all these terms has come about not because of the law but because physically incapacitated people, were always discriminated against very badly.  Even jobs they could do, they could not be given the jobs.  So, people were trying to come up with the terms that would be nice enough for people with physical disability to be able to be acceptable members of society. I can understand why you cannot appoint President Roosevelt to play for KCC. (Interjections)  That we can all understand but certainly he was a capable President and in my opinion, I think ‘a cripple’, ‘physically incapacitated’ and ‘handicapped’, all mean the same depending on how you use them.  (Interjection)  Yes, James Watson who was Secretary of the Interior in the United States lost his job for calling a person he appointed on a Board a cripple.  If he had said this person was handicapped, he would have kept his job.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

PROF. WANGUSA (Bubulo County, Mbale):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to support the Minister in his sticking to his position on this matter, and I would also like to appeal to the Members that we should really distinguish between what might be called the latter of the law or the latter of this physiology and the spirit of it.  If the spirit of including this phrase physical incapacity is that people will be forced to dismiss people from work as soon as they have a physical incapacity, that will be wrong.  But I am with the Minister when he says supposing someone was performing a job for which they needed their eyesight, and suddenly they go blind, or for which they needed their ears, and suddenly they go deaf.  Now, that kind of officer might be transferred to another job where they need to use Braille.  So, I am with the Members who say that we should not have a punitive or punishment for those who are incapacitated.  But -(Interruption)

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of clarification.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like the hon. Member on the Floor to try to convince me, why a blind person cannot be a Managing Director of the Civil Aviation Authority?  Because he is trained to read and he can write and he can hear.  This would be discriminatory.

PROF. WANGUSA:  In fact, Mr. Chairman, I am not taking an opposite position to that one.  I am saying that we should not be so ridiculous as to say as soon as somebody has incapacity, they will lose that job.  Otherwise, everybody who gets ekiwalaata would lose their job. (Laughter)  

So, I am suggesting, therefore, that we introduce something like this that 6(b), now reads something like this, carrying over the sense from the beginning of the sentence that, ‘the Minister may after consultation with the Board terminate the appointment of the Managing Director be that for physical or mental incapacity that reduces performance.’  Yes, if this is directly related to performance.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 15 sub-section 6(b) be deleted as proposed by hon. Mwandha.  

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 15 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 16 agreed to).

Clause 17

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I say that Clause 17 sub-clause 2, be amended to read that Deputy Managing Director shall be appointed by the Minister on the recommendation of the Board.

(Clause 17 as amended, agreed to).

MR. MWANDHA:  On that one, Clause 17 with regard to Deputy Managing Director, Mr. Chairman, you have to bear with me because I have got several amendments, this is one of them.  During the general debate, many Members who took the Floor, rightly pointed out that there is no need to have a Deputy Managing Director.  A Deputy Managing Director appointed by the same Minister, would make the organisation structure top heavy, and if you look around, many of these parastatals, which are even bigger than this Aviation Authority, you do not have a Deputy Managing Director.  

So, the creation of the post of the Deputy Managing Director, will only introduce conflicts between the Managing Director and the Deputy. This happens every time, because the Deputy Managing Director will always want to show after all they are appointed by the same Authority, to show that he is as good if not better than the Managing Director himself; and this will create a lot of conflicts.  This has happened in many organisations.  

Even in Ministries; there are Ministries where Deputy Ministers do not get on with the substantive Ministers, and where even the Deputy Minister will have his own door to enter the Ministry and out which will never be used by the other Minister.  I would like to move very strongly that we delete Section 17 altogether, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose the amendment.  This amendment is sentimental, and it is only talking about emotion.  It is not factual.  What is wrong if the Deputy Managing Director works so hard to be as good as the Managing Director?  It is only good for the institution.  It is excellent for the institution.  In fact, you imagine a scenario where you have one disk bull in this China shop, without looking back to know that there is somebody who can do better.  

Create an institution that has got checks and balances.  If this is to do that, as my hon. Colleague understands it, then it is good using his own reasons, but for me in my view, I think if you create an institution, a legal person you should have to people trying to be there all the time when one is not there.  Anybody who works alone is always in trouble.  I personally like partnership.  Look at sole companies that are running; when the owner of the company is away the business is closed.  But if you have a colleague, the business continues. Many of you hon. Members have got businesses.  If you do not have a partner, I advise you to get one soon, because your business is going to be in big trouble, and if you can find one, get him.  

Now, to say that Deputy Ministers do not get on with Ministers and because of that we do not have Deputy Managing Directors, is also a very wrong argument.  Look at the person who has steered this Bill, is a Deputy Minister, has he not done a wonderful job?  Now, supposing it was his Colleague the Minister who had steered this Bill, you may find the standards might have been different.  But that does not mean that we must do without the Deputy Minister because the Minister and the Deputy Minister do not get on or we do with an institution, look, how the country runs, we have seen quite often President and Vice President.  You cannot say that because the President is always working hard, he wants to shine, we must not have a Vice President because when the President is away, the Vice President will take over.  

I have specific examples, where I was Chairman of a parastatal, and in that parastatal we had a Managing Director, and that was Social Security Fund and the Minister is here.  We created the position - when I became Chairman of the Deputy Managing Director and we fulfilled it and it was also done at the time when hon. Pinto was Minister.  Up to today, the Deputy Managing Director of that Institution is playing a very key role in that organisation, and the organisation has grown from strength to strength and the contribution of the Deputy Managing Director in that Institution is highly commendable.  I think we should not look at this matter with a view of saying there will be two people who are - this is just sentimental, let it become realistic.

MR. NDEGE:  Mr. Chairman, I would also like to oppose my Colleague this time hon. Mwandha because all the parastatals where there is a Managing Director no Deputy, UCB being one of them, every time the Managing Director is away the whole place becomes a crying halt and nobody else is to make a decision.  They have to wait.  So, in the interest of continuity, efficiency and effectiveness, I would like to support the Minister on the Bill that the post of Deputy Managing Director is retained.  Thank you very much.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to concur with those who have opposed this amendment and oppose it as I did yesterday when I was winding up.  I also want to say that there is a good working relationship between Ministers and their Deputies.  We cannot just legislate because of incidents, just because an incident happens somewhere you want to turn it into law.  We should legislate on principles.  

Secondly, I told you the nature of the job of a Managing director of a Civil Aviation Authority, half of the time he is traveling, because of his job.  We want continuity and quick decision making in that organisation.  We do not want, when the Managing Director is traveling because of his job, which he does often, and there is no decision-making or there is paralysis in the organisation because nobody wants to make a decision because of lack of a substantive Deputy.  I, therefore, oppose the amendment, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 17 be deleted as proposed by hon. Mwandha.  

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 17 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 18

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Clause 18, this was again a Clause, which was debated during the general debate with regard to the position of Corporation Secretary.  As it was stated yesterday, a Corporation Secretary in an organisation is really the head of administration in that organisation.  He is trained in certain aspects of the law, such as company law, mercantile law, law of contract and general principles of law, but in addition, he is trained in accounting and financial management and he is further trained in personnel administration, in general management and therefore, he is totally different from the person being proposed here; and, therefore, I would like to propose an amendment that Clause 18(2) be deleted, so that, the Minister has a much wider opportunity of recruiting a person who may be a qualified Company Secretary or somebody else who by experience, has the practical experience and skills of a Company Secretary, without necessarily limiting it to appointing a person  who is an advocate of the High Court of Uganda with the experience of five years.  I think this will be very limiting and it will leave out a lot of people who would otherwise qualify to be effective company secretaries and administrators.  Mr. Chairman, I move.

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I have my own amendment, but before I move that, I oppose the proposal moved by hon. Mwandha.  One of the things one has to take into account, are the specific functions that are being given to this type of job.  The other is the question of where are these people trained.  We know of people called corporation secretaries.  But where are they trained in the country?  I am talking about this country -(Interruption)

MRS. MATEMBE:  Point of information.  I wish to inform hon. Kawanga that those people have actually been trained even here, I personally was training at the Uganda College of Commerce, the people getting the certificate for chartered, can you help me?  The Institute of Chartered Secretaries and Administrators, and they are here in this country; they study company secretariat, and they know the law; they study company law and they are there.  I trained personally, and even those who train after a certain level, they have been doing their exams from even UK.  Those people are there.  So, you should not be heard to say that where do we get them, because they are there.  If you advertise, and put that qualification, they will be there.  Because this kind of limitation is geared towards a specific sort of a person, and it has been happening in this country.  They know a person to put in place, they go and make a law directed at that particular person, and that is wrong.  Mr. Chairman, it is discrimination and for that matter, I am supporting hon. Mwandha.

MR. KAWANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I think that was not information; it almost became a contribution but that as it may, even the contributor himself first got trained in the law.  But that apart, the kind of functions that have been listed here, require a certain kind  -(Interruption)

MR. MWANDHA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Kawanga in order to support his arguments, he is coming to Clauses which we were also proposing to amend, so really, it cannot be fair to jump to Clause 5 ahead which are also subject to being amended.  Because what he is saying is that the secretary will be representing the authority in all litigation.  Now, I do not know of any organisation in this country whose Corporation Secretary represents that organisation in all matters of litigation.  That is really not his responsibility.  If we wanted, we could have a legal department that is manned by people with adequate legal skills and training to do that kind of work, which is being pushed here.  So, I just wanted to give that information.

MR. KAWANGA:  One problem I have is that I do not have hon. Mwandha’s amendments.  Therefore, I cannot anticipate what he has in mind.  He has been moving amendments, I do not have them, and so I cannot take them into account.  I was speaking on the grounds that I did not have his amendments and therefore, could not take things that he is going to make that kind of amendment.  

But be that as it may, I think if we have to take the functions as listed here, then the Clause as stated has to remain.  If we have to amend it, then it means we have to amend virtually all the other functions that have been put here and put at the disposal of the company secretary.  I am pleased to learn that there are institutions that teach Corporation Secretaries because I did not know about them. Otherwise, I thought the people who are being put here have the necessary qualifications, have been doing the job in all the other corporations, and I do not see any reason why they cannot continue to do it.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, the business of Civil Aviation, as an Industry calls for very high calibre manpower.  That is to say no use for us to make a plea in this country that we have not by now for over 30 years, we are independent and we send people abroad to study in institutions such as the corporation of certified secretaries, institute of secretaries and what not.  But we do not have to go and play there, the products from abroad.  What is Makerere doing?  A University since 1922 and it cannot produce business administrators.  

I am quite very sure we have people like the hon. Ntimba here who have been running the education, and we have the manpower.  What definition our colleague hon. Kawanga wants to mislead us there is.  There is a difference between writing down functions or duties in a law or a statute for that matter.  But what we are looking at is the manpower to discharge those obligations honestly and honourably too.  But we should not bring our argument through the collective responsibilities of this House to make a good law.  Ours should be to find exactly the right qualities for the people to administer such institutions; and moreover, Aviation as Industry is worldwide.  

Therefore, we should aim at getting the very best quality of administrators.  So, of course, it is these secretaries we are looking for.  The secretary is not the Manager; he takes the orders of the Board.  The Board gives him authority to function through the minutes and what not and powers drawn from the law giving them the powers.  The Secretary is a servant of the Board.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand here to support the amendment moved by hon. Mwandha and unlike hon. Kawanga, I had already decided to support it not aware that he was going to move other amendments because our policy of this Government and the previous ones I believe, is that the legal advice and legal representation should be by the Attorney General’s Chambers.  Even where a Corporation is high-powered, and has got its own legal department.  

Nevertheless, the legal responsibility for conducting legal matters in this country of corporations and other government departments resides in the Attorney General’s Chambers, and therefore, regardless of what is put in this law, the Constitutional duty of the Attorney General and his team to advise this Corporation and represent it in legal litigation is not taken away by this provision and, therefore, I very much strongly support the amendment, that we should not restrict ourselves to lawyers, as Corporation Secretaries.  

There are other people, for example, we want the Civil Aviation to make money to have contacts with a very important financial base.  Lawyers are known not to be very good at finances.  But some of these Corporation Secretaries have studied accounts, have studied finances and they would be ideal for this kind of Corporation, just as for some other Corporations, lawyers may be necessary.  Really we should not blanket everything, to say so and so is the only one qualified.  We should look at each Corporation on its own merit.  

I believe that this amendment would give the Minister more latitude in selecting a Corporation Secretary who has ably qualified to run the affairs of this Corporation when at the end of the day, if there are any legal issues to be determined constitutionally, these would go to the Attorney General.  So, the provisions about litigation, the provision about giving legal advice are read herein, because the Attorney General constitutionally has already taken that responsibility.  

So, let us accept this amendment as being reasonable and as giving the Minister more latitude to appoint a reasonably qualified person with pre-requisite experience.  I thank you Sir and I support the amendment.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I still have a problem with hon. Mwandha in respect of having moved amendments when in the first place I have not seen them, he has not discussed them with me.  He never bothered when we received he Bill to come in the Sectoral Committee and pass it.  I think this is totally not in the spirit of saving time -(Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is the Minister in order when the Chairman has the discretion to accept an amendment. If the Minister has any objection when the Chairman has already accepted it, you can argue against it substantially but not as a matter of procedure.  Is he in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Not in order, not in order at all.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, the consequential amendments that arise from the above amendment relate to 3 sub-Section 3. (Interruption)   

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of procedure.  I have an amendment which I circulated on 18(1), I would propose that I move that amendment so that we can go in order until we finish the Clauses.  I circulated an amendment on clause 18(1) very willingly, after discussing in the Sectoral Committee.  Existing 18(1) says, ‘there shall be a Corporation Secretary who shall be appointed by the Minister on terms and conditions that may be specified in the instrument of appointment.’  The amendment I have circulated which I have agreed with the Sectoral Committee is to insert the words ‘on recommendation of the Board’ between the words ‘Minister’ and ‘on terms.’

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, 18(3) reads that, ‘the Corporation Secretary shall be the Chief Legal Officer of the Authority,’ in view of the decision that we have taken to amend sub-Section 2, and in view of the revelation and explanations given by hon. Kanyeihamba, that in fact, the legal advice and litigation are matters of the Attorney General’s Chambers.

I propose that the term ‘Legal Officer’, be deleted, which appears in 18(3); and wherever it appears, and if I can also propose that the Corporation Secretary will certainly keep all legal transactions of the Authority but giving legal advice will not be his responsibility, therefore, I propose that that be deleted, and also (f) that is representing the authority in all litigation -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please, let us deal with it one by one.  We start with the first one.  

MRS. J. RWABYOMERE:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, although the amendment on the Sections of the Corporation Secretary was carried, I would like to correct the impression created by hon. Kanyeihamba that matters of legal advise are the concern of the Attorney General’s Chambers.  This is not true, because in this Act, for example, in Section 4, the Authority shall be a Body Corporate with perpetual succession and may sure or be sued in its corporate name.  Therefore, it is not true that matters of litigation concerning this corporation are matters of Attorney General’s Chambers.  I just wanted to correct that impression.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I have noted, Mr. Chairman, from these contributions, the danger of having to legislate for an institution that is already in place many years.  These problems that I have seen, arise directly from the fact that legislation is now being tailored to individuals.  This legislation we must depart - I demand we must depart from this practice where we try to fit the cloth to the size of the place.  

I would like to concur with the hon. Mwandha in moving consequential amendments, however costly they may be because we are already caught up in this situation.  I would also like to suggest that as a previous successful secretary of a very big Board, probably the largest in the country, you can very easily separate the technical task of legal representation from the task of administrative accountability.  The secretary to the Board is a servant of the Board, and he takes instructions from minutes, from resolutions of the technical officers, engineers and so on.  

So, I would like to concur that we consistently separate matters of technical representation from matters of service to the Board.  I also agree with hon. Kanyeihamba that, the Attorney General has not been called upon to service legally the Boards in this country, and yet we know, and more particularly as has been in this House, that the Attorney General’s Chambers is a Chief custodian of the law and its interpretation in this country.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose hon. Mwandha’s amendment.  First, I accept that lawyers need not to be Corporation Secretaries only, because there is a qualification called Chartered Institution of Secretaries and Administrators who are available in Uganda.  Lawyers and Corporation Secretaries can take on this job quite adequately depending on the ability of the person who satisfies the Board.  But having taken this job, and it is important that I speak this knowing that I did two years of a course called CIS, Chartered Institution of Secretaries.  I did not fail; I got distinctions.  I was left with only one year and I crossed to do law.  Now, the point I want to raise here is that, the Chartered Institute of Secretaries and Administrators do law, and they do company law, in good details and they can be very good legal advisors if they win the interview and advice the Corporation.  

Do not lose sight of what hon. Rwabyomere told you here.  She said that, we have created this organisation as a Corporate Body, to sue and be sued in its independent capacity, in its own name.  If as a Government body, it does require legal advice, it can approach the Attorney General for some specific assistance, but not on a day-to-day business basis.  They need a lot of independence when matters become too complicated, they can go to the Attorney General’s Chambers.  Even we here we need the Attorney General’s assistance, but not every day does the Attorney General come here. (Interruption)

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Information, Mr. Chairman, to the hon. Karuhanga and through you to this House, there is no incompatibility, Mr. Chairman, with the amendment being proposed - the consequential amendment by hon. Mwandha, supported by hon. Rwakakooko with what hon. Karuhanga is saying now.  In every Corporation, most of the important ones, there is a legal department manned by lawyers doing all these jobs that hon. Members are talking about.  But we need not legislate for them here; these are departmental divisions which are governed by internal regulations.  So, I do not see why it is continually being said that these are vitally important particulars, which must be reflected in the law.  That would be bad law, which will reflect departmental divisions here.  I thank you, Sir.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  That was an argument, it was not information to me, and I would like hon. Kanyeihamba in future to give information not just arguments.  I would like this House to imagine, if we do not put this requirement for a Company Secretary, a Chartered Secretary or a Lawyer having one in this case, and they get an engineer, because then they will have the right to get an engineer if you drop this requirement.  They can get an engineer to become a Corporation Secretary, and there is absolutely nothing wrong with that, because that is what the Minister has been doing in our Ministry; and you can see what is happening.  But - yes, it might still be the best Ministry because of that -(Interjection)- okay, but I would like a Board to meet when there is somebody who can give them legal advice.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 18 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 19

MR. KAWANGA:  I beg to move that Clause 19 be deleted.  The kind of departments that are mentioned in this clause are internal arrangements that need not be part of this Statute, and therefore, they would limit the ability of the Board to amend them whenever they think fit.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I have already accepted this amendment.

(Clause 19 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 20
 
MR. KAWANGA:  Clause 20 just as a consequential amendment that arises out of the previous amendment, I wish to add the word ‘officers’ so that this Clause 20 reads; ‘the authority shall have such other officers and supporting staff as the Board may determine.’

(Clause 20 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 21

MR. KABUGO:  I am moving an amendment here on Clause 21, Mr. Chairman, the Bill states that, ‘the Government shall be the shareholder of the authority’ and no mention is made of its total share subscription.  This information is needed for proper book keeping and if one is preparing final accounts the figure must be shown in order to balance the books of accounts but to say that the government shall be shareholder of the company with no specific figure, that is wrong, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, I oppose that amendment because normally this share capital is shown in the articles and memorandum of association but not in this Bill.

(Clause 21 as amended, negatived).

(Clause 21 do stand part of the Bill agreed to).

Clause 22

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I have an amendment on Clause 22 sub-Section (2) -(Interruption)

MRS. RWABYOMERE:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, since we got into the Committee Stage hon. Mwandha has persistently moved amendments and most of the hon. Members do not seem to have those amendments, Mr. Chairman.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Mwandha did you circulate your amendment or you did not?

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I think my duty is to give my amendment to the Clerk and then come here and move them; and as I see you have a copy of my amendments. Where the other copies with the Clerk should have been given to Members are - I have no idea whatsoever.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I have got his amendment here, so you can move.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I have this Floor.  Mr. chairman, I want to move a small amendment on Clause 22 sub-Section (2).  The sub-Section says, ‘the authority may possess its own bank accounts in both domestic and foreign currencies in a bank approved by the Minister.’  I would like to delete the word ‘Minister’ and replace it with the word ‘Board’. It will be a trivial matter for the Minister to decide which bank the Authority should open an account in, and as a matter of fact, where an account is opened is a matter for -(Interruption)

MR. NASASIRA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, not only has hon. Mwandha not distributed his amendments but he has also not read the amendments that were distributed weeks back.  I want to inform Mr. Mwandha that I have already accepted that amendment in a distribution and we have changed the word ‘Minister’ to ‘Board’.
                                                              
CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, the amendment that the Minister has got, will be leaving them behind and these were the amendments agreed upon by the Standing Committee of Works, Transport and Communication with the Ministry and fortunately, Members claim they do not have these amendments because they were circulated sometime back.  But these amendments we have them and on this particular Section, there is an amendment and the Section we have just left there were some amendments that were jumped.  

I would like to request, that these amendments be given to Members if they do not have them so that they can see them because we spent a lot of time with the Ministry going through these amendments.  Thank you very much, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  If the amendments are not moved, then I am not the one to move the amendments.  Take your seat please.  So you are withdrawing your amendment?

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, what remains is for the House to vote on my amendments which obviously the Minister says he has accepted.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  That is the Minister’s amendment.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Since in the House there is the total sum, then its wisdom is to be aware of what law is being made and that papers for the relevant Bill on the CA Bill of 1963, that some of us are blindly just saying yes, yes and we do not know anything. I think it will be a total loss and it will be for the good of the law for the House to be aware fully.

AN HON. MEMBER:  What is it now?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, please, we are on Clause 22.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, on this clause 22, I had two amendments.  First amendment was Clause 22(1) where in sub-Section (1) I require to insert a new paragraph as (a) instead of the current (a), I insert a new paragraph as (a) to read as follows, ‘(a) share capital as may be determined by the Board’, and then the rest of those paragraphs from the current (a) to be turned into (b) as follows, to re-number (a) to (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) and have a new paragraph (a) which reads as follows; share capital as may be determined by the Board.

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, this question of capital is taken care of by sub-Section (1) (a).  These are the grants from the government, since it is only the government which is the shareholder so the Board cannot determine the share capital because the sub-scriber is only the government which can determine -(Interjection)- yes, the shareholder is only the government and it is only the government the shareholder which can determine the share capital in the Articles and Memorandum of Association, that is why you will find this item but the Board cannot determine the share capital.                 

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, I fully concur with hon. Wasswa Nkalubo.  It is only the shareholder who should know the magnitude of a firm which he is setting up of the organisation and there he goes down to see the requirements and after setting up the requirements that is the capital outlet, it is only him but not the employees and people nominated by the Government -(Interruption)- I accept the information.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the government, what is the government?  The government has appointed the Board, and the Board is a representative of the government. Since this amendment has been to the Sectoral Committee, it has been agreed upon by the Minister, who is government.  So what is the point?  The Board is the government at that time and it has a direct link with the Minister.  So whom do you imagine is going to come from somewhere and determine this?

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, what happens in any good management of company set up, it is the shareholders who determine.  We have know of cases in Uganda whereby the Board connives - I am not saying that Civil Aviation is, but we have known of cases where management and the directors connive to swindle literally and there the company is down and therefore it should be the government which should determine the share capital, Mr. Chairman.        
                                                                                              
(Clause 22 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 22 do stand part of the Bill, agreed to).

(Clause 23, agreed to).

(Clause 24, agreed to).

Clause 25

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, I am requesting that looking at clause 25(4), we amend it to read; issue of debentures and other types of bonds’, to replace what it there are ‘issue of the debenture bonds and other securities.’  The reason I am saying that, - that is 25(b) - Clause 25 (4) (b) because it says, issue debentures bonds or other securities.  We were saying that other securities is very vague and it does not really say much apart from someone just wishing to put there other.  Therefore, we are saying that he should issue debentures and other types of bonds.  

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I accept that amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OPIO:  I am saying, Mr. Chairman, delete all the words the word ‘government’ and if you look at 25(5) to say, ‘a loan under this Section may within the approval of the Minister responsible for Finance be guaranteed by the Government’ and I am saying leave out ‘and if guaranteed the principal sum and an interest on that loan shall be charged on consolidated funds.’  I am saying that this is contrary to the rules that once the Authority has borrowed money it should be the authority responsible for paying the principal and for paying the interest but not to be transferred to the consolidated fund.

MR. NASASIRA:  That amendment, Mr. Chairman, was accepted.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 25 as amended do stand part of the Bill agreed to).

Clause 26

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, we are demanding Clause 26 so that the CA's Financial year is the same as the government Financial Year.  We are amending Clause 26 to read that the financial years of the authority shall be the 12 months commencing on the first day of July each year and ending on the 30th day of June of the following year.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 26 as amended do stand part of the Bill, agreed to).

(Clause 27 as agreed to).

Clause 28

MR. OPIO:  Mr. Chairman, I am moving to amend Clause 28(2) and I am saying that we delete the words ‘subject to any directions given by the Minister responsible for finance’ appearing at the beginning of the Section.  

If we look at the Clause 28 (2) is saying that ‘subject to any direction given by the Minister responsible for finance the authority shall cause...’ I am saying that this is unnecessary because it is a statutory for the authority to come out with the repaired Financial Statement.  So, there is no need of having this starting phase, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I have discussed this amendment with hon. Opio and I accept the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 28 as amended stand part of the Bill, agreed to).

Clause 29

MR. OPIO:  I am saying that this is very simple that 29(3) I am suggesting that we substitute the word ‘or’ for ‘and’ appearing and if you look at 29(3), it is saying that, ‘the Auditor General and any Auditor appointed by him shall have access to all the books of accounts.’  I am saying that should be the Auditor General or any Auditor appointed by him.  And I substitute and with all.  So, it should read that the Auditor General or any.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 29 as amended do stand part of the Bill, agreed to).

Clause 30

MR. OPIO:  That Section 30, Mr. Chairman, I am amending it by deleting the whole of it.  If you say that, the Authority shall be exempted from government taxes and revenues and income and you are saying that since we have called this an autonomous body, it is going to be run on commercial basis, we do not see why it should be exempted from taxes or revenues and income, Mr. Chairman.             
                                                                                        
MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the amendment because I have my own amendment which says, ‘the Authority may be exempted from government taxes, revenues and income.’  Why, Mr. Chairman?  A lot of equipment connected with Aviation Industry are very expensive and the Authority sometimes is forced to do some work on a social basis by government.  I will give you an example.  Let me take the example of when the Pope came to Uganda, there was need to do emergency rehabilitation of Gulu Airport, Kasese Airstrip and Soroti Airport.  The Authority, in its budget, had not planned to do that emergency and massive repair but there was a national need.  Now, the authority wants that if it cannot be able to afford certain items but for the sake of government need, then there is need for the Authority to have that tax cleared.  Secondly, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)

MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Point of order.  Is it in order for the hon. Minister to mislead this House by giving the impression that the taxes are actually only on equipment whereas this Section is stating that the taxes will be only on income?  It is only income and income means when you sell something, not when you have brought in an item.  Income means when you have surplus profit.  So, if you do not earn any profit, you do not make any income.  So is he in order to labour on something which is none existent?

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is in order to make his point clear.  Try to make your point clear please.

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for protecting me.  I was building up my case why I think sometimes you do not have to tax revenue and income, that is why I was coming to say that, the Authority apart from doing a business, serves a social need as dedicated by government.  Now, if you would want taxing its revenue and income, I think it is better to wait and tax the profit, that is why I want to amend this and come to ‘may’ rather than ‘shall’, rather than delete the whole Article, Mr. Chairman.

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I am actually very disappointed that a whole Minister of the Government of the National Resistance Movement can stand in this House and advocate a blanket cheque to a parastatal not to pay taxes.  These taxes are on income, which is for a start.  

Secondly, we have got Uganda Investment authority.  If the CAA feels that it qualifies for an investment licence, whereby they will be exempted from taxes, they can go to the Uganda Investment authority.  But right now when we are trying to stabilise our taxation, however has income must be taxed in Uganda.  There is no reason for us to condemn this sort of thing.  If CAA is not economically viable, if it operates at a loss, there will be taxation on losses.  But in a way we must legislate that once there is income and it is taxable income, it has to be paid.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 30 be deleted as proposed by hon. Opio.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 31

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on Clause 31(3) by adding the following words; clause 31(3) goes up to (i).  I would like to add paragraph (j) and it should read; ‘Any contributions to international bodies connected with Civil Aviation’.  Mr. Chairman, I am adding or bringing that amendment because sometimes the Aviation Organisations can make contributions to the Civil Aviation authority and therefore, I feel that Civil Aviation Authority should have a direct access to these contributions.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 31 sub-Section (j) be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 31 as amended, put and agreed to).

Clause 32

MR. NDEGE:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  While I agree with sentiments of hon. Latigo, I think the Minister’s way of representing the Board of this organisation is much better because it includes all the players right from the growing to the exporting and even up to the production of textiles.  So, I think I reject the amendment and we go ahead with the Minister’s recommendations as in the Bill.  Because all these are just farmers and the organisations is not just for farmers.  Is it for all people at all different stages of the cotton industry?  It is not just producing; it is involving a lot of added value.  So, I think we leave it as it is as proposed by the Minister.  Thank you very much.

RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose this proposal on the ground that for now, we are looking at those areas, which have been zoned for sometime to grow cotton.  But it does not stop this country expanding the zones to start on cotton, and in fact there is indication that many other areas are suitable for cotton growing.  If in law we put a restriction to only those areas, we are in effect saying that no expansion can take place.  

Finally, I want on record and for the knowledge of hon. Magezi to say that there does exist and registered with the Attorney general’s Chambers an association for textile mills.  Thank you.  

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the amendment for the very good reason that has been ably advanced because as I have indicated in my contribution, if we opted for this criteria, you would not exhaust the list because you have just mentioned a number of districts, you have omitted Bunyoro, Bukedi, Bugisu, Bushenyi and Pallisa and it is just not practical.  I think we should be nationally focused and I wanted to assure him that farmers are represented.  We shall be having two cotton growers and their interest will be taken care of.  So for those good reasons, I am sure my hon. Friend Latigo will agree with me that his proposal should be rejected.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 8 sub-section (1) be amended as proposed by hon. Latigo.

(Question on amendment put and negatived).

(Clause 8 as amended, put and agreed to).

(Clause 9 put and agreed to).

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I think it would be wrong if I kept quiet in view of my inability to understand what clause 10 sub-Section 4 actually means.  I looked at the definition; there is no definition of ‘isolated area’.  I wish I could have an explanation as to what it means, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KYEMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Mr. Chairman, as has been ably pointed out, cotton production is being left solely in the hands of the Ministry responsible for Agriculture and Section 10(4) deals with the control of the use of an authorised cottonseed.  This is important because we are trying to establish certain areas to grow or plant certain seeds and if you introduce authorised seeds in the areas that have been specifically assigned certain seeds, it will be difficult to get the purity of the seed that we must have if we are going to have a successful segregation of seeds in the cotton industry.  Thank you, Sir.           
                                                                                                
MR. WASSWA NKALUBO:  Mr. Chairman, under that same sub-section 4, the Minister has proposed a fine of two million shillings without any alternative.   Now, if I cannot pay, is he ready to let me free to go away?  Because normally when we are legislating, we give an alternative why we cannot raise the fine.  I am taken to jail for a known term so that when I am committing it, I know how long I will stay in Luzira.  But this one means that if I cannot pay, they can sell whatever I have or they will let me free.  I do not know whether it is the normal way of legislating that you are only after money.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. member is misconceiving the point.  It says the fine not exceeding two million shillings, so it could be ten shillings, it could even be free.  It may be a fine and a pardon and a caution.  But I think hon. Nkalubo is used to having a fine or imprisonment.  In this case, he says that we do some imprisonment.  No, no, I think this is not too serious a matter that deserves imprisonment.  Playing about with human rights is too difficult.

DR MAGEZI:  Mr. Chairman, Sir, I wish to move an amendment that we delete the whole of part 4 of this Bill.  If you look at Clause 10, the operators of these laws, it is the Ministry of Agriculture.  The same goes for Clause 11, 12.  And in fact, if you look at 12(3) for instance, it is even the Ministry of Agriculture that has caused these seeds to be distributed.  Clause 13 is also talking about the Ministry of Agriculture, and Clause 14 is the same, 15 and so on until 17.  

Now, I see that this Section is purely to be administered with consultations by the Ministry of Agriculture.  Whereas today probably Sir Richard and Sir Henry may be able to see this Bill through, tomorrow it may be Sir Richard and Sir Apollo who can work to conflict each other.  

And why do we not make this law so simple that agriculture means the growing of all sorts of things?  And they have got the seed multiplication on their place.  Why do we not take this Section out and the Ministry of Agriculture will find a way of accommodating if it is not included in the Agricultural seeds and Plant Statute which we have already passed?  I therefore beg to move that I get support from Members to delete part 4 of this Bill.

MR. KYEMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the proposed amendment.  The provision of this Section was specifically done on the insistence of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries.  And for this to be removed from this Bill, it will expose the responsibility of my Ministry in this particular field and I would like to urge hon. Members that unless there is really any other reason, I would appeal to them that they recognise the responsibility of the Ministry and the need for this section to remain so that we carry out our responsibility.  

In any case, we passed the Seed Bill last year, which would go in fact, in consonance with this particular Bill.  This is a recognition of that responsibility which was assigned to us.  Thank you, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 10 sub-section 4 be amended as proposed by hon. Magezi.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 10 put and agreed to).

(Clause 11 put and agreed to).

Clause 12
                                                      
MR. PINTO:  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking clarification on Clause 12(4), (5) and (6).  Unless it is implied but here it said that the organisation in consultation with the Ministry responsible for Agriculture may require any ginner or any other person to set aside for distribution to growers any cotton seed in his possession and may require any ginner to produce cotton and so on and so forth.  And then the other one says, may require the ginner to distribute any cotton whether set aside at his ginnery or any other ginnery for distribution in the neighbourhood of his ginnery or to dispatch any cotton assigned at his ginnery or any other place in Uganda.  I am seeking clarification from the Minister whether there will be payment for this service if it is implied.  If not, I will be happy to start the paragraph, ‘subject to reimbursement of cost.’              
               
MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I did explain during the submission of this Bill, during my second reading, that for the next two or three years, seeds will continue to be availed free of charge.  However, it is the intention of government as well as this organisation that in the medium term, the whole industry is industry run and when we get to that level, it is proposed that the organisation charges a fee for the service.  So, clearly in the medium term, we have no choice but to have that charge effected.  I hope that is clear.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Clause 12 put and agreed to).

(Clause 13 put and agreed to).

(Clause 14 put and agreed to).

(Clause 15 put and agreed to).

(Clause 16 put and agreed to).

(Clause 17 put and agreed to).
                                                              
Clause 18

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr. Chairman, on Clause 18 sub-section 4 where it says, a person aggrieved by any refusal, revocation or suspension of registration may appeal to the Board against eviction and the Minister shall ratify the Board.  I think the Board shall be final because there is no point keeping somebody waiting just for the Minister to ratify and he has no say.  I think it would be better if we said the Board shall be final.  

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, the idea behind this drafting was that indeed decisions would be technically discussed and agreed by the Board but that in public interest.  The Minister should ratify it for good governance.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I hope you agree that it is fair to leave the Clause as drafted.  Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, Mr. Chairman, let me echo a very strong concern of the people of Kitgum District about their two ginneries.  

The two ginneries in Kitgum, one in Parang and one in Kitgum Town was dismantled by government in 1977 or 1978 with the intention to expand the production of lime.  But then with time, the liberation war of 1979 got the work half way done.  So, up to now government has not come back to meet its obligation, and to put the ginnery into proper running order.  

Number two, with another ginnery in Parang, this ginnery also was in a very good running order but during the war of 1986, the ginnery was destroyed.  The Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing at that time and may be the Ministry of Industry now, several communications have been made to the Ministry appealing to the Government to put this ginnery into good running order.  

At the same time as I was saying before, there has been continuous campaign for double production, yet the Government is aware that these two ginneries are not working.  Consequently as I was saying before, we have got cotton for five years in store.  Now the people of Kitgum want clarification from the Ministry of Trade and Industry now to tell us when these ginneries are going to be rehabilitated so that the cotton that is lying in stores is sold out.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I will be happy to give any information I have then may be later; and I will turn to the Section.  I want to inform the hon. Member that we had a programme in place.  We are due to use the STANBIC EEC Fund, but I am afraid this has been subjected to the passing of this Cotton Act.  We hope soon after the passage of this, specifically Kitgum ginnery will be rehabilitated by STANBIC Funds, but certainly not Parang.  I am afraid through no fault of government, Parang was destroyed by senseless people.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, the CAA as the Aviation Authority delegated powers now by the Aeronautical Authority of Uganda; is empowered here to participate in what are called bilateral air service agreements between other countries and that is why we bring in that Clause.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I will sympathise with the Minister and nevertheless, I cannot understand why he wants a law o be passed to authorise the Authority under his control to advise him and assist him!  Why should you write a law requesting the authority to advise and assist you?  This particular proposal is so weak, it is so unnecessary but really the Minister probably does not quite understand what it means, because really that authority is there to advise this Minister all the time, to assist him all the time whether in negotiations or whether in any respect.  And I think this is a redundant and superfluous amendment and Mr. Chairman, I oppose it.

MR. KARUHANGA:  I just wanted the Minister to clarify to us what the difference is between the Civil Aviation authority and the Aeronautical Authority because in the Chicago Convention, these things are all described and identified but in this Bill, we have only defined the Authority to mean the Civil Aviation Authority.  But now you have come up with this Aeronautical Authority and the time that I used to work for government in the Ministry of Justice, working for Uganda Airlines and Civil Aviation Board, I used to find that we were connected at various levels Aeronautically.  Now, I do not know which one is this.  Is it the Montreal one?  Is it the one we have in Nairobi?  Now you have said the Aeronautical Authority is the Minister, now I am a bit confused.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, on the Authority, I entirely oppose the amendment.  It is superfluous and it is not necessary.  Indeed, it brings confusion in the interpretation of the law because once you have already said that the authority is there at the beginning to advise the Minister and indeed that is what it is supposed to do constitutionally.  This is not only redundant but likely, it can cause confusion.  

So, we should not accept this amendment purely on points of law and construction.  I believe that the proposal was not thought about; but I also, I had a point about the Aeronautical Authority which has been introduced for the first time, we note it is not in the dictionary in section two, it is not defined.  We need to define it again but it seems that we are creating, out of nowhere, a new Authority, which is not thought about in the functions and the objective of the Bill.  So perhaps the Minister can give us that information about this because really we shall be making a bad law.  It just comes out of the blue, and it is nowhere.  But on the other one, Mr. Chairman, I oppose the amendment; it is superfluous.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. NASASIRA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  Let me start first of all with the Aeronautical Authority.  It has not come out of the blue.  It does not have to be in the English dictionaries but it is in the Aviation dictionaries.  First of all, hon. Karuhanga talks of the Chicago Convention and the Montreal Organisation and so on.  The Montreal Organisation is the headquarters of the International Civil Aviation Organisation, which is called ICAO - this is an organisation collecting all these Authorities, all the Civil Aviation Authorities as a Body.  Now, the Chicago Convention as I said in my opening remarks, yesterday, was the one, which set up how the Aviation Industry is going to be run and rules and regulations for it.  

Now, the Aeronautical Authority means who is the Authority, who is responsible for Aviation in the country?  Now, why it has to be part of government is that when you are having for example, bilateral air agreements, you have negotiations between State to State.  It is not between a parastatal to a parastatal.  If you are having negotiation for an Airline where you have a commercial memorandum of understanding, you have Airline to Airline for business.  Now, when it comes to State to State, the negotiations are no longer entirely the responsibility of the Civil Aviation authority.  Maybe the word that is confusing is the Civil Aviation Authority. May be we could have called it the Civil Aviation Organisation or Board.  Then the word ‘Authority’ would have changed.  So, I think I have clarified it properly Mr. Chairman.  

MR. SIBO:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I thank the application for the Minister to the advice and assistance indicates really the mistake we have made in making him the Aeronautical Authority.  I believe the Aeronautical Authority should not be the Minister at all.  First of all, he has not got the necessary knowledge and of course, it is not true to say that is the way it happens in other countries because in Britain for instance, it is not the Minister, in America, it is not the Minister, in Kenya, it is not the Minister and so on.  

Anyway, we have passed the amendment, and he is now the Authority.  Okay, let him have it but, let him not come back to us and say please, advise me and assist me or give me advice and give me assistance.  He has ability, the capacity to call upon whomever he wants within the Ministry, or to call upon the Civil Aviation Authority to advise him and he does not have to come here.  So, it is absolutely superfluous.  I oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 43, sub-Section 3 be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Clause 43 sub-Section 3 as amended, negatived).

Clause 43, sub-Section 4

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, there is an error in 43, sub-Section 2 which is now re-numbered 3.  It was going to be re-numbered 4 but since it is numbered 3, amend the abbreviation of the African Civil Aviation Commission to read as AFCAC not ACAC, that was just a typing error.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 43 as amended, put and agreed to).

Clause 44

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend Clause 44 to remove the existing Clause 44 and substitute it with the following Clause, ‘The Air transport licensing’ should read as follows, ‘Authority’s permission and establishment of fares’, rather than ‘The air transport licensing’.  And then Clause 44 (1) should read as follows; ‘no aircraft shall, (a) arrive in Uganda from a place outside Uganda, (b) depart from Uganda for a place outside Uganda or, (c) overfly Uganda without the permission of the Authority and in accordance with any conditions specified in the permission’.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am seeking information whether this Clause covers missiles; and what happens to missiles?

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I am totally confused with the amendment to 44(1), to say that no aircraft shall arrive in Uganda from a place outside.  I just do not understand this because, if a plane has to arrive in Uganda, it must be coming from some place in order to arrive in Uganda. (Laughter)  And, Mr. Chairman, I think -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  You asked for information, not for debating.  Take you seat.  Are you giving information or you are just debating?

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I was opposing the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, let him finish please.

MR. NASASIRA:  As far as I understand, Mr. Chairman, this is the legal language.  Lawyers try to be as precise and sometimes unnecessary obvious to make their point.  So, hon. Mwandha should know that it makes sense.  As for hon. Kanyeihamba’s information, he required, I think I referred him to the definition of an aircraft at the beginning of this Bill to know whether the missile qualifies to be part of it or not.      

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 44(1) be amended as proposed by hon. Mover.  
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 44(2)

MR. NASASIRA:  The amended 44(2) reads as follows, Mr. Chairman,  ‘The Minister may on advice of the Authority, establish fares, freight rates and related matters.’  And I think hon. Karuhanga was ahead on this.

(Clause 44 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 45, agreed to).

Clause 46

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, there is a typing error in the marginal note.  The marginal note should read Appeals Tribunal, not Appeal Tribunal.             

(Clause 46 as amended, put and agreed to).

(Clause 47 put and agreed to).

(Clause 48 put and agreed to).

(Clause 49 put and agreed to).

(Clause 50 put and agreed to).

(Clause 51 put and agreed to).

(Clause 52 put and agreed to).

(Clause 53 put and agreed to).

(Clause 54 put and agreed to).

(Clause 55 put and agreed to).

(Clause 56 put and agreed to).

(Clause 57 put and agreed to).

Clause 58

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, 58(1) reads; ‘the Minister may give the Authority written directions as to performance of its functions which directions shall be only of a general nature.’  That sub-Section does not convey any information to anyone and it should be deleted.  I propose, Mr. Chairman, therefore, that deleting that sub-Section should amend the Section.

MR. NASASIRA:  Now, by hon. Mwandha deleting this Section, is he trying to imply that the Minister should not give any written directive to the Authority?  I think the Minister should have a leeway of how he gives written directions to the Authority and by deleting it, he is trying the Minister’s hands.  I oppose the amendment, Mr. Chairman, of deleting that Section.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 58 be deleted as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 58 put and agreed to).

(Clause 59 put and agreed to).

Clause 60

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I propose to amend Clause 60 by inserting the words; other than the Managing director, Deputy Managing Director and Corporation Secretary’ between the words ‘employees’ and ‘pay wages’ appearing at the end of the first line and the beginning of the second line of sub-section 1 of Clause 60.  

In other words, I am eliminating those three employees from these benefits.  I am removing them - I am removing the Managing Director, the Deputy Managing Director and the Corporation Secretary to fall under that the Authority shall in the case of its employees pay wages, salaries, pensions, allowances and any other peculiar or non-peculiar benefits as it determines necessary and the benefits shall be approved by the Minister, because the terms of the three are determined by the Minister at the time of employment and not by the Board.

MR. KANYEIHAMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I entirely agree with the Minister, but I think that this provision should be transferred to I think Section 2 where words are defined and there we define employees to mean persons employed with the Corporation other than those you have enumerated; that is better drafting than putting in the middle here.  So, I am not opposing the Minister, but I am proposing that for better drafting, we should put it in the definition.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 60 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 60 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 61 agreed to).

(Clause 62 agreed to).

(Clause 63 agreed to).

(Clause 64 agreed to).

(Clause 65, agreed to).

Clause 66 

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I propose that we delete Clause 67 from the Bill.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 67 be deleted as proposed by the hon. Mover.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 68 agreed to).

Clause 69

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, permit me to move my final amendment.  Mr. Chairman, I want to amend Section 69 by adding number (e), which shall read as follows; ‘The Post of Managing Director and Corporation Secretary shall be filled in accordance with the provision laid down in this Statute’.  In other words, these are the transitional measures, which have been drawn up here, and I am adding one with regard to the appointment of the top officials in the Corporation because as you know, we have made some amendments.  

Also, this Statute provides for the definition of who occupies which position and therefore, for the efficiency of the Corporation, of the Authority, it is necessary that the top leaders of the Authority - those posts should be filled in accordance with the law that we are going to pass this afternoon.  Even if it means appointing the same individuals, because hon. Rwakakooko made the point that the problem of this type of law is the fact that you are legislating when people are already there; but even if it was that the same people filled the positions, it is necessary that in the transitional measures, the two positions are filled in accordance with the laws that we are going to pass.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose hon. Mwandha’s amendment for two reasons.  One, in my introductory remarks, it was made clear that the Authority was established by an ordinance.  

Secondly, that the study was done on how the Authority should be set up.  When the Authority was set up, a Board was appointed and jobs were advertised - the three jobs hon. Mwandha is talking about.  They were advertised in the Press, people applied and for these three posts, people were interviewed and appointed.

Second point, Clause 69, concentrates mainly on assets and liabilities.  It is handing over assets and liabilities from Government to the Authority.  I think hon. Mwandha wants to combine these assets and liabilities so that the Managing Director, the Deputy Managing Director and the Corporation Secretary become part of these assets and liabilities.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 69 be amended as proposed by hon. Mwandha.

(Question put and negatived).

Clause 69
(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 70 agreed to).

Clause 71

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira): Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend Clause 71 by deleting the word ‘purported’ from Clause 71, so that Clause 71 reads, ‘all actions done or made under the ordinance number 2 of 1991 are hereby being done or made under this Statute.’ 

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 71 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE SCHEDULE

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Schedule do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE TITLE

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Title do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME
 
THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Sir, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Council do resume and the Committee do report thereto.

(Question put and agreed to).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, ‘The Civil Aviation authority Bill, 1994’ and passed with some amendments.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to report.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WORKS, TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATION (Mr. J. Nasasira):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Civil Aviation Authority Bill, 1994,’ be read a Third time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Title settled and Bill passed).

BILLS
SECOND READING
                        
THE COTTON DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION BILL, 1993

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. R. Kailua):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that, ‘The Cotton Development Bill, 1993’, be read a Second Time.                                                                                                          Hon. Members it will be recalled that the Cotton Development Organisation Bill, 1993, was read for the First Time on 7th July, 1993.  Since the First Reading, further consultations have taken place resulting in significant changes to the original Bill.  The changes, I am afraid were necessitated by the following considerations.

(i) There was real need to oversee the Cotton sub-sector through a single institution under one legislation;

(ii) There was need to establish an autonomous industrial-run institution; and

(iii) There was need to de-regulate the cotton industry as much as possible so as to encourage the private sector participation.  The most significant changes of the Bill is really related to the need to over-see the cotton sub-sector, through a single institution under one legislature.  

In this connection, a new part fall dealing with cotton production has been incorporated into the Bill.  The incorporation of this element of production in the Bill has necessitated several changes in the Cotton Development Organisation Bill, 1993.  They include the organisation of an entirely new part-fall cotton production, change of name of the Bill to ‘The Cotton Development Bill, 1993’, editorial changes to reflect the added element of production, additions to the interpretation sections, changes in presentation of the Board of Directors. 

MR. LATIGO OLAL:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, in view of the fact that cotton is the goal number two of Uganda in importance, and that Members of Parliament should be able to listen and help the Minister to discuss, is it in order for us and for him to present this when we are not forming a quorum?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Do we not form a quorum?  We form the quorum.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you.  Mr. Chairman, I will continue from where I ended.  I was saying that, there are a number of changes that had to be undertaken and I was saying that changes in representation on the Board of Directors had also to take place and if you look in Section 6 and 7 of part II, dealing with establishment, powers, objectives and functions of the organisations, all these have been streamlined to remove the unnecessary repetition reflected in both the objectives and duties of the organisation.  

We have had thorough consultation and discussions with the Sectoral Committee on Trade and Industry.  We have had to do this because there has been need to - there was real need to support the cotton farmers and this need was underscored during the discussion.  

Indeed, the revival of the cotton production will depend on the support that can be extended directly to the farmers in order to encourage them to produce more cotton.  The best incentive that cotton farmers can be given is timely purchase of their cotton at fair prices and in cash.  Failure over the years by the Cooperative Union to pay cash for farmers’ cotton is largely responsible for the declining cotton production, with farmers turning to alternative crops, which are easily marketable.  

The removal of bottlenecks in the ginning and marketing of cotton through the introduction of competition, and the support of research institution, aims at providing better yielding varieties of cotton.  The improvement of extension services offered to farmers, the extension of credit facilities, to enable farmers to acquire easily the programme of re-stocking cattle to provide animal factions, are major components of the comprehensive cotton sub-sector development project, which seeks to provide meaningful support to the cotton farmers.  Under the proposed project, cottonseeds will be distributed freely to farmers for the next three seasons.  

Farmers will also benefit from some essential production inputs such as pesticides.  However, in order to encourage the private sector to play a significant role in the distribution of cottonseed and other inputs, it will be necessary to allow them to charge for the services after the three-year period.  

We are endeavouring to attract serious players, such as the French CFCT, which has a lot of experience in supporting smallholder cotton farmers in West Africa.  The company supports farmers by providing extensive services and the necessary credit in the form of inputs, which is recovered from farmers when they deliver cotton.  I hope with the patience of Members, I want to give a little bit of background.

Cotton production grew rapidly fro the time of its introduction in Uganda at the beginning of this century until the mid-1930s when coffee began to compete as an alternative cash crop.  Thereafter, production increased steadily through, although at a slower rate until 1969 to 70, when the area under cultivation peaked at around 900,000 hectares and production reached record level of 466,000 bales.  Between 1966 and 1970, Uganda ranks as the third biggest producer of cotton in Africa behind Egypt and Sudan.  

Over the same period, Uganda was a leading exporter of textiles, edible oil and animal feeds in East African region and achievement, which was based on a vibrant cotton industry.  A combination of factors including the slumption of research into new and better varieties BA and SATU seed, poor agronomic practices, an absence of extension support, and meaningful incentives to cotton growing areas, contributed to the sharp fall in cotton production, which declined to an all time low of a mere 11,000 bales in 1988.  

Although production has risen slightly, to between 60 and 70,000 bales, this is far from satisfactory; and is a reflection of the deep-rooted problems that continue to adversely affect the industry.  Low production has meant that cotton Unions have carried excessive ginning capacity for a long time, resulting in ginnery under utilisation and high over-head costs; Factors which have contributed to Unions financial wars.  

Similarly, Lint Marketing Board was saddled with very high unit costs of marketing lint, after failing to adjust quickly enough to the decline in cotton production and export volume.  Mr. Chairman, hon. Members will recall that on 4th March 1993, I made a statement to this august House, in which I outlined the problems that face the marketing of the year 1992/93 cotton.  The failure by Lint Marketing Board to raise adequate crop finance, which was partly due to the loss of 1.2 billion incurred by the Board the previous season in the process of supporting a minimum producer price at that time of Shs. 340/= per kilogram announced by Government, severely constrained the purchase of cotton by some Unions.  For example, when the 1992/93 cotton buying season opened Lango Co-operative Union had not ginned most of their 1991/92 crops and owed Lint Marketing Board Shs. 500 million as crop finance.  In an effort to reverse the declining cotton production, Government adopted a three pronged strategy consisting of:

i) Liberalisation of marketing of cotton and cotton inputs;

ii) Enhancement of production through research and better extension services; and

iii) Enhancement of efficiency in the ginning industry. The Government in collaboration with the World Bank and International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), has developed a comprehensive cotton sub-Sector rehabilitation 	programme whose objectives are: to strengthen the cotton breeding programmes at Namulonge and Serere Research Stations in order to improve the physical and genetic quality of cotton seeds.

DR. TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, are we really in order to continue listening to the Minister when the number of Members in this House is only 73 instead of being 90?

THE CHAIRMAN:  So you have been very busy counting the Members?  It is not in order. And it is not in order to proceed when we do not form a quorum, but it is not also in order for you to come very late. (Laughter)  And with that, we adjourn the Council until tomorrow at 9.30 a.m.
	                                                                                                                           
(The Council rose at 6.20 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 14th January, 1994, at 9.30 p.m.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              

