Thursday 18th, January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

BILLS
SECOND READING

PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995

MR OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Municipality):  Mr Chairman, our Standing Orders enable us to dispatch Public Service with a right to quarrel; the House has no quarrel apparently.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We adjourn for 15 minutes please.

(House adjourned for 15 minutes.)

MR OMARA ATUBO (Otuke County, Lira): Thank you, Mr Chairman, for catching your eye and allowing me to speak early this afternoon.  I would like to join my hon. Colleagues who spoke before me and saying at the out step that this is a very historic Bill and a every important one for this country.  But, like hon. Obednego Ongom said earlier yesterday, the importance of this Bill does not simply lie in the exercise of election of a President; but rather in the quality of that election and in the manner in which we sure that, a law we are going to pass is going to give us a free and fair election and without fear or favour.  T

he importance of this Bill also lies in a historic context, first because, we all know that the 20 years or so of this history has been a tragic one.  A tragic one because the tragedy has resolved around the issue of power and the highest vision of this country of the Presidency, has been the source of that tragedy.  

I think I and many Ugandans would love to see a situation in which a President of this country would be elected by the people of Uganda and the people of Uganda could accept that election and there would be credibility.  An election which is not credible is worse than having no election.  And, therefore, I am contributing with the hope that I will be among those who are looking forward to having a good law, to set a basis of election of a President, which will consequently also be the basis of stability for this country.  Let us not make it impossible for a person to contest a Presidential election.  In the provisions of this Constitution Article 102 and Article 80; the Constitutional requirement for election of a President are very clearly stated there.  

In Article 102 of the new Constitution. ‘A person who desires to contest to be a President of this country will be qualified if he is a citizen of Uganda by birth, if he is not less than 35 years and not more than 75 years and if he is qualified to be a Member of Parliament.’  And in Article 80, the qualifications of a person to contest for Parliament is stated there. ‘You have to be a citizen of Uganda, a registered voter, has completed probably education of Advanced Level, and you are not qualified if you are of unsound mind or you are holding or acting in a position of responsibility connected with conduct of election, you are a traditional leader, you have been judged bankrupt or you are under a sentence of death or imprisonment exceeding 9 months’.  One would say that, once a person satisfies the provisions of Article 102 and Article 80, he should go ahead and contest an election for Presidency.  But this House has been empowered by the Constitution to make additional laws.  Because as you know a Constitution basically provides a framework, it can be as brief as possible.  So since other laws in addition to Article 102 and Article 80 are specifically subsidiary laws.  But the Constitution has already provided basic qualifications of a Presidential Candidate.  And therefore, those laws which we are making in order to implement the provisions of the Constitution as I said earlier should not be seen to make it impossible for a person to contest for Presidency.  What do I mean Mr Chairman?  I will just give three examples because of time constraint.  

One of them is the money they deposit; the requirement for the deposit; the two million or so.  The second one is the issue of funding of a Presidential Candidate.  To me the law has made it very restrictive, practically impossible.  A number of Presidential Candidates, have come out with various figures.  Figures ranging from one billion shillings to ten billion shillings if you want to be a Presidential Candidate or if you want to dare to contest as a Presidential Candidate.  There is no doubt that if you want to contest for Presidency you must have resources; and if these resources are quantified or reduced in terms of money, they definitely are substantial.  You need transport, you need money for advertisement, you need money for your agents and all these and all that.  

So, simple logic will dictate that a Presidential Candidate is not a Constituency Candidate from Otuke; I can cover Otuke on a bicycle.  And in most cases, I may reach all my voters and they maybe able to decide because I have reached them.  But a Presidential Candidate will not be able to do that.  And therefore, he needs substantial sums of money.  The law has forbidden for example organised groups like Political Parties, to sponsor a candidate.  It would be very easy if a person were to come through an organised group.  Because that group would easily finance his election.  But we are in a stage where first of all the Constitution has said No! And therefore, there is really nothing this House can do about that.  But more ridiculously, is the manner in which we are making a law which practically forbids a person from going to raise funds from outside this country; even restrictively from within the country, the problem of accountability.  

We have also made it very difficult; I will like to join my Colleague from Kalangala yesterday who ridiculed this provision.  The provision of accountability.  There are people in this country like hon. Adonia Tiberondwa said yesterday or the other day that they would like to contribute; people will contribute charity to other institutions and they may not even like their names to appear.  But here the law is saying, we should account for all sources of funding and the funding must be by legal means.  I do not know whether there are other illegal means to rise funds?  I do not know whether somebody is going to break a bank in order to rise funds or he is going to launder money for funds and so on.  So, these are necessary institutions coupled with Articles 269 and 271 of the Constitution has made it practically impossible for an individual merit candidate first of all to contest and if he dares contest, to win.  

Politics demands resources, if need be basic resources and if those resources are not there, it is impossible for anybody to win an election.  In an election of this day, somebody can rig an election; the modern method of rigging is there.  You do not even have to use the primitive method, which people used to use possibly in the 60s and in the 80s.  You just have to look at three aspects; what I may call three modern methods of rigging an election.  The first one, is for you to declare one political system.  That is a sophisticated method of rigging an election.  Because if you declare one political system in which you are the chairman and so on, definitely that one is a modern method of rigging an election.  The second method of rigging an election is to control State Machinery.  

If I may go back to say what do I mean by one political system.  I am referring to what has been happening in Tanzania before multi party democracy, I am referring to the elections which were always won by Habyarimana in Rwanda, I am referring to an election which is always won for the last 30 years by Mobutu in Zaire, I am also referring to the elections which were always won in Somalia by Saidi Barre when he was in power for 20 years or so, I am referring to the type of election which has been won by Gadaffi for how many years I do not know.  That is the type of a system which really restricts people to participate fully.  The control of State Machinery is obvious to us.  Those of you who contested in the CA and those of you who have seen what is going on, political harassment by the Chiefs, Local RCs, Intelligent Network, the Police, the Armies; all those.  If a President controls all those State Machinery, surely how can he fail to win an election!  

The third one is to deprive resources for your opponents.  You are the one who will have the resources to contest an election.  You are the one with the transport, you are the one with money, you are the one with all other logistics.  But all your opponents are impoverished, how do you expect them to win an election?  And the International Community may wake up and say, you have won an election.  Let me say, because of the limited time that, on this question of free and fair elections, that Mr Chairman, we in this House must be seen not to be repeating what went wrong.  We know what went wrong in Africa, we know what went wrong in Uganda and with our leaders; but we have all sacrificed for some degree of freedom and I think that election which should be respected by the people should be seen to be generally free and fair.  But for those of us who object and oppose Articles 269 and 271 of the Constitution, nobody should stand in this House and anywhere in the country and say, you should use only democratic means to ensure that Article 269 and 271 are removed from the Constitution.  If these were so then those who went to the bush would not have gone to the bush.  A bad law like Articles 269 and 271 can be removed using all and every means and nobody can expect anybody to respect a Constitution which I am proud I did not sign, because of the provisions 269 and 271.  

Finally, Mr Chairman, on the issue of Minority Right; hon. Kabwegyere had the chance to compare this matter to the issue foxes and lions.  I will like to take it the other way round.  I will like to compare it to the sheep and the hyena.  You all know that the sheep eats grass and the hyena eats meat.  But it would be the height of folly for the majority of hyenas to compel the sheep, because the sheep are in a minority; to say you should stop eating grass and join us in eating meat.  That is not democracy.  The basis of democracy does not lie in the dictatorship of the majority, but lies in the respect of the rights of the minority.  And, unless we in Uganda and in all these countries struggling for democratization process learn that the minorities have rights which sometimes are even stronger than those of the majority, we are unlikely to make a fair law which covers everybody.  

So, Mr Chairman, I support this Bill, I have a number of amendments which I will bring up not because I have any selfish interest to see that the law is made unfavourably.  But because I believe that those amendments will improve in making a good law.  A good law which will make this country look towards peace and stability which all of us are looking forward to.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.                 

MR KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Ntungamo):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I will be very brief and concentrate myself on certain aspects of this Bill in light of the Constitution, and in light of what is going on.  We have seen amendments coming through and if I maybe allowed to show you Mr Chairman, these are the amendments generated by this Bill alone.  And I am requesting if it is acceptable, we may as well in order to synchronize them, maybe ask the Committee of this House to go through them so that we reduce the volume.  Otherwise, we will take ten days maybe to go through them.  They are too many and they are bigger than the Bill. (Laughter)  You can see the interest this thing has generated.  

Like my Colleagues I do agree, it is important that for the first time the people of Uganda are going to elect their President, instead of getting the President by proxy.  It is very important and therefore, we need to get this Bill properly done.  I would, Mr Chairman, like to address myself to few aspects of the Bill some of which are already in the amendment.  I will start at the bottom.

Clause 16; in Clause 16, there are several amendments and I am sure the Minister will accept some of those amendments which make the amendment more in line with the provisions of the Constitution.  That is, that this House should have the power to see those regulations when they are being made, passed before they are implemented.  The lawyers will structure these things in such a way as to allow that happen.  Leaving it to the Minister on his own is I think of a burdening him and since he is my friend, I do not want later at the later stage to have him to be led into total confusion saying, here lies so and so who rigged or helped to rig the elections. (Laughter)  I want to protect my Colleague from that situation.  So let the thing spread so that all of us are involved.

I want to touch Clause 15.  My main worry on Clause 15, besides the amount except that some people are rich I even see the amount is being increased.  I think this is very, very expensive.  Five the conviction plus the fact that, you are going to be locked up for five years.  Then I have another question which has remained unanswered.  Given that the constitution says that, the President after he has been elected cannot be subject to court proceedings.  What happens if there is evidence enough to show that, he should be convicted for an offence?  What happens?  He is already elected.  Then you cannot take him, you wait for impeachment and the House has 51, 49 imbalance, those in favour of the President, those against; then you cannot even impeach him, it becomes a problem.  He stays there with his sins and he may fail to go to heaven for it.  I would like a provision made as to what happens in the initial period, should a Presidential designate or elected President be the one who has messed up during the elections, what do you do?  

Now, I want to touch a more sensitive part, Clause 14.  Clause 14, I think is put in to conform with the provision in the Constitution especially the transitional clauses.  I have been telling my friends who are lawyers; as far as I am concerned actually, the Constitution of Uganda is 18 Chapters, the transitional ones.  Because you normally put the amendments at the end of a Constitution.  The transitional ones are purely transitional and I wish they would have been relegated to that and could be actually removed.  The transitional arrangements are the ones that are causing us trouble.  But I want to look at this problem in light of both the Constitution as a statement so far issued by the President of this country to whom we all have respect for.  

During the New Year’s Statement, the President is on record telling the people of Uganda, to elect people on policy.  Which means people who are going to be elected as Presidents must have Manifestos, the support and programme.  If that is true, a single man looking after 18 million people on his own, cannot produce a Manifesto or a Policy Programme, it is not possible.  If he does, then his definitely would be amounting to a dictator.  Because he would be the only one who has the knowledge, who knows what this country needs and he has no need to refer to anybody.  I am saying this is not possible.  Therefore, anybody who is going to stand, will have to have a group, he will have to have a section, he will have to have a plan, he will have to have a Movement or he will have to have a political allegiance somewhere so as to put that knowledge in order to prepare a document.  If that is the case then, I am wondering how anybody is going to produce  -(Interruption)
                                                
PROF. KABWEGYERE: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, and thank you hon. Member.  I do not think it is written anywhere in the Constitution or in this law that a Presidential Candidate cannot have a team of people he can work with to produce a Manifesto.  I am trying to understand whether this is implied anywhere.  Could the Member clarify that for example hon. Tiberondwa’s team already known could not sit down and write a manifesto. (Laughter)

MR KANYOMOZI: Immediately Mr Chairman, that happens, then that candidate is being sponsored by that group; he is no longer being a candidate on merit.  He is going to go in because of my input in that programme.  He is going to come in because of the ideas of Prof. Kabwegyere.  He is no longer a merit person, because he does not stand on merit any more.  And I am saying, Mr Chairman -(interruption)

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor that a Manifesto is a Political Statement, speaking Politically.  It is produced as a policy for running a country and policies not slogans as we said in the line of slogans of politicians.  But it must be clearly outlined to sell those policies to the people for them to love to elect a person who so produced such a Political Statement. (Applause)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  It shows what I am trying to say that given the condition, there is nobody who is going to stand on merit, people are going to stand on programme as the President has already advised us and therefore, they will be identified.  People are saying, how do I link this with Clause 14?  Because Clause 14 says ‘no person shall attempt to use a political party, tribe, religious affiliation, any sectional ground etc., or a symbol or a colour.’  Immediately you produce a manifesto which groups of people are going to be saying, we are supporting this, that is a symbol.  We are supporting this programme is a symbol.  It does not need even to have a card; it can be on White Paper.  It is by definition a symbol because that is what you are standing for.  Therefore, merit is out.  We are going with the President ‘why decision is the programme we are going to choose.’  And, therefore, once you choose a programme, it helps -(Laughter)- Mr Chairman, therefore, it is even important to realise this.  

In that line, if this Clause is to remain in the Bill, then it needs to be modified so that it includes things like Plan, Movement, and Political Organisation, everything that is of that nature.  Then it becomes all encompassing and it removes any anomaly other people may fail.

Let me also turn to an issue in the Constitution, Mr Chairman.  The Constitution provides that after 9 months on saba saba days as I said before, the NRM will end.  If that is true and I think it is, then we need to know what else we are going to elect on.  You cannot then stand up and say, I am electing on a programme called a Movement.  Because that one will await being defined by the Parliament which is going to be elected.  We do not have that Parliament yet.  It is the Parliament which will design what type of Movement we are going to have.  So, you cannot elect on a Movement which we have not yet defined.  The former Chairman of the CA is here.  You cannot elect on nothing.  Let me, however, say that you can elect a person on individual, I know that.  In America people in different Political Parties are now busy selling themselves although they are democrats and what have you.  What this provision in the Constitution has done is to deny us a right to have primaries to choose two or three candidates who are going to face each other in the elections under programmes already known.  

Given that NRM is going to end in 9 months, given that you cannot stand on individual merit, I think we need to do something.  Either we are now grouped to come out with programmes of their own, with a Name, with a Symbol, with manifestos, and sell these programmes, manifestos or Policies to people; other wise I can see a problem of us electing people with nothing and it becomes a problem for this country.

Mr Chairman, let me touch some other general issues.  The general issues in Clause 6, section 3; a Candidate shall not hold any public meeting under this section unless he has given intentions that he is going.’  I thought, immediately a candidate is nominated, his intention to stand is known and he should be free to go and hold campaigns anywhere.  He does not need to work out a programme or a notice!  He can inform the police, he can arrest.  Because Mr Chairman, supposing you are the candidate; you will be passing in Nakawa immediately you stop depending on how people know you, hundreds of people will stand up and you will start talking.  You will not have time to give a notice to anybody.  And if you do not have a Policeman, they may arrest you for having not notified anybody.  

So, I am saying, this one I do not see any need for it.  Once you have been nominated properly, you should start and campaign anywhere and everywhere -(Interjection)- any time you so wish.  Not anyhow I would not believe that.  If he does it anyhow, that is his problem.  Mr Chairman, Clause 4.  I would like instead of ‘ all candidates’.  I would like it to be changed maybe to ‘each candidate shall be given equal time’ although I am worried!  I do not know how that should be insured.  Because if I am an incumbent, I have an extra time and it becomes a bit of a problem.  

Can I go to Clause 7 please; section 2; sub-clause 1; this thing of a Commission providing security to protect its candidates.  I find that one a bit very difficult.  Can you imagine under the law of Uganda arm hon. Adonia Tiberondwa is a candidate or Kanyamuhanga is a candidate and he is going stand.  If Kanyamuhanga even for asking a question is being sent away from RC by other people, I can see a problem.  Unless a person is going to be provided with security, it becomes very difficult.  I cannot imagine for example if the -(interruption)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would very much like the presenter of the Bill to inform this august House -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Give information please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Clarification, Mr Chairman.  The point I am trying to get clarification on is whether somebody can hire KGB, or one of those American Security Forces (Laughter)

MR KANYOMOZI: Mr Chairman, what I am saying is, we know for example if Francis Okwenje was standing as a candidate and hon. Col. Otafiire was asked to be his bodyguard; because under the Army Rules he can be called to be his bodyguard.  You can see the problems that one would say; so I think maybe a candidate should be given the option.  

Section 2, the Commission shall with approval of a Legislature give facilities.  I am reading that section with a section which gives a person who is already holding the office other facilities.  And I think I would rather qualify that; and say the Commission shall give equal or same facilities to those candidates who are not holding public offices.  Why am I saying Mr Chairman?  The one who is already in office is already catered for because we are saying, he will be free to use everything that is ordinarily associated with his office.  So, he should not have additional facilities, because he already has any way excess facilities.  He has helicopter, he has cars, he has ‘mizinga’ and he has everything.  So, what other facilities can you add on?  So it should be; that one should apply to those people who are not holding public offices.  Because then it would look fair, they are being assisted.  The other one is assisted by the law already because of the virtue of his office.  

I think that should be taken into account.  Section 8, Mr Chairman, subsection 2; I have already touched on it.  I am saying if the person is already by virtue of his office and even if you put it in the law, he is already holding it.  You are not going to stop as people have said.  You are not going to ask the President now if he did not have a car to say, you cannot use the official cars.  It is just not possible!  He is still a President until the people of Uganda decide otherwise.  And, therefore, if that is the case, I do not see any need for the provision.  And in any case, even if we did; it is going to be very difficult to prove to anybody that, this time when you went to Kajara or to Bwashameire, you were not on official duty.  It is very difficult.  What are you going to do to the donation?  If the President comes to a constituency ‘X’ and decides to give 4 million to the incumbent; are you going to say no, No!  That is bribery?  No!  It is a part of his ordinarily duties which he has been doing for the last 10 years for example.  So, what do you do? Just forget about it, do not put it in the law.  It is not necessary.  Because the President is going to donate buses, he is going to donate iron sheets, even Ministers can donate bicycles; and everything that is possible.  So, because it is ordinarily in the things that they do or they have been doing.  If you want to change that which we have not done to introduce a provision we have been providing these monies on donation and also monies under sub-programme of 7071; it is going to be very difficult.  So, let us not pretend that we are leveling ground by putting this thing in the law. 

Clause 9, subsection 1; I am only worried about the time being given.  Say giving such time as he thinks reasonable.  I am saying the Commission should know in advance what is a reasonable time and we state it categorically.  I am saying either within seven days or a maximum of 14 days and we leave it to that.  I would now like to turn to the last part and conclude.  I found a bit of difficulty in section 11, subsection 10; ‘where the Chief Justice in consultation with the Attorney General make rules providing for the conduct of petitions and such.’  I do not know.  I am just being a student of law; not being a lawyer.  I do not know whether that one does since the Parliament is the one supposed to regulate elections.  Whether those regulations which are going to affect petitions should not be known to this House.  

Section 12, Mr Chairman.  The Commission directing.  If the Commission is to direct, then it is taking over the responsibility of this House.  I think that section 12, should go out.  Because the provisions in the Constitution are such that, it is this House which should decide.   The direction given by the Commission on its own, goes contrary to the provisions in the constitution and I am suggesting that section should go.  

Mr Chairman, let me sum up then.  The President whom we are going to elect, we are going to elect him not because of his boldness, or his glasses, we are going to elect him on basis of policy.  I have a bold so I could be maybe a candidate, since I have not declared and I have glasses.  We are going to elect a Presidential Candidate on terms of policy.  Secondly, to be able to make a policy, you need to consult.  Therefore, you are of necessity going to have a group or a section or supporters.  And to identify those supporters who are different from his supporters, there must be symbolism.  And that symbolism of necessity means that people are just going to be in groups.  

I am saying, let us lift the veil, forget the provision in here which has transitory anyway.  Because as I said, the Constitution ends on Chapter 18, where even the provisions of the amendment serve.  Beyond that, these other things are meaningless.  The other part; if you are going to insist that nobody is going to have a symbol or a party or a group to be identified with, then define in Clause 14, that, that spectrum covers everything from Political affiliation, Religious affiliation, Movement affiliation, Organisation, anything so that everybody is clear, that would make the ground more leveled and more attainable since the elections are normally on policy and not on individual.  I thank you.

DR LUYOMBYA (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand in support of the Bill.  Mainly because, this Bill is depicting the fundamental change which the NRM promised when they took office.  Mr Chairman, first of all the NRM was committed to peaceful change of power and it was in their programme that the NRM Government will end with the making of the Constitution, and it will respect the out come of that Constitution and will hand power over to whoever that Constitution will propose.  

Therefore, this Bill is an example of what a truthful government should do.  It is also fundamental that, the President is going to be elected as a National President rather than a party President or a President affiliation to one group.  Having said that, Article 4, section 2 talks of at least somebody having support in two thirds of the Districts of Uganda.  Having 39 districts as of now, it means if somebody gets support in 20 districts, he can be nominated as a candidate. Since we are looking for a National President, I think this figure is too low in reality.  Assuming that there are eight districts in the Buganda Region and there are three districts in West Nile; that is 11.  It means somebody can afford to neglect looking for any supporters from that area of a country and yet be nominated as a candidate.  I would rather like to see that, this law puts it down that, somebody should have supporters from all districts.  If the figure of 100 is too big, we can reduce.

DR MAGEZI: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that under Chapter 7; the Executive of the Uganda Constitution, Article 103, section 2; it clearly says  ‘ it can only be nomination if supported by 100 voters in each of at least two thirds of all the districts in Uganda.’  To change that would be a Constitutional amendment over which we cannot participate at the present moment.

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, I am very aware of what the Member is informing me about.  I feel it is maybe a matter of English; but it says ‘at least’; not ‘at most’.  So as long as the law we are creating does not go beyond that, we can propose in this law to go beyond two thirds.

DR BESIGYE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Indeed maybe there is an element of English.  But I think what the Constitution establishes are qualifications; and once qualifications are established in the Constitution, you cannot raise the qualifications from what has been said to higher qualifications; neither can you lower them.  Those are the qualifications.  Because if you raised it to all districts, that would be higher qualifications than is provided by the Constitution.  If I vote in at least two thirds as is provided for by the Constitution and your law says all, which one will be respected?  Will it be your all or the two thirds of the Constitution?  Therefore, Mr Chairman; I would like to inform the hon. speaker, that hon. Magezi’s point is valid.  That you cannot have qualifications which are higher than are provided by the Constitution. (Applause)

DR LUYOMBYA:  Mr Chairman, a Constitution is a guideline and other laws can be made out of the provision of the Constitution.  I am saying that the Constitution did not say that, it will absolutely be two thirds; it is saying at least.  I will leave Members to judge that.  I will like to again remind Members that, it is fundamental to build culture. We shall do a service to democracy if in this interim period we build the culture of tolerance and the culture of competition for position.  I would like to see that as many people as eligible compete for the position of Presidency and I would like to request everybody in this House and Ugandans at large to support this sort of culture.  That we should not harass or tease Presidential Hopefuls (Applause)  

But rather let us try to encourage this competition.  However, people should be educated on how to separate boys and men from the lad.  Even in politics there are men and there are boys.  I agree that any government runs on a programme and operates a programme based on the needs of the people of the time.  Therefore, I would like to see that, enough civic education is done to sensitize the voters as to what the needs of the people are.  If it is poverty, then we would expect the Presidential candidates and hopefuls to come up with programmes which they can show to the people as to how they are going to answer to that plight.  

As far as making programmes is concerned, I do not quite agree with hon. Kanyomozi that it is only a group of people which can put up a programme.  An individual can initiate a programme but then he sells it to others.  He may be assisted in modifying and polishing up that programme but it is possible that an individual comes up on his own merit to initiate a programme.  

Since I am talking about political cultures, in this interim period, let us try to see that individual leaders stop driving systems.  It should be rather the systems driving the leaders.  

Looking at article 13, it is talking about punishing somebody who has tried to be false or untruthful.  

Hon. Mayanja in his presentation talked about election punishments rather than the sort of punishments provided in this law. Even in this bill, I am not quite happy that if somebody tells lies and tries to misguide the country, it would be enough to fine somebody a million shillings.  Having done that, he can around and raise that one million shillings.  But I think we should make this law at least where Presidential elections are involved and very stringent.  It is common knowledge that rigging an election once has laid to civil strife. Therefore in this bill, I would like to see sentences of jail rather than fines.  Thank you very much.

MISS LAGADA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  My contribution will not be long.  I will touch on very few clauses but before I do so, allow me to make a comment on a presentation by hon. Omara Atubo this afternoon.  I really felt perturbed and up to now, I keep hoping that my understanding of what he said is wrong; when he stated that for people like him and others to be told that article 259 and 271 should only be changed using constitutional means is not acceptable; and he went ahead and asked, if that was the case, why did people go to the bush?  

I hope I understood wrongly because hon. Omara Atubo is a lawyer that I really respect and he is a democrat and he took part in making the constitution which made provisions for those two articles.  Hon. Omara Atubo was the chairman of the rules committee.  He set the rules which guided us in making the constitution.  I therefore find it rather chilling that in this House where we make the rules to govern this country, a man of his calibre can actually suggest or imply that there are some people in this country inspite of all what we have been through, inspite of all the efforts, there are people who are still considering taking unconstitutional roads.  I feel it is appalling Mr Chairman.

I also want to make one more comment on what he said.  He gave us very nicely and I believe he is correct because I respect him Mr Chairman; the modern methods of rigging an election.  He told us that one of them is having one political system.  I presume that by implication, he was saying since the citizens of this country decided through the Constituent Assembly to be ruled under a movement political system, we are therefore being ruled under one political system.  As I said, my brother is a democrat and I believe he does respect the choice of the people of this country for the time being.  Therefore I trust he will respect the choice of the people of this country.  

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I do not want to make a substantive contribution but let me inform my dear Sister from Apac and the House that historically, a person or a group of people who believe that a particular law is bad, they are entitled to use the best means possible to remove that law. There is a constitutional provision which I know very well for removing this or for changing the constitution.  That is why we are here and we are hoping that sooner and not later, the best Parliament also or even in the next referendum, we shall not allow these articles 269, 271 and other obnoxious provisions to continue in the constitution.  But if constitutional means fail, then my Sister should rest assured that those who strongly object to articles 269 and 271 and others will have no other alternative but not to use constitutional means.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman and I thank hon. Lagada for giving way.  I just wanted to respond to the statement just made by my very good Friend and Learned Friend hon. Omara Atubo who has engaged himself in a very delicate exercise where he did not use carefully lawful means where he dropped the word lawful and he said that historically, you can use means and he refused deliberately to use the word lawful constitutional means.  He then went on to make statements which if, they are taken at their face value can actually be totally misleading and would not be palatable even to him.  I wanted to just assist him and remind him that article 271 - because he has been quoting article 269 and 271.  Article 271(2) has provided a constitutional means to solve the question of political systems.  It states: “Two years before the expiry of the term of the first Parliament elected under this constitution, any person shall be free to canvass for public support for a political system of his or her choice for the purpose of a referendum.  

During the last month of the fourth year of the term of Parliament referred to in clause two of this article, a referendum shall be held to determine the political system the people of Uganda wish to adopt.”  Surely is hon. Omara Atubo saying that he is impatient for the two years and he is dropping lawful means and he is asking and appealing to voices of reason in a democratic exercise, to use means that are unconstitutional to remove this constitution when we are preparing to usher this country to a better road than we found it?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MISS LAGADA:  Mr Chairman, I want to thank hon. Elly Karuhanga for that information he has given.  I hope that my Brother and people who think like him will feel comfortable knowing that the CA in its wisdom did provide constitutional means of making changes; and I want to repeat what has been said elsewhere that in politics, you are never a permanent minority.  Today you may feel that you are a minority, your rights are being trodden upon but imagine how happy you are going to be tomorrow when the people of Uganda choose to go under multiparty, how you will manage to keep these movement people in place!  How they will not disturb you will be full blasting multipartyism.  Surely that should comfort him now and he should be patient and wait for 1999 or there about when he will be free to canvass for change in this country.  

I have been listening to contributions in this House and it appears there are so many people who believe that it is only those in government who can rig an election.  My Brother again told us other ways of rigging election.  I want to state here that it is not only government that can rig an election; that even people who are not in government at that particular moment of election do and can rig an election.  Let me give you a very good example.  

In the last elections when the Constituency election was going on, I had the opportunity to be in Lira Municipality.  I want to state here seriously that in Lira Municipality in the last CA elections, there was rigging of election but it was not done by government. It was done by those who were out of government.  At the end of the day, I took the then DPC and he stated definitely that in Lira Municipality there has not been free and fair elections.  How did they do it?  There was intimidation by the people who were anti-movement candidates.  I want to state here that there were so many Ugandans who were not Langi, who were other tribes and who had gone there for so many reasons; trading and what not, who did not vote because there were certain people who put road-blocks on the way to the voting places and intimidated these people into going back home and not going to cast their votes.  Was that government which rigged that election Mr Chairman?

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the Lady on the Floor is making a very important observation.  It is true at the end of the day, people in Lira Municipality jubilated that the elections were free and fair but on the ground, At the distance of 100 metres away from the ballot box, people were around and they were waiting and whenever you ticked a person who is not a Cecilia Ogwal, they would throw stones on you there and then and this really happened and those who had televisions in their houses, this thing was televised, how people were being beaten and that was what was free and fair in my constituency.  (Laughter).

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, Sir, three days before election to the CA, letters purported to have been written by Obote were circulated in Lango to the effect that only those candidates mentioned in the letter should be elected and those were the candidates preferred by Obote.  That was the wisdom of these very senior riggers.  Thank you.  (Laughter)

MISS LAGADA:  Mr Chairman, I believe all that information given to me and to the House goes to prove the point that indeed, there are experts in rigging elections and it is not only government that is the expert.  There are other experts at rigging elections.  

Let me now proceed to clause 15.  I have heard Members saying that this clause should be scrapped.  In fact I think it was hon. Abu Mayanja who said it is a law that cannot be enforced because in the last CA election such provision was made and it was not enforced.  

But Mr Chairman, allow me to disagree with him and other people of such thinking.  The fact that a law is difficult to enforce simply means that we should refine it and make it enforceable.  But to say that we should scrap it, I think we would be opening ourselves to a lot of problems. Allow me to remind the Members who have such thinking of what Robert Vult said in a man for all seasons and this is a play that has since 1960 when it was first staged has remained popular up to now.  Thomas Moore was arguing with a young man called Roper which Roper thought because a particular law did not allow certain things to happen, the law should be scrapped and Moore had this answer; he told him and said, ‘…and when the last law was down and the devil turned round on you, where will you hide Roper?’  Do you really think you could stand up right in the winds that would blow then?  If you scrap clause 15, I want to ask the hon. Members here that if you have no law against bribery, where will you hide?  Because you will be the victim of this bribery.  

Just before Christmas, I was with hon. Wanjusi Wasieba in Kitgum north and he told those people that in Mbale, there are people who are swearing that they are going to buy the voters cards from the supporters of their opponents at as much at UShs 50,000.  
Yesterday, I read in the paper that there were people buying voters cards in Kabale.  Supposing we scrap this law and there were people who came around and had their money and were stopping other people from going to vote or buying voters cards, which law will protect those of us who have no money?  Are we trying to say we should leave this law so that whoever has money can do whatever he wants; he can bribe all the voters?  Are we trying to sell our country to the highest bidder?  And the highest bidder, where has he got money from? 

In some constituencies in Apac District right now as I am talking, things are pouring in and not always from government or from movement supporters.  

AN HON. MEMBER:  They are rumours.

MISS LAGADA:  They are not rumours because they are being given free wagons of mabaati stored; 5000 iron sheets somewhere.  Now if you have been there all these years, and you have not been able to even make a contribution of 100 iron sheets to a school and suddenly you are able to give 100, or 200 to every school, are you telling me that money is out of your pocket?  I will go ahead and say let whoever is going to campaign surely declare the sources of his funding.  I have a very strong suspicion that in this coming election, we are going sell this country; beaus that man who is giving you the money, who you are saying does not want his name to appear as having funded you, why should he want to fund you in secret?  What is his agenda?  After he has given you all that money, what is there for Ugandans tomorrow?  

Mr Chairman, I will go ahead and support the provisions of clause seven that people declare their sources of funding.  Ugandans have a right to know where your money, or the 5000 iron sheets are coming from.  If Lagada is going to give 50 iron sheets, yes, that is believable because you can imagine that I may have UShs 50,000 somewhere.  As a Member of Parliament, I can afford UShs 500,000 but if I certainly went and gave 100 there, 200 in the other places, 200 bags of cement there, all over the constituency, where have I got that money from Mr Chairman? 

Somebody here talked of bicycles.  I want to assure you that at least for the bicycles, I do not believe that any individual said, these are my bicycles.  I presume this was referring to the bicycles that were given to the offices of RC 3 chairmen or local councils through chairmen, women councils and youth councils.  I believe they were given to offices and I want to assure Members here not to panic because in my own sub-county, the chairperson women council three is a campaign manager for one of the Presidential candidates who happens to be hon. Ssemogerere and he is using the bicycle that was supplied to the office of women council.  So why are you panicking?  It is perfectly in order.  You see, they were given to offices.  But at least they are not given to individuals.  

I would like to support clause six but I would like to add that the best thing that happened to this country I believe was the CA elections and he best part of it I believe was the joint candidates meetings. That was the time when politicians who believe that telling lies is their right were for the first fixed.  Because if you wanted to tell a lie about me Lagada, tell it when I am hearing and I answer you there and then.  I believe that politicians should be responsible for their words.  


There are so many people who believe that politics is dirty and you can say anything and create any propaganda to be able to win an election.  But I believe that as leaders of society, as politicians, we should be responsible for our words more than anybody else and, therefore, I really feel that in this bill, we should provide at least for free joint meetings.  I would like all these Presidential candidates to at least appear together to each district headquarters.  I want to ask these people spontaneous questions and see how they answer.  They will provide manifestos but as has been said, a manifesto may be the work of so many people.  How will I know that this President I am going to elect, tomorrow he will go to the United Nations and he will be asked a question and he will not embarrass me because he is not able to think first?  

So, let us provide for a few of these meetings.  Let us test these men who want to rule this country or to lead us.  I also hope there will be some Presidential candidates who are women.  My Brother here says he would like to compete with one.

 Mr Chairman, lastly I want to comment on clause seven.  The Commission providing security.  I have heard people opposing that provision; that it will be too much for the commission and where will the commission get its security?  But I want to support that provision and I think it is a good provision.  Why?  Because I believe that this coming election is not just going to be about winning.  It is going to be about how a person wins.  It is going to be about the credibility of the whole election process.  Whoever wins, will Ugandans and the world agree that that person won fairly?  Now you imagine, if each one provided his own security and we know how funny Ugandans are, what guarantee do we have that some candidate who sees that he is not getting votes is not going to steal to get sympathy votes by maybe staging his own accident?  You can easily stage with your own people to either overturn your car or somebody to take a funny shot at it which will not kill you anyway and the populace will then say, you see, they want to kill this man because he is popular and so many people will give you sympathy votes.  

Let there be one organisation in the names of the commission to protect these people.  I believe it is in the interest of this present government to make sure that elections are free and fair and seem to be free and fair.  Mr Chairman, I thank you.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the bill on the Floor of this House.  I would like to start by supporting the amendment proposed by the Uganda Law Society in clause two and as also circulated by hon. Ongom that the Minister here should be the Minister who is in charge of Justice and Constitutional Affairs but the Minister responsible for Presidential and Parliamentary elections.  

On the qualifications of the candidate, I would like to be educated on the ceiling of the age where the President should not, at the time of polling be more than 75 years old.  What if he is elected and he is 74 years and ten months, are we going to have a bye-election thereafter?  Because when he clocks 75 -(Interruptions)

Also, touching on the elections of the President, had it not been the constitutional matter where we cannot right now talk of amendment, I do see that giving in or whoever is going to be a candidate only 100 people in the a district is a bit too low.  In Lira, we are about 500,000 people and also in Apac.  That means that two districts put together is over one million people and of these I imagine, we may have about 400,000 voters and if this is the case, it sounds a mockery to only have 100 people saying that well, in this district, we would say that so and so can lead this country. Had it not been for the sympathy that I have for Kalangala, I would wish that we have that President, whoever aspires to be a President like my Colleague and my Brother upstairs in the gallery, should be able to raise 20,000 people in a district.  

Also, if we are to talk of the refund before we talk about it, the Presidency is a very high office and that office is very demanding.  Even a figure of two million shillings is too low a figure to be talked about because he aspires to lead these people and if it warrants that whoever wants to lead should be poor so that he can raise only two million shillings, then all of us can qualify and who is going to support all of us?  That is why we would like to make a difference Mr Chairman, that for one to want to be a President, a token figure of 50 million shillings would do -(Interruptions)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend who is on the Floor that the two million shillings we are saying as a deposit is not for purpose of limiting the number of candidates; because I know among the politicians, if you take it by value, I think they are apparently the poorest.  There are Ugandans who have much money and do not want to go to politics.  I think it is a clear indication to make it even clearer when you have the support of people of up to 25 percent, the money is given back. So it is not a fundraising drive.  Thank you.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think it is important to know the purpose of this money we are talking about.  Is it for proving that the candidate is a man of means?  What sort of seriousness are we talking about?  After he has given it away, probably he is left with nothing.  Mr Chairman, I will even suggest that nothing at all is taken from the candidate.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Well, I was putting this -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend hold the Floor of the House that though my hon. Friend Mayengo has thrown a question to us, this question of having to pay money in order to qualify to become elected is wrongly placed.  Why?  In history in this House, we elected the late Sir Edward Kabaka Mutesa the second here without money, the kyabazinga of Busoga Mr Nadiope without money, Rutakirwa from Kabale, nothing.  Alright, ourselves here when we first came to the House no money was paid.  Why buy Presidency? (Laughter)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Well, I would like to thank all these pieces of information passed to me by my hon. Colleagues.  The buying of Presidency is the showing of seriousness.  Mr Chairman, there was talk about security and facilitation.  Government is in place right now and we have the police.  One reason why the term of NRC was extended was to have enough police on the ground and I believe now we have and for people to say why do I not have one who should be protecting me is to doubt the government which is in place.  I have a living example.  T

he Rt. hon. Prime Minister, hon. Kintu Musoke is still being guarded by the same Madi who was chief security guard to hon. Adyebo and he is from Arua and as I know it, he protected the Rt. hon. Prime Minister very well during that accident on Masaka Road and whatever we are doing here, I think we should only know that we are not in Mozambique where half of the people were in the bush, neither are we in Angola.  We are in an independent Uganda where also an interim government to put facilities in place has been here for the last ten years and for us again to begin talking even of facilitation, in 1992, Americans elected their President.  Bush was in power and Clinton was elected.  Incidentally, I was there in that year and during the election time and they were three.  Here we are talking about facilitation.  Rozz Perot was not facilitated and he was running with those other guys although eventually, he slowed down and pulled out.  

But the issue that I am trying to stress here is that to talk about facilitation, we are almost showing to this very first world who are talking about democracy that whereas they can within their own means go ahead and carry out their elections, when it comes to the third world, we should be facilitated by government.  To me, I would hold to the idea of security for all of them and no harassment on any person because these are free citizens of Uganda who are going full length in the country to try to let people also see those intrinsic values which they may have; which otherwise if they were not allowed to go round, we would not actually have known them although we may know them for the first time and as we know them they come back and fail honourably.  

Mr Chairman, there is this clause on the death of a candidate. We are being told here that should one of the running candidates die, and then the elections will not take place on the day that it was slated for.  If anything, fresh or more candidates are to be recruited.  The Electoral Commission had already agreed on the candidates.  Now to give room again to people who otherwise did not want to or did not intend to participate as Presidential candidates, I think this would be a bit unfair.  Why do we not do well with those who are already in the field and participating?  I also agree in clause 10 with all the other people who have contributed that 48 hours seem a bit too long; because for example, we have got radio calls in all district headquarters.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to clear doubt about a suggestion which is very suspicious.  I think that provision is wise.  Why I say it is wise is that if there are going to be two Presidential candidates and if I want to pass unopposed in the middle of the election, I can cunningly organise for the other one so that I pass unopposed.  So that provision is being given so that even if I do that trick, I still have a chance of receiving another opposition.  I think that one is a more secure line than saying do away with it.  Thank you very much.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  I think seeing that idea Mr Chairman, I tend to buy it right now. (Laughter) I would like to say that I am proud of this supreme law, the constitution which took 16 months to be brought in place and I am very, very happy making references to it and there is one thing, whoever will become President or whoever will come to this Parliament is free not to hold and that will be the bible or the Quoran but he will not make any mistake of not saying he will preserve and uphold and protect the constitution of this land; and if people who have not signed this constitution and they have written and they would like to come here, what will they do for the avoidance of doubt? What will they say when they are here?  (Laughter) With this, I beg to conclude.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I sought permission from you to contribute so that I may react to some rather misleading - if I may be allowed to say so - submissions which were made in respect of the provisions of the constitution which if they go uncorrected, we might mislead the public; more particularly the submissions of hon. Kanyomozi which tended to mislead particularly with regard to the position of the movement as regards to the forth coming elections and for the future.  

But I will start by referring to hon. Kanyomozi’s statement that the constitution does not extend to the transitional provisions.  According to him, it stops somewhere on chapter 18 and that chapter 19 is purely transitional and therefore it is not part of the constitution.  That is not true.  First of all, let me say this, it is not true to say that the whole of chapter 19 is transitional.  Actually it was because we were economizing on words.  Otherwise, the correct title of chapter 19 should have been immediate and transitional provisions.  Why do I say this?  

There are some provisions of that chapter which immediately upon the coming in force of the constitution make for permanent provision of certain institutions.  If you look at article 265 of the constitution which is part of the transitional provisions, you will see an immediate provision there which says, “the supreme court and the high court in existence immediately before the coming into force of this constitution shall be taken to have been established under this constitution and shall perform the functions of the supreme court and high court as specified in chapter eight of this constitution.”  That is what we call in law or drafting an immediate provision.  It immediately comes into force and creates a situation which if not covered would have left a lacuna.  The high court and Supreme Court created or continued by 265 are not transitional.  They continue and forever.  If you look at 266, it is also an immediate provision. A Justice of the Supreme Court or a Judge of the high court holding office immediately before the coming into force of this constitution shall continue to hold office as if appointed to that office under this constitution.  So, the chief justice and all the other judges immediately upon the coming into force of the constitution continued to be judges of the high court and supreme court.  That is not a transitional provision.  It is a permanent feature of the constitution.  Transitional is this.  Look at 263.  “Notwithstanding anything in this constitution, the government of the National Resistance Movement existing immediately before the coming into force of this constitution in this chapter referred to as the NRM Government shall continue in the office until a new government is elected in accordance with this constitution.”  That is the transitional provision.  It feels a gap between the day of promulgation and the day of swearing in of a new President.  So chapter 19 Mr Chairman, I do not have to bore Members with many examples.  It is not just a useless chapter which is not part of the constitution.  Hon. Kanyomozi also said – (Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of clarification.  In view of the very able explanation given by the hon. Minister and former Chairman of the Constituent Assembly, I would like him to maybe make it clear to this House as to whether this Parliament continues with the powers it had before this constitution came into force.  I am particularly referring to the power of this House to make amendment to this constitution; because from what you have said, it seems as if certain things can continue and then we are told that the Parliament cannot continue with these powers.  In the same breath, I would also like to hear from the hon. Minister as to whether the President at the moment is in order to appoint ambassadors without approval of this House.  (Applause)

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, for me I am making a contribution on the elections law.  (Laughter)  But the hon. Member is trying to divert me into other arguments.

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Minister without portfolio in order to mislead the House that hon. Kanyomozi stated that this constitution which I have and which everybody enjoys to have - hon. Kanyomozi stated clearly that there were only 18 chapters in the constitution but from article 263 is transitional.  Now, the lawyers cannot deceive us because the heading here says there are transitional provisions.  

MR WAPAKHABULO:  Thank you Mr Chairman for giving me the chance to continue where I left off.  I was saying in response to hon. Tiberondwa that whereas I would have liked to indulge in an argument with him on the matters he raises, they do not immediately impinge on the subject matter which is the electoral law and I was responding to provisions which hon. Kanyomozi was saying that with 263 particularly which said the elections provided for this article shall be held within nine months from the promulgation of the constitution.  He was saying that the movement system ends on saba-saba day.  That is not true if you read the constitution properly.  Article 69 sets out the various political systems that the people of Uganda may choose.  There is movement, the multiparty and any other democratic system.  That is on page 45 of the black book.  

Article 70 Mr Chairman, describes the movement political system; as to its characteristics but then it says in clause two of that article, that Parliament may create organs under the movement political system and define their roles.  That does not mean that the political system called movement will not exist merely because the organs have not been defined.  So, that assumption was wrong.  

Similarly, Mr Chairman, article 71 talks about the multiparty political system and also goes ahead and describes it as to it is supposed to do or the nature of it so that really the two systems are described.  Now what it goes on to say is that the Parliament may make laws regulating the political party system.  It does not mean that before Parliament makes that law therefore the political party systems are not there.  The two systems are there except that Parliament is given additional powers to actually describe them further and define their roles; so that when we come to article 270, it is actually saving the existing political parties.  It says, “until Parliament has made a law, the political parties or organisations in existence immediately before the coming into force of the constitution shall continue” - hence the continuation of my brother Tiberondwa being on the executive of his party because 270 has saved it.   And then 271 also goes ahead and saves the movement and says, “until such time as but notwithstanding article 69, the first Presidential, Parliamentary and Local Government and other public elections after the promulgation of this constitution shall be held under the movement political system.”  

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  I want to seek clarification on this issue.  We are talking about movement system of government.  Understandably, the movement type of government is the one NRM has formed.  It has not been spelt clearly under that law that the movement type of government we are talking about is the one formed by NRM.  I now want, after the election, should hon. Tiberondwa win the election and becomes the President of this country - I am assuming he wins, after this coming election he becomes the President of Uganda, do we expect him to continue with the movement type of government until Ugandans go for a referendum?  And how is that provision granted?

MR WAPAKABULO:  Yes, the question is quite simple.  President Tiberondwa would be the President of the movement type of government.  (Laughter)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, Sir, the hon. Minister on the Floor has just said that article 270 saved political parties and therefore saved Tiberondwa to continue.  Now if Tiberondwa and his party were saved to continue, why do we not operate also?  (Laughter)

MR WAPAKABULO:  Of course I will draw hon. Tiberondwa’s attention to 269 of the constitution.  They will continue except for certain activities which they cannot do because of the wishes of the people of Uganda that we should have full blast political party activity when they have so declared by way of a referendum. But what is available to hon. Tiberondwa is the provisions which hon. Elly Karuhanga read out earlier; being the President of a movement type of government but not being comfortable with it.  He will nevertheless have to wait, open up three years from the beginning and then conduct a referendum and by the time he finishes his five years, it is possible that he will be re-elected then under a political party system rather than the Movement. Otherwise, the provisions as they are now, that is what is available.

MR KIIZA BESIGYE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to give information to the hon. Minister and most specifically, hon. Tiberondwa, that the provisions of Article 74 talk about change of a political system by referenda or elections.  This is at any point in time, that a referendum shall be held for purposes of changing a political system:

(a) If requested by a resolution, supported by more than a half of all Members of Parliament or,

(b) If requested by a resolution, supported the majority of the total membership of each of at least one half of all District Councils or,

(c) If requested through a petition to the Electoral Commission by at least one tenth of the registered voters from each of at least two thirds of the constituencies for which representatives are required and directly elected under paragraph (a) of Clause 1 of Article 78 of this Constitution and two, the political system may also be changed by the elected representatives of the people in Parliament and District Councils by resolution of Parliament supported by not less than two thirds of all the members of Parliament upon a petition to it, supported by not less than two thirds of the majority or the total membership of each of at least a half of the district Councils.

Therefore, at any point in time, even before the stipulated periods, if these majorities are martialled in Parliament, in the District Councils or in the voters themselves, then a political system can change.

MR WAPAKABULO:  The hon. Member would have been correct if he had gone on to read three of the same Articles.  The Resolutions or petitions for the purposes of changing political systems shall be taken only in the fourth year of the term of any Parliament.  (Laughter)  So, President Tiberondwa will be President of the Movement type of Government until there is a referendum or there has been a resolution in the fourth year of the next Parliament.  So, that is what I wanted to clarify.  

So, really Mr Chairman, there is no problem; what will cease to be in place in July will be the NRM Government or the NRM Government and its organs.  After that, the Movement or the political party systems will apply in accordance with the other provisions of the Constitution and the election by virtue of the provisions I have read out, the next election will be held under a Movement type of arrangement and that will then give way to the results of the referendum that will be held in the fourth year and 74 is intended to be therefore, a provision which will enable generations from time to time, to make up their minds should they wish to change from one system to another.  It is an enabling and empowering provision.  I wanted to clarify those two points, because I thought the impression created was not quite correct.  

Also, my learned brother did mention something about minority right; that actually the restriction on certain activities or political parties and particularly the provisions relating to the nature of governance in the next five years is a suppression of minority rights.  My reading of the Constitution is quite different, Mr Chairman.  It is saying in one provision that formation of political parties is guaranteed and, therefore, the right to create associations called political parties is guaranteed and, therefore, the right of association to that extent is guaranteed.

Two; it says, one party state or one party arrangement is prohibited and therefore, a monolithic arrangement where, if you are not a member of a political party, the only political party, your political rights are suppressed; like we had our neighbours, where, if you are not a member of TANU, you could neither stand for Parliament nor stand for any Parliamentary or Local Council elections, that is prohibited.  Therefore, with the right to form associations called parties and any other associations, because, I think sometimes, we do mislead ourselves. The right of association does not only relate to the right of association for the purposes of capturing political power, there are many rights of associations.  You associate to form Cooperative Societies, you associate to form Express Football Club, you associate to form all sorts of things, freedom of association.  The only difference in this case, is the question of having associated in political parties, does that give you the right to determine the manner in which we should be ruled as Ugandans?  In other words, you can associate, even form Movements, but having done so, you should not then assume that merely because you have associated, therefore, Ugandans should be ruled in accordance with what you have wished; because, the right to choose as to how I should be ruled, is the right of all of us.  So, we might say, between now and the next five years, you rule us together, all of you come together and form a Government of national unity or a Movement Government or a Government of one party, but that is now prohibited.  Therefore, the right to form parties and political party activity is there. What only thing has happened are two; the right to choose the manner in which we should be governed is left with the people and two, the mere fact, that we have come together in association does not give you an absolute right to disturb the arrangement of peace and whatever we have and, therefore, you can say, within the Constitution, that while you are associating, please, do not do one, two, three, for the time being, because, if you do, it will prejudice our peace and tranquility, it is not in public good for you to indulge in a situation which  lead to battles in the streets and we walk backwards from where we came from.  This is how I read this Constitution.  It is not saying, there shall be no right of association.  

So, I thought Mr Chairman, I should only make those few observations, as I support the Bill, I have nothing drastic; I have one or two amendments coming and I hope that the House will support me when I move them.  Thank you.

THE VICE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Tuesday, next week, at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.35 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday, 23 January 1996.)

