Friday, 14th January, 1994

The Council met at 9.30 a.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice-Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE MINISTER FOR COMMERCE, COOPERATIVES AND MARKETING (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I propose to start off from where we ended yesterday in order for us to make progress.  Just before the House adjourned, I was giving the general background to our cotton production history. (Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  We do things according to law, not yes.  Mr. Chairman, we have no quorum.  You can ask your officers to come to quorum for the House to be orderly.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, we adjourn for 15 minutes and then come back.

(Quorum realised)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Hon. Minister, please proceed.  

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will proceed as I had mentioned, from where we ended yesterday before the House adjourned.  I was saying that the government in collaboration with the World Bank and International Fund for Agricultural Development - IFAD, has developed a comprehensive cotton sub-sector rehabilitation programme that I would like hon. members to be familiar with.  The main objectives are:

1.  The strength the cotton grading programmes at Namulonge and Serere Research stations in order to improve the physical and genetic purity of cottonseed.  

2. To revive the waive system of cottonseed multiplication in Serere, Masindi and Kasese so as to ensure adequate supplies of improved cottonseed.

3. To strengthen adoptive research in cotton with special emphasis on integrated pest management in order to increase productivity.  

4. To introduce cattle into cotton growing districts such as Kumi and Soroti in order to provide animal attraction for cotton production.

5. To improve procurement and distribution of cotton imports.

6. To improve marketing and ginning efficiency through a policy of liberalisation of marketing and ginning operations.

7. To increase revenues through increased export of lint and, 

8. To provide adequate raw materials to local textiles edible oil, soap and animal feeds industries.

Since I had taken trouble to give the background yesterday, I just want to end by saying that in practice, we have really liberalised in terms of licensing more than five Unions that are involved in export of cotton and 18 private operations.  Although we have 18 registered, not all of then have been as active as I had imagined.  

So, rather than waste time giving the background, I would like to turn to the Cotton Bill that you have before you.  The cotton industry in Uganda is currently regulated through the Cotton Act and the Lint Marketing Board Act.  The two Acts impose strict controls of cotton growing and marketing including restriction of movement of cotton to specified ginnery zones.  The fixing of prices for seed cotton, lint cotton and cotton seed and their licensing of ginneries, traders, stores and transporters of cotton.  The Lint Marketing Board is given exclusive rights to market lint and seed and every ginnery holds to the order of the Board all lint cotton and seed produced.  I am just talking about what is on the statute books although in practice we have really moved away from this position.  

Following Government decision to liberalise the ginning and marketing of cotton so as to open up the industry to the private sector, it is necessary to make appropriate changes in the law.  Further more, opportunity has been taken of the necessity for these changes to consolidate all laws relating to the cotton sub-Sector into one comprehensive legislation.  Therefore, the Cotton Development Bill that is before us seeks to repeal the Lint Marketing Board Act and the Cotton Act that have hitherto entrenched the Lint Marketing monopoly in Lint Marketing Board and the ginning monopoly in the Cooperative Movement.  

Furthermore, the object of the Bill is to establish the Cotton Development Organisation that will promote and oversee the cotton industry as a whole by facilitating research, improvement in production and marketing of cotton as well as monitoring the quality of lint cotton.  The Bill seeks to grant responsibility to the organisation operating in liaison with the Ministry responsible for Agriculture to procure, process and distribute early generation of planting seed.  Why is a regulatory body necessary in a liberalised cotton sub-sector?  That is a valid question that perhaps we should pose at this stage.  

Unlike most other crops, marketing of cotton depends on uniformity in quality, reliability in supply and sufficient quantity to ensure the long run of uniform bales that are necessary for efficient spinning operations.  While large-scale farmers in other parts of the world may be in a position to produce sufficient lint from their own crops satisfy their buyers, in Uganda, cotton is procured by small farm holders and has to be brought together to form large enough consignments.  Full account has to be taken of fibre characteristics in bringing these small lots together to achieve the desired degree of uniformity in the bales produced.  The degree of uniformity in the bales depends on the standards established for grading seed cotton and classifying lint cotton in relation to the international standards at the expense by which they are monitored and enforced.  Objectively in establishing standards and in ensuring that they are applied can be achieved by an organisation that is free of commercial bias.  

It is for this reason that the Bill seeks to establish the Cotton Development Organisation that will be responsible for establishing seed cotton and lint cotton, cotton grade and classification standards and to ensure that standards are applied.  

The second reason is that the success of the cotton development programme will depend largely on the restoration of market confidence in the quality of Uganda cotton. This will require carefully controlled plant breeding and seed multiplication programme to ensure that the variety or purity and availability of adequate supply of high quality planting seed.  

It is, therefore, essential to grant the Minister responsible for Agriculture the powers outlined specifically in part 4 of this Bill and to have a single organisation charged with the responsibility of ensuring that farmers are provided in a timely manner with high quality planting seed.  

Thirdly, in a liberalised cotton marketing environment, it is essential to maintain up-to-date records of what is happening in the sub-Sector at all times.  This calls for registration of operatives, collection, storage and dissemination of statistical information for purposes of policy formulation and general guidance and support to the cotton industry.  This requires a neutral body that is not engaged in any commercial aspect of the industry.  

I wish to take this opportunity to stress that CDO is going to be a very lean - and I mean - lean organisation which will essentially be funded from the budget that whose operational costs will increasingly be borne by the industry itself through a zest on lint exports, registration fees and fees for lint classification and certification.  The overall objective is to have a whole industry funded and industry run institution within the shortest possible time.  

Furthermore, I wish to underscore the facilitating role of CDO in cotton research, cotton production and extension.  It is not the intention of government to duplicate the roles of the Ministry responsible for Agriculture in these areas.  Rather, it is the intention of government to ensure that revenues and other sources of income will be utilised as much as possible to facilitate and support the efforts of line institutions and further development of the cotton sub-sector.  Details of the duties of CDO are outlined in Section 7 of the Bill.  

As indicated earlier, it is the intention of government to CDO as an autonomous and industry run institution in the long run.  This is clearly reflected in the composition of and the powers conferred on the Board of Directors of the Organisation.  On a Board of 12 Directors, government will be represented by only three directors as compared to six directors directly representing the industry with the remaining three, namely, the Chairman, a representative of NARO and the Managing Director closely association with the industry.  Details of the composition and duties of the Board of Directors are contained in Section 8 and 9 of the Bill and perhaps Members should reflect on the amendment I have already circulated that I will talk about at the Committee Stage after I had met with this august House Sectoral Committee on how we should move forward.  

Part 4 of the Bill reflects those parts of the Cotton Act that need to be retained to enable the Minister responsible for Agriculture to regulate cotton production.  I wanted to explain that our regional Bill which was withdrawn had separated the production side from this organisation but after thorough consideration and discussion, it was found that it was necessary to institutionalise cotton as a very important crop and have one organisation right from production to processing and marketing under one direction, hence the inclusion of a specific provision in part 4 that deals specifically with production and the Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for.  So, Part 4 deals with isolated and segregated areas, establishment of cotton zones, distribution and planting of cottonseed, power to prohibit movement of cottonseed and destruction of pest ferrous cottonseed and cotton plants.  

Part 5 of the Bill provides for registration and obligation of participants in the industry as dealers in cottonseed, seed cotton, lint cotton and ginnery operators.  Emphasis is placed on the maintenance of appropriate records that must be availed to CDO and the relevant government departments.  In line with government liberalisation policy, emphasis has been placed on registration rather than licensing.  This makes it much easier for any applicant who meets the best requirements for registration to be registered automatically.  

Part 6 of the Bill with the staff of the organisation.  It is the intention of government to keep the government as I had already said lean as possible so that it is not a heavy burden on the taxpayer and the industry.  As I have already pointed out, a Committee of this House has discussed the new Board representation, and we shall discuss it at an appropriate stage.  

Part 7 of the Bill deals with the financial and related provisions, the sources of funds for the organisation will include money voted by the National Resistance Council proceeds from sale of cotton seeds for planting, fees collected in respect of legislation, testing and classifying lint cotton and a zest not exceeding 2 per cent on the sales values of lint cotton sold at every ginnery.  It is the intention of government to gradually reduce financial support to the organisation from the budget as the industry assumes more responsibility for the funding of the organisation.  

Part 8 provides for the transfer of some property and assets, which immediately before the commencement of this Statute were vested in Lint Marketing Board.  Care will be taken to ensure that only those assets, which are required by the organisation for the discharge of its functions, will be transferred to the organisation.  The Schedule deals with matters related to the application of seal, conduct of meetings of the Board and record of minutes of proceedings.  At the amendment stage, you will note from page 21 where you see draft; it is actually an instrument under Section 18 and so on.  All those should never have been printed.  We shall be moving an appropriate amendment but perhaps it is useful information for Members to keep handy with them.  

I would like to turn to one of the biggest issues in the cotton industry; and that is the indebtedness of Cooperative Unions, so that Members can explain the position as we move up-country for the urgent business of nominations next week.  Unlike the liberalisation of the cotton sector, where the private sector was already involved in coffee processing, full liberalisation of the cotton cub-sector will not be achieved by the mere passing of this legislation.  There are two inter-related constraints that need to be resolved before full liberalisation is achieved.  These are:

1. The monopoly enjoyed by the Cooperative Unions in the ginning of cotton and,

2. The very heavy indebtedness of Unions arising from the rehabilitation of ginneries and funds borrowed for crop finance. 

Mr. Chairman, a study of Unions’ indebtedness made by a British Cotton Growers Association in 1992, revealed that by the end of that year, Cotton Unions had accumulated 52 billion shillings and 212 billion in African Development Band and IDA ginnery rehabilitation loans and Lint Marketing Board Crop Finance loans respectively.  The ADB rehabilitation loans go back to 1974 while the IDA loans were secured in 1983.  This level of indebtedness has had a negative impact on the ability of cotton Unions to borrow from Commercial Banks in order to raise working capital and crop finance for the purchase of cotton from farmers; thereby contributing to the problems faced in the marketing of cotton.  The debts -(Interruption)

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, where the hon. Mover of the Bill and Motion before the House, gives the House a plea of its inefficiency, we cannot, anybody with brain get the conviction of the House.  Because we are thinking here - because we are a reasonable assembly.  The conclusion of the House is that he has failed; we should move a Motion moving out of organising all these institutions and agricultural activities, and particularly trade and industry, which is the life blood of the nation if the economy.  I do not care about law; this is the life of blood.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, you can see the level at which the House has degenerated.  However, with fullest respect -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of order.  Mr. chairman, it is in order that the hon. Minister should insult the House as having degenerated when he, himself is a Member of the House?  Is that in order, Mr. Chairman? 

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is not in order please.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I am saying that I was -(Interruption)- I am sorry.  I thought the word sorry meant apology.  Mr. Chairman, I am sorry.  I withdraw the statement.

THE CHAIRMAN:  He has withdrawn.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, may I say that I withdraw a statement if it is in anyway -(Interruption)- the statement by saying that the House has degenerated, I apologise for that.  However, I was -(Interruption)- may I suggest that we turn to the Bill.  The ADB rehabilitation loans, I was saying, go back to 1974 while the IDA loans were secured in 1983.  This leave of indebtedness has had negative impact on the ability of cotton unions to borrow from Commercial Banks in order to raise working capital and crop finance for the purchase from farmers thereby contributing problems faced in the market of cotton. The debts have accumulated to such an extent that unions are totally incapable of meeting their obligations.  The Unions have distributed this level of indebtedness arguing one, that some Unions had no knowledge or the not approval of the acquisition of the ADB and IDA loans.  

Secondly, the programme to rehabilitate ginneries was an operation, consequently they were under no obligation to repay any loan in respect of these ginneries that have never been handed over completed; and thirdly Unions they argue that unions are not under any obligation to meet the foreign exchange risks associated with the loans.  

In order to address these issues, government has agreed on modalities; government is considering agreeing modalities with the unions for extending debt relief to the unions.  Government is considering strictly this debt relief on strict understanding that unions will cooperate in this endeavour.  

For purposes of determining a fair value of the debt; and independent team comprising of financial analyst, a lawyer and a ginning engineer under the responsibility of a firm of auditors will determine the present dues of the unions to Commercial Banks and Lint Marketing Board as per existing agreements.  For the dues that are due to the bank, a fair value of the ginnery will also be determined on the basis of going concern value after adjusting for the remaining works to be undertaken to complete the rehabilitation where applicable.  

Hon. Members are familiar with some ginneries that really have not been completed like ICHEM and several others.  For dues to the Lint Marketing Board, a fair value would also be determined for adjusting for interest over charged due to delays on the part of Lint Marketing Board, meeting its obligations such as prompt collection of lint and realisation of export proceeds.  The fair value of debt would either be the value in terms of the agreements or the value determined the best on the fair value of the ginnery whichever is less.  The value would form the redeemable value of loans.  In other words, whilst there is in the books of accounts - if you take union X, maybe may have borrowed so much million dollars an there is ginnery loan into billions, we will have to use this machinery to arrive at what we consider a fair value and whatever difference there is between this value and whatever loan, the government will take off that relief from them; but we can only do that if Unions and that is for the Members to explain to members of the Unions to cooperate with the government in restructuring those loans, restructuring ginneries.  Where if we must have private players either on their own or in joint ventures or on this arrangement are serious in being involved in cotton; where unions do not cooperate, they will not expect any relief from government.  Government, therefore, will enter into negotiation with individual union for that relief.  The relief will be applied to the difference between the book value of the loans and the fair value of the ginneries as going concerns.  

In order to qualify for debt relief, unions will be required to draw up business plans, taking into account, (a), the present financial, managerial and technical situation including the state of the unions’ cotton operations and assets.  (b), The estimate of future cotton production for the areas covered by the Union.  (c), the prospects for successful processing of cotton produced within the unions’ areas of operations including prospects for leasing, joint venture or outright sale of cotton processing operation as well as the future of other activities of the unions.  Once banks accept the business plans, subordinate repayment agreements of the agreed new value of loans will be entered into between banks and unions.  

It is anticipated that through this offer of debt relief, unions will appreciate the desirability of disposing of some of excessive ginning industry.  Banks will be required to fore-close on those unions and I am repeating that one - banks will be required to fore-close total liquidation on those unions which will fail to present acceptable business plans for the operations.  It is hoped that through this arrangement, sufficient ginning capacity will be transferred to serious players in the private sector to facilitate the removal of the bottlenecks in ginning cotton, which will in turn enhance out ability to pay farmers cash for their cotton.  As long as farmers are not paid promptly for their cotton, the revival of the cotton production will remain bleak. 

I wish to inform the House that I am arranging to meet all the indebted cotton unions and the banks - Cooperative Bank and UCB and Lint Marketing Board next week to discuss this relevant government debt relief offer so that we can move forward.  

If I may end by talking about the Cotton Marketing Company.  When this Bill is passed by this august House and accepted by his Excellency the President, the Lint Marketing Board will cease to exist.  However, because of the major role Lint Marketing Board has played in the marketing of line, cotton and in consideration of the fact that it may take some time before private sector players get seriously involved in the marketing of lint cotton, government has decided to establish a Cotton Marketing Company under the Company’s Act to undertake the trading functions formerly performed by Lint Marketing Board.  The Company will initially be wholly government owned but it is government’s intention to privatise the company as quickly as possible.  Possibilities do exist for joint venture arrangements as I mentioned yesterday of the possibilities of linking up with the French Company - between the propose company and some major players in the cotton industry and these are being actively considered.  The assets of Lint Marketing Board, which are related to the Board’s trading functions, will be transferred to the new company and some of the current employees may be taken on by the new company, subject to their qualifications and record of performance.  The overall objective is to have a small staff that is properly remunerated and motivated.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  The Cotton Development Bill, 1993 is now open for discussion.

MR. ABOLA (Aswa County, Gulu):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  As the hon. Minister has said, this Bill was brought to the Committee of Trade and Industry and we discussed it thoroughly with the Minister and the Committee gave the Bill its full support.  However, there were some Sections in the Bill which we felt required some amendments and these amendments were discussed and the hon. Minister will be bringing them up for consultation of the Members.  The concern of the Members of the Trade and Industry Committee was mainly about the position of the cotton farmer.  We realise that the cotton industry had declined considerably in this country because of the way that the cotton farmer had been treated.  Members will recall that previous reports from the Sectoral Committee we have always made a complaint - very strong comments about the way that the cotton farmers were being treated.  The biggest problem facing the cotton farmer is non-payment for his cotton.  You find that if you go to most areas growing cotton, some farmers are still keeping chits given to them as far back as 1980 without payments.  Now, this has discouraged most cotton farmers and unless definite steps will be taken by the new arrangements to ensure that the cotton farmer is encouraged to start growing cotton, encouraging cotton production in some of these areas, may become very difficult.  

The second problem with the Committee was concerned with the question of ginning cotton.  Most of the common ginneries in the country today are not operational.  In fact, in areas like Gulu and Kitgum and part of Lango, cotton is transported to Masindi for ginning.  Now, efforts to get these cotton ginneries rehabilitated is very difficult because the unions are not in a position to borrow money from the banks because of their indebtedness.  Now, some ginneries were straight down because of rehabilitation and farming was secure for them as far back as the 70s.  Unfortunately, there has been concern about disturbances and insecurity in these areas and some of these were even looted.  

As a result, you still find that most of the new ginneries which actually had committed on very heavy loans and had machinery brought in, have not been rehabilitated and the result is that cotton produced in these areas must be transported very far away for rehabilitation.  So, because of this, people have chosen the easier way or better way of earning money and that is by diverting and producing other crops from which they can get money.  

Now, the Minister has mentioned the question of indebtedness.  This matter has been discussed not only this year but even last year and we are very happy that at least, a definite arrangement has been made now as the Minister has said which we find will bring this indebtedness of the Unions to an end.  We only hope that it will not take a longer time as we promised last year; when we found in the end that nothing had been done for the cotton farmer or for the Unions.  

Last year, as the Minister has already told the House, some arrangement was made to appoint certain people and Unions to market that cotton directly.  Some of these companies ran into problems.  There were three companies appointed, unfortunately they did not have their own ginning facilities.  The unions are very, very difficult especially in allowing some of our union facilities to be used by their competitors.  This was a case in this particular experiment by the Ministry.  As a result, the three companies that were appointed last year did not perform well as they were expected.  

It is for this reason that it became very necessary that some authority be given to the Ministry so that if it becomes necessary for the companies that are interested in exporting cotton to get easy access to some ginneries they should be allowed to buy from these ginneries.  We have very large useful capacity of ginneries throughout the country.  In a place like Lango, there are about 38 ginneries.  Out of these, only two or three are operational.  The rest are unutilized, but the owners of the unions would not like to have them sold.  

In a place like Teso, there are about seven ginneries. Out of those, only two are operational.  The other unused capacities are lying there idle.  Now, you find that the authority that would like to promote the marketing of cotton cannot effectively allow the new companies appointed a chance to be able to get access to these unions.  Now, the only way - and we shall be moving an amendment to this Bill - is at least to give some power to government t be able to acquire these unused capacities and sell to other operators so that the marketing of cotton can be effectively encouraged.  

One thing that the Committee felt at least comfortable with, concerning the proposals in this Bill, is the arrangement being made by the Ministry for promoting production.  Our worry was the farmer; the cotton farmer is the person that could easily be subjected to cheating.  The reasonable experiments also showed that some people who are allowed to buy cotton from farmers actually left a lot of farmers unpaid.  And they received a lot of complaints from these farmers for non-payment by the cotton buyers.  

So, we have in the Committee, insisted that certain amount of incentive be provided by the Ministry to ensure that cotton production is really effectively encouraged.  I am very happy that at least arrangement is made by the Ministry that for the next three planting seasons, cotton seeds will be distributed free. (Hear, hear!)  Now, we are concerned and we hope that this will be implemented.  

The second proposal by the Ministry that is of great concern to us was how the farmer is going to be encouraged to start producing cotton.  Under the Ministry’s proposals, it is that an arrangement is being made to at least make sure that certain essential inputs are made available to the farmer on credit.  This is a very good arrangement and I am sure that the farmers can take advantage of those kinds of credit facilities.  At least it should go a long way in improving the production of cotton.  

When you come to the Bill itself, there are one or two areas that I would like to comment on.  The first is the composition of the Board.  Now, this composition of the Board as mentioned by the Minister is deliberate.  It is intended to actually work as an incentive to cotton production.  That is why only people who are directly responsible with cotton production are involved.  You find that besides the three representatives of the Ministries responsible for cotton production, it is only institutions or organisations, which have got direct connection with industry who are going to be on this Board.  I think this is healthy; it is in the best interest of promoting cotton production.  

The other bit is a section that will allow a creation of some unused capacity of the ginneries.  This one is very necessary, and it is very important, and I will appeal to Members that when it is brought up for consideration, it should be given some support because it is already experienced on the ground that unless this kind of arrangement is put in place, it will not be possible for us to effectively liberalise the marketing of cotton.  The Committee gives its support to the Bill and at an appropriate time, we shall definitely assist and have the Ministry to ensure that this Bill is passed.  Thank you very much.

MR. OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti):  Mr. chairman, I am happy to say something about cotton.  With all seriousness, sometimes my Colleagues in this House and possibly the Chair think I am very serious wrongly.  Cotton as an industry, the lifeblood of our nation, is the most important commodity that we cannot afford not to give serious attention.  Why?  We are developing in our institutions of learning such as the Universities and Colleges, technical colleges.  Men and women who are tomorrow to take over from us leaving administration and running our economy - if we are not, in this most important unit, given opportunity under the NRM government whereby we were brought together, I do not think that it was by wrong means that we should be deceived.  The broad-based government brought the development of the economy so that we get quality life and it is because of that quality life that our children are going to schools.  We have our life, and we have a better feeding.  I am sorry to say, how misplaced, and how upside we are.  The Minister concerned with Agriculture, the production of cotton is not here.  Is the House not respected?  I see the Deputy Minister standing up.  It is excellent but is he taking notes?  I raise that point because he is not in the seat to see what is going on.  I caution him to be attentive.  

I am not going to speak here; I can speak eloquently on cotton because cotton was started in 3,000 B.C. in Africa and India.  So, I am not a little student. (Interjection)  Yes, because I am attached to Toroma and Kanyum ginneries.  I had that time Onama, Ngobi and Obote who disrupted my cotton production.  So, I know what I am talking about.  

May I say this only?  Let us make under this Bill an organisation, Cotton Development Corporation.  Why?  Why, I put it to the lawyers even to the government side.  I am glad that my hon. Colleague Mr. Njuba is there, who assists the Attorney General.  It is imperatively important to define Cotton Development as a Corporation rather than organisation.  Why?  Because it is an international commodity.  Cotton is an international commodity and staple crop.  Even the hon. Mover who is running the trade in this country and marketing he must know the value and level at which internationally, the cotton falls.  

So on this, from the title right up to the schedules - I have given my Colleague Okwera that he should move to make this a Cotton Development Corporation because it is perpetual.  Why?  When he gets to that, when he goes to Geneva the hon. Mover, there cotton, because it is international trade where there is India, America, Canada, Britain, Spain, Russia and China that when he talks to these people, he must feel that it is superior Ministers, not an organisation.  Because cotton is an international commodity as governed by those -(Interjection)- now, whether I like this - make cotton as a commodity, a Cotton Development Corporation so that all through right up to the use whenever that word organisation is, please agree with us because we do not have to come to this House.  I am coming to this House next time, even after the 1994 elections this year.  Yes, I am still alive, my people will bring me here, there is nobody who can deny me here, I am a politician, nobody can deny me to come to this honourable House, I pay taxes, nobody!  I am coming here.  Therefore, let us make this a national issue so that when Mr. Minister - when you go to Geneva and what not, do not talk about organisation, because those intellectuals it strikes them in their organisation, but if you talk we are developing corporation, it strikes those people that you are important.  Because an organisation is inferior, internationally, commercially and industrially.  

Secondly, wherever you find a word ‘Cotton sub-Section’ please put it as Cotton Industry.’  Because industry it tells you, it makes you superior, Mr. Minister, when you talk when you go to Tokyo, to Japanese, I have been there, and I know what they are and even India, and Britain.  So that when you go to Lancaster and what not, when you talk about cotton industry, that we have a Cotton Industry, you are not an organisation.  These are the most important things.  Now, I can write more and more about these things and I am out of this business.  

I have told you cotton was started in 3,000 BC, in the Middle East countries like India, America and what not, they finally said when I started my earlier remarks, the cotton is very important, it is gold.  If we use cotton to produce in this country, cotton industry, oils - you are technicians or even if you do not go beyond a technician, please in standard what - what shall I call it?  Any standard works on cotton will make you what are the uses of cotton, where tropical countries and how beautiful it brings for us Africans.  For example, in Uganda, if we use the cotton and coffee industries properly, we do not have to borrow money.  

MR. LATIGO (Kyoga County, Lira):  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  Exactly that is what I was going to tell you that I will be very brief, because, Mr. Chairman, a year ago, we had 20 hours almost of discussion with hon. Kaijuka in Lira with the Langi about the cotton.  If it was not for the urgency of the World Bank here, which wants our Bill discussed, I was going to say this should not be discussed, but I am going ahead and discussing it.  Because the cotton industry will survive, but those who lead the cotton industry in whatever manner they do it, may not survive. We want the cotton bought, but we do not want all these hurry, hurry laws and other things to mask up the cotton problems we have got.  We want a method by which cotton can be bought quickly and bureaucracy to be removed, and in this connection, since I seem to be very brief, I am asking the hon. Minister to amend Section 8; I also wish to inform that the typing was bad so you need not make any remark about how badly the typing was done.  

So, I am telling him once as follows; if you accept it should read that there shall be a Board of Directors of the organisation as follows; and then he can say latter on that from among those the Minister will elect a Chairman.  One representative from farmers from West Nile Zone, that is (b); (c) one representative from farmers from Acholi Zone; (d), Lango Zone; (e) Teso Zone, Bukedi Zone, Busoga Zone, Luwero Zone, Kasese Zone.  Then he can add his NARO, and he can add his exporter if he wants to be exporter also, he can then add the seed processor, the ginner, then he can add the distributor, those are his.  Then the Managing Director - must he necessarily be a member of the Board of he is an executive?  

This done, the following will be achieved, then the farmers shall be in control of their own cotton and they will be assisted, therefore, by the following persons, a representative by the Ministry responsible for cotton marketing.  He will then eat the allowances for sitting in these Boards, he is in Kampala here, and he is going to be junior officer who does not know even how to grow cotton.  He will then have somebody representative for agriculture, naturally agriculture must have somebody to advise the Board, it does not necessarily that he has to be in the Board, and representative from the Ministry of Finance, can you see this, Mr. Chairman, Finance to be a member of the Board and there is no finance to finance the cotton and he is on the Board. NARO, I accept NARO because this is in such organisation that will give advice to these farmers who will be sitting on the Board.  As I said before, these other distributors he can put, this Board, therefore, shall not be a Board of nine, and it is not a law that a Board must be of nine, it can be a Board of thirteen.  Then he can eventually have his Chairmen of the Board appointed by him as normally it is done, as will be agreed here and I think this will make me happy.  

I am saying this finally, that we had a lot of trouble with Lint Marketing Board that had a representative of so and so from the Minister, things of the kind; and it became almost a war of personalities.  

So, to avoid bureaucracy decentralise two people who are concerned, this management, and also liberalize, if you want to liberalize, do not deliberalize.  You say liberalisation with own word and then in your paper you are bringing bureaucracy here, what is that liberalisation?  

I do not have much to say about the cotton. I am aware of the fact that we must get money, otherwise my views are different. But for a cooperative nature, it seems you have been a fantastic leader, Sir.  I would not want to disturb this House, except the Minister must accept this Amendment, I will be very happy and I am with you.  Thank you very much.

MR. DRANI DRADRIGA (Ayivu County, Arua):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman and hon. Members.  The scrapping of the Lint Marketing Board, in my view is not going to be a panacea, at least, in the short run, and therefore, government must continue to play a facilitating role.  This is because cotton provides a firm foundation for the sustainable growth of our economy, and if you look at the level at which the cotton industry has degenerated, then a deliberate and substantial effort must be made by Government to revive this very important industry here in Uganda we call it the ‘white gold industry.’ 

There are four major areas which government ought to address, one, is the problem of indebtedness of unions.  The government is partly to blame for the indebtedness of some of the unions.  I do remember a seminar which I attended in which many unions expressed a lot of disappointment with the government reaction to their problem of indebtedness, partly because most of these unions had not prepared for receiving the loans, and they were imposed upon them through a mechanism out of which they could not run out, especially - you look at the situation like in West Nile, where the destruction which was meted out from 1979, caused a very big blow to - especially the cotton industry.  We are still staggering and we are trying to recover from that effect.  So, government ought to have negotiations with these unions as fast as possible and try to render to them substantial relief.  

Another problem is seeds. There is a very big problem with the seed multiplication, and I would like the Minister to consider setting up regional centres for seed multiplication, this is the only way we can try to assist in the distribution of seeds.  In Arua, especially we have a big problem with the mixed seeds, I do not know what happened, a lot of seeds got mixed up, I remember visiting the ginnery, the West Nile Central Corporation Union Ginnery at Lanoka, we discovered that farmers faced a very big problem with the mixed seeds.

DR. MAGEZI:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the floor through you, that the issue of seed multiplication is squarely in the hands of the Agricultural Seeds and Plant Organisation which we set up here in 1993 and that to try to ask the Cotton Development Organisation to go into this area of seed multiplication, we are duplicating their roles and nobody will be responsible of anything and we shall end up in total confusion.

MR. DRANI DRADRIGA:  Yes, Mr. Chairman, I thank the hon. member for his information.  Another area where Government ought to come in, is with guidelines on pricing.  Many unions have faced a very big problem in pricing.  While we appreciate the liberalisation policy of the government, there are situations where many unions have failed to sell off their cotton.  While we may blame the Lint Marketing Board, for not having much of that capacity, if you look at the situation in Arua again because I must give examples of what I know, the Co-operative Union there up to now still has bales of cotton lying idle, this is because some private buyers whom the Ministry advised would come into our area offered prices which are even lower than what Lint Marketing Board is offering.  So, I think in future government ought to continue to give general guidelines on prices.  If crops like cotton and coffee that do not grow or are not grown in Europe especially, Britain, if their prices can be fixed in London, and the whole World follows them, why not here?  The Minister should take this up.  

Another problem that is facing the cotton industry is lack of democracy and therefore, corruption in some of the unions.  Examples are very many, but I want to point out through the primary society constitute the unions do not exercise their rights.  You find in meetings that I have attended at least, in some of the meetings; all the time is taken on matters arising and at the end of the day refreshments are served without really examining the balance sheet and the financial reports very easily.  So, there is a very big problem there and I think I would like to appeal to my Colleagues to play a very big role there.  

Another area which has already been mentioned is the rehabilitation of especially, the ginneries and the primary societies.  This is a common problem all over Uganda, but in my area you will find that most farmer societies are not capable of being rehabilitated even in the next ten years.  This is because of the destruction I talked about and I would like to ask the Ministry to give a big attention, Lanoka which was rehabilitated partially still has some gins lying idle. The potation is very high, and we have a certain ginnery, which was supposed to be built in hon. Amin Onzi’s county.  It is a place called Aca.  That ginnery we need it because the potation of cotton in Arua is extremely high and you will be shocked to find that it is going to be one of the highest, if we give those supporting services.  

With the revival of the cotton industry, we are looking forward to certain industries being boosted like the textile industries, soap industry, oil industry and even animal traction programmes, these could go a long way in boosting our economy. 

Finally, I would like to end by appealing to the Minister to ensure that the relationship between the various organisations is made very clear, harmonious and it should be properly coordinated.  This is the Ministry itself, and this organisation, which we are setting up, the National Agricultural Research Organisation, Corporative Alliance and the like.  Unless this is done properly the farmers will continue to be at stake in terms of the operations.  Thank you very much.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like through you to thank the hon. Members who have made very useful suggestions and contribution to this Bill, specifically, the Chairman of the Sectoral Committee hon. George Abola, has informed the House that indeed we spent two days looking at the provisions of this Bill and I want to thank all those Members who made useful contributions and amendments before coming to the House.  

First, I want to assure Members that we think that cotton industry within the medium term, is going to be one of those major crops that will contribute significantly to the foreign exchange earnings of this country.  So that in our medium term strategy within the next five years or so, cotton hopefully should be in the region of where we were before. In other words, if everything is in place, we expect within the next five years or so, to go back to production of about 500,000 bales of cotton, and so there is no doubt that if we were not concerned there is no reason why we would not be thinking of drastic measures including date relief in terms of billions of shillings.  It is essentially because we want to have this cotton sector moving.  I agree with hon. George Abola that we hope the implementers of this cotton sub-sector programme which we are borrowing funds for whom World Bank, will move as fast as possible so that the issue of union indebtedness is solved expeditiously and I can promise the House that we in the Ministry, we will make sure that this is doe without fail.  

In fact, we were talking to World Bank Official yesterday, and we hope to go for negotiations, our officials should go for negotiations hopefully before the end of next month, so that we would really get on the programme as sooner than latter.  

I also wanted to mention that it is really not a fault of Government that some ginneries are not operational in fairness to Government.  You will recall that we came here passed the Corporative Act in 1991, the purpose of that Act was to make Corporative move independently in its operations.  The idea was that the Corporative movement operations as an independent body, accountable to its Members.  The significance of that decision or legislation was that government should have a vital role to play as possible, and therefore, our appeal hitherto has been to cooperative leaders and I am glad hon. Latigo mentioned in a meeting we held sometime last year in Lira, with cooperators from all levels.  It was apparent to me that there is a big difference between cooperative leader and the cooperators farmers.  

Clearly, there is a bit of a problem in terms of accountability.  It is not always correct that the management or the cooperative leaders are always speaking the same language with the farmer - owners.  So that remains a big problem.  

In terms of incentives, yes, we will make sure that seeds are given free as I have stated, as has always been the case for the next three years or so.  And indeed that inputs are in time.  And that is why clearly we are trying to put this whole organisation under one umbrella.  I wanted to inform hon. Magezi who was giving information, because he was bothered about the possibility of having confusion on the seed industry.  I do not think there will be confusion.  It is precisely because of the importance we attached cotton, as a crop to this country that we deliberately decided, let us move even seed multiplication and seed related idea together, to be under CDO, but in the - and in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture.  It is because of focus that we brought this together; it is not because we are getting confusion.  It is precisely because we wanted to focus on this problem and get on with production.

Members, recall that our variety our productivity is the lowest in the world per acre.  We are producing on the average between 250 to may 800 kilos per hectare.  And in some parts of Western region, the varieties produce well over 2,000.  And so the focus on research in the medium some of this problem is going to really concentrate on improving productivity.  Hon. Obwangor was bothered about the title.  He was saying that we should concentrate on many Cotton Development Corporation.  I wanted to make one comment that to the extent that this is not a corporation in the sense of the old UDC ideas.  Because it is not going to be involved in commercial activities.  The CDO is going to concentrate on facilitating.  It is a service registry unit and therefore, the idea of the development corporation would be the appropriate one.  

Hon. Latigo, yes, I am you are bothered about revival.  And really I want to appeal to hon. Members of the House who come from cotton growing areas to really help.  You can help in many ways, you can help in explaining the position, you can help in focusing on areas that could help farmers.  Because in that meeting we held in Lira, it was clear that sometime we do not even tell some officials the truth because of faulty.  And it requires some of us being pulled, saying this too, whatever it could for the benefit of the farmers.  

So, the suggestion we will handle at an appropriate date but I want to say this.  That it would be dangerous to have a Board in this form.  Why? because you have suggested that we have representatives from the districts you named.  But you have excluded other districts.  And in your minute you talked about Acholi, Lango, Teso, Busoga, Kasese.  People in Bunyoro grow cotton, Bukedi grows cotton, Bugisu, Bushenyi and new areas are going for cotton.  So, where are we going?  I would advise my brother under the same and they start cotton growing shortly.  So, I was going to suggest my brother hon. Latigo, that we need to adopt a more scientific criteria which would take care of your concern when we get to that case.  

Hon. Agelo Drani, I want to thank you for your contribution, I think it was a very outstanding contribution.  Although you are saying Government should continue, the question is, how far do you want the Government to continue playing its part in cotton production?  

I want to mention that Government is deliberately trying to get out business - of doing business which should be done by the private sector.  That is the clear vision for division.  So, having made that division deliberately, the only emphasis we think we should continue playing is to facilitate and how?  By getting this new organisation which is going to be seen but concentrates on extension in collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture and so on.  That is where we shall focus and we think it will be beneficial in the long run.  

So, whilst you want government to continue facilitating like people saying it is a shame that cotton is not being bought.  The fact it is a shame that some ginneries are not operating.  Of course, it is a shame.  But what do you expect the government to do?  Because the moment you liberalised and do not have people serious there, getting it filled, it remains a problem, I can assure you.  So, I want to appeal to you hon. Members and your friends, clearly get into business of cotton, until we have serious layers, we will continue having a problem of cotton not being bought with cash.

I think I had made a comment that was raised by Angelo Drani - honourable on the mixed seed.  I want to assure him that regional seed massification centres are being set up specifically in Teso for example, for SATU, Masindi for BBA, Kasese for BBA and there is a proposal for a new centre in West Nile for SATU.  It is correct that there was a mixed up of this seed, precisely because of our past confusion.  But that should not really be repeated in the future as I had explained in my introductory remarks.  

Yes, you mentioned your concern for lack of democracy and corruption in union.  It is a fact.  And that I want to appeal to Members; I think we should make it a collective effort.  I think we Members can do a lot in helping our members.  I want to give an example of Banyankole Kweterana, where some of us have had a direct influence and when things go wrong, because we represent the people, we call them and tell them, okay, and we take collective measures.  And so, I wanted to appeal to Members, if you come from a particular area and you see things going wrong, do not wait and expect to have a solution in Kampala, you can set 100 in your home area.  Because the hands of a Minister are now tied up.  A Minister even when you detect something, someone comes up quoting a law that you are not supposed to do; that in terms of this Bill something wrong is clear and seen, but the law does not let you operate.  No, I want Members to appreciate this problem.  It is not specifically in this case, but I have had problems with cooperative movement precisely because of the law we have put in place.  Maybe at some stage, we may reveal some of these provisions because of one principle.  We could let the cooperative movement become independent, and you know when you are independent, you do not have to talk to anybody.  In other words, if you have your private firm, why should you bother government with how you operate?  Are you with me?  So if you have them, you solve them, you do not talk to the people.  But if you are private and you want assistance from Government fill cooperate.  Is that not fair?  I am winding up really.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  So, in conclusion -(Interruption)

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, with all due respect, is it really in order for us to rush this important Bill?  Because I know of the Cooperative Union, which has, been killed in the sense that money was borrowed from the African Development Bank, machinery was imported -(Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Wanendeya, I want to remind you that this Bill went through the committee of this House.  Therefore, we are not hurrying it up.  Take your seat please.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  In conclusion, I want to assure Members of the House that their own Elect Committee took - I repeat two days -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  As the hon. Minister is winding up, but I would like to draw his attention on page 11, Section 14.  This falls under Ministry of Agriculture.  This is concerned with production of this important crop.  Under 14, he talked of a Minister directing the destruction of any plant harbouring or likely to harbour cotton paste.  I wish to guide the hon. Minister and help that among the cotton paste, we have pests, which can feed on several plants or can feed on other alternative crops.  So, taking the example of cotton.   Taking the example of cotton ligar, it feeds very well on maize, and it feeds very well on sorghum.  It will be implemental if a farmer neighbouring a cotton farmer growing maize or sorghum and these crops are declared as likely to harbour the cotton paste.  It is very dangerous to pass this law without bringing to your attention.

Secondly, cotton has got its wide relatives.  And these wide relatives behave as volunteer pastes, as volunteer crops or volunteer plants which can - where these cotton pastes can continue breeding.  A farmer may not really have control or right to eradicate these plants in world state simply because they are harbouring cotton pastes.  So, I would suggest that on volunteer plants which offer themselves as breeding centres for cotton paste, the organisation which is to set - will look out to find out world state tonnes are offering as volunteer plants to be eradicated by the organisation or by the research that is to be in place.  But as for the control of the infections that eat several crops, it should be the work of the Ministry of Agriculture.  Thank you.

MR. KAIJUKA:  I would like to thank the hon. Member who has given us information.  On a very serious note, I want to thank you for taking for issues and I am glad my colleague, Minister of State for Agriculture is here and taken note, and I have certainly taken note.  Because we hope to engage scientifically qualified personnel who should be competent to take care of your concern.  Thank you.

So, in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I was saying since we had taken really two days debating issues related to cotton, I want to thank Members for their contribution and assure them that by passing this Bill, we will be moving quickly to revitalise the cotton industry for the benefit of this country.  And with those few comments, I wish to end here.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that the Cotton Development Bill, 1993 be read a Second Time.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

COTTON DEVELOPMENT BILL, 1993

Clause 1

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to request you if possible to allow us give amendments verbally because we were not able to get enough time to try these things -to be typed by the Clerk National Assembly, since it is in your prerogative to accept an amendment verbally, I would request you to allow us Sir. (Applause)

THE CHAIRMAN:  But if you have got your amendment, you can send it there to be typed right now.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, as mentioned earlier, the Sectoral Committee went through this Bill and made a number of proposals and suggestions, will be raising them at an appropriate stage because we have spent a bit of time debating each one of these proposals.  But specifically, the one I would like to start with is the World Organisation that appears on page 1.  The word organisation to be deleted from the title of the Bill so that it remains as it is in the front page, memorandum page.  So, if you could cross out that word organisation.  Secondly, the title of the Ministry on the memorandum page should read Ministry of – (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have not reached there yet.

(Clause 1, agreed to).

(Clause 2, agreed to).

(Clause 3, agreed to).

(Clause 4, agreed to).

(Clause 5, agreed to).

(Clause 6, agreed to).


Clause 7

MR. OLUM:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First, it is already been pointed out by hon. Kirya-Gole.  There are certain aspects in this Bill which actually either a duplication of the Agricultural Seeds Plant Statute or a contradiction.  I have already given a copy of my proposal amendment to the Minister.  We did not have time to discuss with it but I think it is very explanatory.  I hope you have a copy, Mr. Chairman.

That is in 7(a) the Agricultural Seeds and Plant Statute is dealing with all the registration of people who deal with seeds and planting material.  I think it will be really important that the administration of this material be centred in one place.  There is no contradiction, I think the Cotton Development Organisation could as well benefit from the central centre where all these registration takes place and the control of seeds and planting material are so important to our production that if you have got two different centres trying to administer that kind of organisation, I think we shall have a problem.  There is no contradiction really what we are saying here, let it be set in the Ministry of Agriculture and the cotton Development Organisation can be registered as a body dealing in seeds and planting material.  So, I really would urge the Minister to delete that Section dealing with the Control and Registration of Seeds.  I beg to move.

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to support strongly to the proposed amendment and in fact, we could go further and say that the issue related to cotton production should remain in the Ministry of Agriculture.  There is no reason if you look through what we have passed, the Agricultural Seeds and Plant Statute, that there will be no capacity for duplication of these equipments.  Say especially, Clause 6, 7, 8 of that Statute.  Let the Ministry of Trade and Commerce deal with matters of marketing but the production - which is Clause 4 - should remain in the Ministry of Agriculture.  I, therefore, strongly support hon. Olum’s amendment.

MR. OKWERA:  Mr. Chairman, for the following reasons, in the past years that there has been a lot of uncoordinated work between the Ministry of Industry, call it Industry or Co-operative marketing and Ministry of Agriculture.  Quite often you find the Minister going out to campaign for double cotton production while at the other end the Ministry of Co-operatives and marketing has not put in place means of marketing the cotton.  So, up to now, we have got a backlog of cotton for the last five years, in some stores.  So, we would like this means of cotton to be centred under one Ministry of Agriculture.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR AGRICULTURE (Mr. Kyemba):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to stand and inform the hon. Member of this House that the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries held extensive discussions with the Minister of Trade and Industry.  Indeed this matter of seeds could be revisited several times because of the fact that the Ministry of Agriculture is extremely interested in ensuring that seeds must be properly controlled before they are sent out to the farmers.  This responsibility still remains firmly in the hands of the Ministry of Agriculture and whatever is here does not in anyway reduce the responsibility of the Ministry.

MR. OLUM:  I think that is precisely why I move this amendment.  I think we would like to emphasise that this responsibility remains in the hands of the Ministry of Agriculture.  And the law can be abused because having it diluted in this Cotton Development Organisation can sometime be misused as hopeless people.  What we are saying is that, let us use the present law is already in existence, when we have doubt at all about how the seeds are supposed to be handled and all planting materials.  I think that is why I have brought this amendment, and there is no contradiction.

MR. KYEMBA:  Mr. Chairman, I can appreciate Members’ concerns but I just want to inform the House that you will recall that the old Bill had separated the production sight from this.  But precisely because we wanted to focus on cotton in the near and in some future, we held consultations bold one with the Ministry of Agriculture, World Bank and came up an agreed position and what is here does not negate what hon. Olum is suggesting.  

If you look at 7(e), may I repeat, Mr. Chairman?  It says, the organisation will procure process and distribute planting seeds in collaboration with the Ministry responsible for Agriculture.  Are you with me?  In other words, these responsibilities will squarely remain part of Ministry of Agriculture but this organisation and funding is focusing specifically on cottonseeds purposely for revival in the short term.  The Seeds and Plant Bill is dealing with a variety of a thousand and one seeds but we are saying, we want to focus and that is the purpose of concentrating on this Bill; and when we get patrol, you will see that we have made a provision and its all Ministry of Agriculture and it has been thoroughly discussed even in the Sectoral Committee.  I want to beg Members that it has been taken care of so that it is agreed in good spirit.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I think it is difficult to assign every problem that will arise of cotton to a specific Ministry.  As far as I know, the greatest enemy of cotton is inflation and the Ministry of Agriculture has hardly anything to do with inflation, it is probably to the Ministry of Finance.  I think it might be better if we leave it as it is.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for giving me a chance also to contribute on this Bill.  I would like to draw Members’ attention to one part that I think is very crucial.  This organisation will have financial autonomy will be collecting excess on cotton so that this money will be applied towards the development of cotton.  If we placed the distribution of seeds for cotton in the Ministry of Agriculture alone, we run the danger that because of budgetary constraints you may find the distribution is not being done properly because of what we know, money may be available or may not.  But under part 7, Section (28), there is provision for raising money so it is so that we have financial flexibility and we continue to improve cotton.  Thank you.

(Clause 7 put and negatived).

(Clause 7 do stand part of the Bill, agreed to).

Clause 8

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I wanted Members to look at the paper distributed to them and I would like to suggest that we turn to Clause 8 on - we were proposing the Sectoral Committee has discussions and we agreed that we amend Clause 8(1) paragraph (f).  That is on page 8 on top.  (a) Substitute the word ‘five’ with the word ‘six’ and then substitute the words cottonseeds distributor’, that is after the cotton growers - cotton seeds - with the words ‘oil miller’ - we are introducing an oil miller instead of a cotton seeds distributor, you are putting there oil miller and then adding after the words one cotton exporter after cotton exporter the words ‘one representative of the textile industry’.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. NTIMBA:  Mr. Chairman, he is dealing with Sections but I wanted to start with (c) sub-Section (1) -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  We will come to that.

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I would like just to seek clarification from the Minister.  There is no association of cotton exporters nor is there an association textile industry, manufacturers even the oil millers.  How does he intend to get representation from these people?

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I wanted to inform hon. Magezi that the whole idea is to get sub-sector representation, anything that has to do with cotton industry.  In other words, if you are talking about textile industry, you have got representation of those who are involved in textile industry even if there was no association, you can cause those players to meet and they can select one representative on their behalf.  As far as cotton exporters go they actually already have an association for your information.  And talking in terms of oil miller, we are talking about people who use seeds a lot and even if there was no association we shall consult and make sure that the whole is that all those who are involved in that sector are involved in what goes on in the organisation.  That is a principle that is behind a proposal by the Select Committee and by us.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to express gratitude to the Minister for thinking of the textile industry.  In a country where 95 per cent of the populations dressed in second hand clothes, I think it is very important that we have someone from the textile industry on aboard of this kind.

(Clause 8(f) as amended, agreed to).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, the Committee and I then discussed and agreed that we move an amendment on page 8, we proposed to delete Clause 8 - sorry.  On Clause 8 sub-Section (2) delete that one and then we substitute it with, ‘the Minister shall appoint the Chairman of the Board and that is in agreement with a proposal that was imagined from one of the Members of the House.’ I do not know whether it could deal with one item at ago.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  For me, I have gone further and say that the Minister shall appoint the Chairman of the Board on recommendation of the members of the Board.  (Interruption)  Yes, we do not want the Minister alone to appoint but the members -(Interjection)- yes, that recommendation is what I want to bring as an aspect of -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  That one is not accepted.

(Clause 8(2) as amended, agreed to).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Again on page 8 sub-Clause (5), paragraph (b) to (d).  By removal from office by the Minister we wanted to have that one be deleted by removal, if you look at (b) by removal from office by the Minister, then we would like to substitute on written recommendation of the body represented by that member and or for inability - that is what is in the Bill to perform the functions of the office whether existing from infirmity of body or mind or from any other cause.  In other words, we are making it another smoother thing as opposed to what it is at the moment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to)

MR. LATIGO:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to make an amendment on Clause 8 sub-section (i) as amended by the Minister as follows; to read that ‘there can be a Board of directors of this organisation which shall consist of  - this will be - he has added one and I accept that Members from who the Minister shall appoint the Chairman as follows; and, I say one representative from each zone as mentioned and of course during typing, the secretary left out Bukedi zone.  The Minister wants to impress me that there are so many growing areas.  Okay, the Minister can on aeronautical basis appoint these people on the Board and I have no quarrel and they have got their agricultural organisation.  

Also, I would like to see a situation where there is a doctor, Kiyonga coming on the Board because he is an agricultural man who has won agricultural shows and production in his area.  I would not like to see a situation I mentioned before where a substantive sector of production and therefore money earning is represented by somebody academically.  These people have got all these other organisations we have got here to advise them, agriculture is there, NARO is there, seed production is there.  So, these people will advise the country correctly.  

As the Minister also said that there should be sensitisation to the farmers.  This is the best way of sensitizing the farmers and having the farmers have interest actually.  So, I would like the hon. Minister to accept the farmers’ plea that their Board shall be theirs with the advice of these technocrats.  I beg to move.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend Clause 32 sub-section (2) by deleting the word ‘and’ at the end of paragraph 1, re-numbering paragraph M as paragraph O and inserting the new paragraphs M and N as follows:  M to read as traffic handling and N as Aircraft handling.  This is purely for technical reasons.  

Secondly, I would like to amend sub-Section 3 and 4 as follows.  Sub-Section 3 to read, ‘the proposed scheme shall be published in an aeronautical information circular and within 30 days after publication, it shall be submitted to the Minister for information.  And sub-Section 4 to read as follows; ‘the scheme shall come in force on a date specified in the scheme which shall be at least 30 days following information to the Minister.’  Again these are purely for technical reasons that we overlooked during the drafting of the Bill.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 32 be amended as proposed by hon. Mover of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. NASASIRA:  Clause 32(5), there is another amendment where I would want to delete the words ‘without seeking the approval of the Minister.’  In other words, we are giving a leeway to the Board and the Authority to carry out that function without seeking the approval of the Minister.  I think I can complete the Clause.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Yes.

MR. NASASIRA:  And finally, I would want to substitute the word Board for the word Minister appearing at the end of the fourth line of sub-section 7.  Clause 7 reads as follows:  ‘a charge shall be payable within a reasonable period specified by the Authority and any failure to pay within the specified period may attract a penalty which shall be a percentage prescribed by the Minister per day on the outstanding charge until payment is made’.  Mr. Chairman, we think these penalties can be prescribed by the Board without having to bother the Minister.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I will be very brief but these penalties to the public must have the consent and full backing of the Minister.  The Board officials are workers whose main job is to get profit for the organisation.  Charging the public penalties is a job which should have the Ministerial information and knowledge and consent because he is a politician and people can go to him and say, this is too high.  But these Board Members may be insensitive to the public wish.  Therefore, I think here the Minister should take full responsibility for these charged.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to oppose this amendment and in supporting hon. Karuhanga.  I think they are ill-advised.  The Minister must always be responsible for penalties imposed on members of the public.  These matters must be authorised by the Minister who remains responsible to this House and must be in a position to give a policy statement here should anything go wrong.  So, I oppose the amendment.

CAPT. BABU:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the amendment and I support it because we discussed for sometime in the Committee but then after that, we looked at the normal practice in all parts of the world where the Aviation Industry is working and we found that the Board can come out with these penalties without disturbing the Minister; some of them are very small.  

Secondly, the Minister at times has been given the wrong information by the operators of these aircrafts.  They go and give the Minister the wrong information saying that they will not pay these penalties without consultation and correctly so as hon. Karuhanga has said, they use a political mask to do so and therefore, we preferred in our Committee, to leave it to the Board who are technically qualifies to be able to put up these charges.  Thank you.

MISS KADAGA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I also oppose that amendment.  Mr. Chairman, this is a technical matter.  Penalties are to be prescribed and published fined by the Minister responsible.  That is the law and practice.

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, maybe, I may clarify.  First, you have the charge payable.  That charge is determined by the Minister, maybe with Statutory Instrument.  Then when you fail to pay that charge which is decided by the Minister, there is a penalty.  Are you trying to tell me that if there is a demurrage charge in Transocean, the Minister should come to determine demurrage charges?  This is really just paying a charge or failure, a pay that can be fixed as a percentage, and that can be handled by the Board.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Demurrage charges even constitute part of the international convention.  These are very strong issues that affect the public.  Let the Minister accept taking responsibility for his Ministry.  Let the Minister be able to hear both sides - the Board’s interest and public’s interest.  Remember what the hon. Babu of Kampala Central up to now has said. (Laughter) 

He is saying that all traffic operators will go and manipulate the Minister.  This is why the Sectoral Committee removed the power from the Minister to the Board.  How easy is it for them to manipulate the Board?  But who has ultimate responsibility in this House?  It is the Minister.  Therefore, the Minister must not run away from the office.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, I think that sub-Clause should be read with two Clauses below.  If the amount due is not paid within the period specified, the authority may cease the aircraft or other property after giving a reasonable notice of the intention to cease the aircraft or property to the owner, operator of the aircraft or property and the Authority shall retain the aircraft or property until payment is made in full.  Nine, the amount or rate of charge shall be reasonably related to expenses incurred or to be incurred by the Authority in relation to the provision of the service of the facility.  So, I think this question of the authority honestly of deciding, the magnitude of action can be quite too big for the Authority to handle.

MR. KARUHANGA:  You can see that if the Authority is going to determine the fees and the expenses they have spent on this business and then from that they determine the fees the person who has committed crime pays.  Supposing they engage in extravagant expenditure?  Secondly, we are inviting foreigners to come in their aircraft.  They get here, the next thing you hear is that the Board - and I am not talking about hon. Rwabyomere’s Board because that is a very miserable Board.  But you hear that the Board has grounded British Airways because the expenditure has been contested by this Airway and then the relationship between us and the foreign carriers and other countries get tarnished without the knowledge of the Minister and his approval.  Men, we should not accept this.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 32 sub-section 5 be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and agreed to).

Now we are moving to 7.  I now put the question that Clause 32 sub-section 7 be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 32 as amended, put and agreed to).

(Clause 33 put and agreed to).

(Clause 34 put and agreed to).

(Clause 35 put and agreed to).

(Clause 36 put and agreed to).

(Clause 37 put and agreed to).

(Clause 38 put and agreed to).

(Clause 39 put and agreed to).

(Clause 40 put and agreed to).

(Clause 41 put and agreed to).

(Clause 42 put and agreed to).

Clause 43

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to amend Clause 43 by re-numbering the existing 1 and 2 as 43 - sorry, I want to amend Clause 43 by re-numbering the existing sub-sections 1 and 2 and 4 respectively and inserting the following new sub-sections 1 and 3.  The new sub-Section 1 now reads as follows; The Aeronautical Authority in Uganda shall be the Minister responsible for Civil Aviation who may delegate some of his powers to the Civil Aviation Authority in accordance with this Statute.  

This is an international requirement in the Aviation Industry; to know who the Aeronautical Authority is and the Civil Aviation Authority as representing the Ministry responsible for Aviation will be delegated some of the powers but the Aeronautical Authority still remains the Minister responsible for Aviation.  This is also required to be known by other Aviation bodies in the world and during negotiations.  I also want to add sub-Section 3 to read as follows -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Let us go one by one.  I now put the question that Clause 43 sub-section 1 be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover of the Bill.  

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. NASASIRA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to add sub-section 3 to read as follows:  The Authority shall advise and assist government in its negotiations with other countries in regard to international air services originating, transiting or terminating at Uganda Aerodromes and those overflying Uganda.  

The CAA as the Aviation authority delegated powers now by the aeronautical authority of Uganda, is empowered here to participate in what are called bilateral air-service agreements.  Just like the funds, we hope soon after the passage of this, specifically Kitgum ginnery will be rehabilitated by STANBIC funds but certainly Parang.  I am afraid, through no fault of Government, Parang was destroyed by senseless people and I am afraid the way forward is to liberalise so that we can have some private players to get involved in getting Parang and any other ginneries going.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 19 put and agreed to).

(Clause 20 put and agreed to).

Clause 21

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that the words ‘Ministry responsible for Agriculture’ be deleted and replaced with the Ministry responsible for Commerce, Industry and Cooperatives, because I do not see the wisdom behind the Minister responsible for agriculture handling production and then crossing into the area of marketing.  This is where we always do not know to whom to complain.  So, I am just proposing that whatever to do with marketing should be always the responsibility of the Minister who is the Mover of this Motion.  Thank you, Sir.  I beg to propose.

MR. NDEGE:  Thank you, Sir.  I second the Amendment because right from time immemorial when I was a young kid, the Ministry of Commerce or responsible for Cooperatives which announced the beginning and the end prior marketing of cotton.  I think it was a misprint and I think the Minister should accept.  Thank you.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, the drafting was deliberate.  The organisation will be supervised by the Minister of Trade and Industry and it presupposes that before the organisation announces any beginning or end of marketing, they will be automatically working with the Ministry of Trade and Industry but that before the organisation does that, he will do so in consultation with the Ministry of Agriculture.  That was the thinking behind the phraseology of this Clause.  However, if Members, felt very strongly it is not a matter of substance.  I will be happy to concede.  Thank you.

(Clause 21 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 22

MR. ABOLA:  I would like to move an amendment on Section 22 to introduce a new sub-Section 5 to read as follows;  “The Minister may, after the approval of the Cabinet, by Statutory Instrument acquire any ginnery in the national interest subject to appropriate consultation, which ginnery will then be sold to another private operator.’  

The Sectoral Committee considered this amendment very important because of the huge and under-utilised ginnery facilities in the country and most of these ginneries are not operational because of lack of spares, and since unions are going to be involved in direct cotton export.  Now there will be conflict of interest in some cases and you may find that some unions will deliberately refuse to allow a private operator to gin whatever cotton he has bought for export purposes. For these reasons, we felt that in order to enable the liberalisation programme to proceed, it was necessary that the Ministry or Government be given some power to acquire these ginneries not for keeping but for passing on to another private operator for efficient and effective operation.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

RE. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, while the proposed amendment may be in order, I would like it further improved by saying that any dormant ginnery because government may be tempted to take from cooperative union the only viable ginnery that they may have.  By disposing some of these ginneries, the whole idea is to improve on the performance that should, therefore, be catered for.  For example, in Lango, we were now proposing that we begin to lease some of those ginneries stop private business people but to have this compulsory acquisition may go against the Union’s asset.  So, I would like to improve that to any dormant ginnery.

MR. KAHERU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the amendment.  I would like to remind the House that these ginneries were actually compulsorily acquired from the old operators and were handed over to the Cooperative Unions.  There are some who actually acquired them on loans; but since the farmers’ cotton is not being bought in many parts of the country, I think it is right that the government should have a right of acquiring some of these ginneries in order to process farmers’ crops.  Thank you.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to accept that amendment essentially because much as we have tried to liberalise so far, I wanted to inform the House that it is only in four cases where we have succeeded in the last two years to have unions agree to leasing arrangement.  It is only Masaba Cooperative Union that has leased Sironko Ginnery, while Busoga Cooperative Union has leased Luzinga Ginnery, and North Bukedi has leased Kabole Ginnery; and to-date, much as Monac East Africa tried to conclude the leasing arrangement to Lango Cooperatives, it is only recently that Lango is still advertising; that is after so many players have visited many of these ginneries.  We have become extremely worried that unless we have a last resort approach, in public interest first of all.  

Secondly, not for government to hold on to property but that you do it to facilitate the private serious player to the extent that we are putting this in place as a last squarely resort machinery.  I would have no choice but to accept to the proposal.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 22, sub-Section 5 be amended as proposed by hon. Abola.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 22 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 23

MR. WAMUSI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I propose that Clause 23(1)(d) be deleted because in (c) there is a record given; the recorded weight of cotton and the weight of the container and then in (d) we are again saying we should record the weight of cotton.  So, I am proposing that (d) should be deleted and (e) becomes (d).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I do not know whys there is a problem on the grading of cotton because you can see these are particulars and that is one of them.  And so, I have not quite understood the main reason for suggesting the deletion of this Clause.  So, I make the proposal.

MR. WAMUSI:  Mr. Chairman, this section clarifies that any person who buys or collects cotton seed, lint shall keep on the premises in which such cotton is purchased or collected proper books in which shall be recorded in duplicate the following; (a) the name of the seller or owner; (b) the grade of cotton; (c), the weight of cotton and the weight of the container, and (d) again the weight of cotton.  So, I am saying this is repetition.  That is why I am saying we should delete (d).

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I have no objection in accepting that proposal.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 23(1)(d) be amended as proposed by the hon. Mover.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 23

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, page 15, Clause 23 sub-Clause 2 you can see a reference made in the middle there provision to sub-Section (i), it should actually read 1.  It is just a simple amendment.  If you could make it 1 instead of (i).  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Clause 23 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 24 put and agreed to).

(Clause 24 put and agreed to).

(Clause 26 put and agreed to).

(Clause 27 put and agreed to).

(Clause 28 put and agreed to).

(Clause 29 put and agreed to).

(Clause 30 put and agreed to).

(Clause 31 put and agreed to).

(Clause 32 put and agreed to).

Clause 33

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend Clause 23 to include in liabilities.  It is most remarkable that the Minister heads the Clause by vesting of assets and liabilities and does not include liabilities in the Clause at all.  

I would like to add a Clause to the effect that at the end of the Clause, to the effect that government takes over liabilities including employees’ claims.  There are a number of employees, quite a big number in Lint Marketing Board.  The Lint Marketing Board Act is being repealed and these employees of the Board are being left high and dry.  

Indeed, they are being left on the street by the Act of repealing this Lint Marketing Board and I believe really it is most inhuman to just leave these people as they are on the street just by the stroke of a pen.  And, I would like to suggest that the government should take over the liabilities at least in as far as the employees are concerned.  So, it is in this respect that I appeal to the Minister to accept the amendment.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand not only to support hon. Sibo but to thank him for this amendment because I was actually disturbed about the change of name from Lint Marketing Board to something else and I was wondering how the Minister and why he was trying to lose all this good will because Lint Marketing Board is invested in many go-downs in Mombasa, it has been in business in cotton for so many donkey years.  

Now, I was wondering why all of a sudden he wants to drop this name, create a new name and then people will have to find out this animal.  Now, I can see the reason.  Obviously he does not want liabilities of Lint Marketing Board to be associated with this new company.  This is why he is refusing to put liabilities of Lint Marketing Board in this Bill.  But he should be honest with, he should tell us that I have a problem with Lint Marketing Board, that it has liabilities, that it has been sued internationally, it owes so much money to the international world and that it is bra, bra, bra.  But, I think hon. Sibo’s point about the fate of the employees who have to go, the commitment of government, since it is divesting and it was a sole shareholder of Lint Marketing Board to accept the -(Interruption)

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr. Chairman, the previous Bill which the Ministry had drawn under Clause 25(1) says as follows; ‘All property and assets except, property and assets that the Minister may determine which immediately before the commencement of this Statute were vested in LMB established under the LMB Act, and which are required for the fish charge of the functions of the organisation under this Statute, shall rest in the organisation subject to all interests, liabilities, charges, obligations and  trusts affecting that property.’  So, you can see how the foreign element has completely ignored that.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Who are owed money businessmen in this town by Lint Marketing Board?  By this stroke of a pen, they are technically knocked out.  They cannot claim any money from this new organisation.  Can the Minister now confirm to the public that the State of Affairs is okay and we can move on. 

MR. KAIJUKA:  (Continued) - the claims are in the region of $3 to $4 million dollars.  What is disturbing, is that although in business there were morals, but I am advised that contracts are contracts; if you fail to live up to the word of the contract internationally, you have no choice but to pay up.  Because what happened here is that Lint Marketing Board failed, because we had disturbances and the country did not produce as much cotton.  So, they pleaded, and our Attorney General advised that we had no cause to worry but at the end of the day, we did loose.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, this House is very interested in knowing the details of how the Ministry of Justice handled that case, because we have information that this matter was not properly handled by our lawyers and from what you have just said, with the assurance you had been given that you will win this case, it is surprising that a case involving so much money could just be lost in international circles.  How deeply involved were our people in defending the interests of our country in this matter?  I think, it is very important that this House knows the details of how the officials who were involved in handling this matter handled it and if they did not handle it ethically and professionally, what punishment is available?

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, in a short response to these comments -(Interruption) 

MR. SIBO:  Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, there are people who are holding Titled of Lint Marketing Board and I would like the Minister to clarify what the position of these - since this Clause 33 is talking about the new organisation acquiring the property and assets and so on free of any encumbrances.

MR. KAIJUKA:  Mr. Chairman, I want to respond specifically to hon. Karuhanga’s information.  I want to suggest that I will be too happy to circulate to Members of the House a short, detailed piece of information, it is brief but detailed.  In other words, it will be specific.  I will be able to give Members full information relating to this case, in other words, it is to everyone who has Uganda at heart will feel really annoyed but that, that is the nature of laws.  I will definitely inform the House - I will give the information but on a more serious note, because of these problems, we decided that Government takes over these liabilities, because they were - they could not be handled by Lint Marketing Board in its present form even if we wound it up.  So, we specifically had to take them over and they are part of Government over all debt and we are busy trying to negotiate with those who want the claims to settle this outside this.  

Having done that, we went ahead to deal with employees specifically.  Lint Marketing Board had well over 300 employees. But as I speak to you, within their terms of service, we have been able to reduce their staff to about 100 people, as I speak to you now.  We have been handling staff a matter with caution and religiously, and there is no one who has left without appropriate terminal compensation.  I will think that many of them who are left and still useful should find room in the two organisations.  If they are experts in the seed treatment side, they will get to the organisation, those who are commercially oriented will be absorbed in the new marketing arm.  So, we think the matters are being handled. 

Lastly, for the overdrafts, Mr. Chairman -(interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Proceed please.

MR. KAIJUKA:  For the overdrafts that Lint Marketing Board may owe, you may have listened to my submission.  Lint Marketing Board is owed well over Shs. 2 billion by some unions, and that is going to be at the heard and core of settling whatever liability, because the structure, the cotton project, is going to make sure that the 2.2 billion is put in place, in favour of Lint Marketing Board.  We shall settle whatever liability. 

Secondly, we shall make sure that the new Marketing Company has enough working capital.  This has been really taken care of that is why, having taken care of all these liabilities, we are proposing that the new company starts off with a clean slate and that is why we are specifically - we are saying that it shall vest in the organisation, free of any encumbrances deliberately.  So, with this explanation, I believe hon. Sibo will agree with me that I should reject the amendment.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SIBO:  I have hear and listened very carefully to the explanation given by the hon. Minister, but I think he is falling short of accepting the amendment, because he says he has taken over the responsibilities of the liabilities and he has got the money to do it, and he also says that the employees are going to be taken over by the new organisation. But out of the experience we have had, for instance, Uganda Revenue Authority refused to take some Members of Customs and Excise, Income Tax Department, because they were not allowed to - they were free to take them on or not to take them on.  

So, I believe, really quite frankly the Minister as I said, has just fallen short of accepting the amendment.  In any case, when he says that the new organisation takes over everything, all the assets, free of any encumbrances, then he cannot obviously pass on these liabilities to the new organisation.  So, I would appeal to him to accept the Amendment.

PROF. WANGUSA:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the information I want to supply is that in addition to the question of staff of Lint Marketing Board, there are other local creditors.  Sir, I happen to represent the African Textile Mill in Mbale and I do know for a fact that Lint Marketing Board owes us 200 bales of lint, in shortfall, you know, they under supplied us and this case has been on our books and there has been a lot of correspondences, like three years.  So, I am proposing Sir, in support of the amendment moved by hon. Sibo that this question of liability should be written into this Bill.  

If I may, therefore, bring back what hon. Rwakakooko has already brought up, this Article as it appeared in the May version which I brought by mistake, tallies very well with one we have now, but the only difference is at the end.  I would like to beg your indulgence to bring out the deference and to recommend that we take the earlier one.  May one Sir.  The May one goes like this.  If you like to raise almost exactly as the present one up to the last line; if we can take the present one up to the last line, to the word organisation, so shall vest in the organisation.  The previous one after organisation continues like this - after organisation it says, ‘shall vest in the organisation, subject to all interests, liabilities, charges, obligations and trusts affecting that property’.  I see no valid reason why this very good drafting was changed and I am proposing in support of hon. Sibo that we take the May drafting.  Thank you, Sir.

MR. KAIJUKA:  I really have no problem with the basic use of addressing liabilities.  Before I accept, just take note of this, Mr. Chairman, that first I did inform the House that we had taken care of all the liabilities and our legal advisers did mention that when you are not specific, when you do not mention liabilities specifically; liabilities automatically become a responsibility of Government.  I stand to be corrected and I am advised by the Attorney General’s Chambers, I am not a lawyer, so in matters of this nature, I accept in good faith, if that is not a true position to the extent that Government is going to take liabilities, I do not loose anything inserting this Bill.  Mr. Chairman, if you agree since hon. Sibo had raised a slightly different Amendment, if we agree in terms of procedure, we could adopt, amend and carry the last Amendment and we will be home and dry.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that Clause 33 be amended as proposed by hon. Sibo.

 (Question put and agreed to).

(Clause 33 as amended, agreed to).

(Clause 34 agreed to).

The Schedule

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, there is one Amendment to be made on page 23; that is Schedule III Clause I, sub-Section 3, substituting the word ‘of’ with the word ‘or.’  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

(The Schedule as amended, agreed to).

The Title

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, I would like to amend the Title of this Bill to read, ‘The Cotton Development Bill, 1994.’  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  I will go back to what I was going to start with, if they could remove the word organisation from the Cotton Development Bill - it is on page 1, really and then the title of Ministry to read ‘Ministry of Trade and Industry.’  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee report there too.

(Question put and agreed to).

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled ‘The Cotton Development Bill, 1994, and passed it with some Amendments.  I beg to support.
 
 ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE MINISTER FOR TRADE AND INDUSTRY (Mr. Kaijuka):  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled ‘The Cotton Development Bill, 1994’, be read a Third Time and do pass.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN:  Title settled and Bill passed.

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIR (Mr. S. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I would like to move under Rule 85, in order to suspend the application of Rule 26, which requires among other things that five days notice must be given to this House.  This is so because of the urgency and the extreme importance the matter that is supposed to be decided upon this House.  Sir, the matter is with regard to two points.  There has been extreme concern expressed to Government that the dates allowed for viewing the record has not been sufficient or has not been enough for the inspection of the register.  Secondly, there has been wide concern that the agents of candidates at the polling station should sign the result sheet.  Government has taken serious consideration of these views and I would like to amend the regulations by -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. S. Njuba):  If you so permit by providing for these two things -by moving a Motion that the National Resistance Council do resolve and that approval be given to the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs to make the Rules under paragraph (a), of sub-Section (i), of Section 30 of the Constituent Assembly Statute 1993 to the effect of 14th day of January, 1994 in terms of attached instrument to amend the Constituent Assembly election rules contained in the Third Schedule of the Constituent Assembly Statute.  

This is a power given to the Minister responsible for Constitutional Affairs and what we propose in the Statutory instrument is that extension of sub-Rule 1, of Rule 5 be amended by allowing the Commission in his own discretion to extend the period by a further ten days if it appears to him to be necessary and fair to do so. This is important, Sir, because I say in his discretion, because he acts independently and if he deems fit and there are sufficient funds, he may extend by any number of days that he may consider necessary.  (b), by substituting sub-Rule 11 or Rule 25 the following Rules.

ii) The Presiding Officer shall enter the particulars of the votes polled by each candidate at the Polling Station again the name of the respective candidate on the declaration of the results form set out as Form DR in Part II of these rules.

iii) The Form referred to in sub-Rule II shall be completed in four copies and signed by the Presiding Officer in the presence of the Polling Assistant and such of the Accounting Agent of the candidates as are present and entitled to append their signatures to the Form.

iv) Of the copies, the Form referred to in sub-Rule 3:

(a) Two copies shall be delivered by the Presiding Officer to the Returning Officer.

(b) One copy shall be placed in a ballot box referred to Rule 27; and one copy shall be displayed in a conspicuous place, open to inspection by the public in the immediate vicinity of the Polling Station.  There should not be a full stop there, because it should continue as follows:  For a period not less than five consecutive days immediately following the polling day.  The display shall be from 08 hours to 1800 hours on the day -(Interjection)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Minister, where are you getting all that from? 

MR. NJUBA:  This was omitted; I thought the Clerk had drawn your attention.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, proceed please.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Thank you very much.  On each of the days, the completed result Forms referred to in sub-Rule 2, so displayed.  Mr. Chairman, I apologise that, that bit was left out, but this is to ensure that the list is displayed for a number of days so that those who are interested may be able to examine it for at least for next five days and the hours are known rather than leave it in a book and say okay, it was left to the Chief and Chief has it.  We thought this was necessary.  It may be urged or it has been advanced that each agent should have been provided with a copy.  However, considering our meagre funds, we find this extremely expensive.  

Secondly, I would like to point out to Members that the failure of an agent not to sign this Form - if he refuses in other words, should not be fatal to the results.  It is important to understand that agents have the liberty - candidates agents have the freedom and the liberty to sign the forms, but should as some losers do behave in some places, decide to walk off or you find a poor candidate like myself, without agents, that the absence of the signature of that agent should not be fatal - should not invalidate the results.  This should be made quite clear to the House and to the country.  That is all, I beg to move. 

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Motion, but it was unfortunate the Minister did not bring these Amendment last week where we were considering the extension of registration, because we would have to consider all this at the same time.

Secondly, I support the resolution because, from our past experience in Uganda, some of the Presiding Officers are so sided that they can always fidget with the figures.  So, I think by bringing the agents of the candidates to sign on the results, I think this will improve and reduce the reading of figures in these elections and perhaps even in future.  If you remember, in 1980, it was only the presiding officer but not the Chairman of the Military Commission.  I had to fidget with the figures because of his own authority.  So, I think to avoid such occurrences it is good that the Agents of the Candidates also participate in the signing of these results.  

I would even add that the Minister has forgotten another necessary amendment.  This one is on the signs used on voting.  If those people who know how to write can write a tick now, why introduce an X?  This has been found out to be confusing, because we are going to find that a voter will tick his candidate and because he knows X means wrong, he will go down and cancel somebody’s name out and this will spoil the vote unnecessarily.  

So, I would request the Minister just to accept this amendment and that we also use only two signs - the ‘tick’ and the ‘thumb,’ so that it is clear-cut, and there are no alternatives.   Because you may lose a lot of votes by some people putting two signs on the voting paper.  I think this will help us.  Because if somebody can tick, let him and those who do not know how to write, use a thumb, full stop.  Why put a third alternative, which can be confusing, Mr. Chairman?

MR. MARWAS:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to thank the Minister at last to have come out to the please of this House and the nation.  While supporting the Resolution on 4, I am still asking myself whilst put in a conceptious place.  What happens, if I lose I run ahead and tear it off immediately after that?  Who is responsible for this post that I have put in a conception place; at least, there should be someone responsible t make sure it stays for these five days.  But as it is because after the elections somebody can tear up because he or she has lost, what happens after that?  Because it is supposed to be tendered in case there is some - to issue in court?  So, I wish to ask the Minister - there should be somebody maybe the agent who should be responsible to make sure this paper put there stays for those five days.  Otherwise, I support the Minister.

MR. KALULE SSENGO:  I stand to support the Resolution.  In fact, I remember when I was contributing, I did propose the idea of having agents countersign the results, and since the Minister has brought it, I am very grateful to him.  Because, as my former Colleague has pointed out, the former experience of 1980 makes countersigning a necessity.  

I also foresee another complication where I think the Minister may have to give some consideration and this is the question of joint meetings.  Now the situation in Uganda - it may happen on the given date when we have called a joint campaign somewhere, and then one of our Colleagues loses a relative or even a wife.  If he misses that joint meeting what happens next?  Because in the law we do not provide for a case where a man for genuine reasons misses a certain meeting.  It seems if he misses it, that is the end of the story.  So, I would request the Minister to think of a way of either organising another meeting or allowing him to go there in particular guidelines that he should confine himself to listen to that in his address to the people.

Again, I also do agree with the Minister on the question of extending the viewing of this list because when we went down to the villages, these lists were not up yet, and I think this is because they were being written manually.  So, extending it is also a very genuine proposal.  

Lastly, I want to request the Minister that as we get along, he should allow us to give him proposals so that we make sure this is free and fair and we leave no room for anybody to complain.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. MUKWAYA:  Mr. Chairman, I support the Resolution as presented by the Minister.  But my concern since you have asked us to be very brief is on the signatures.  I would be more comfortable if the Minister had proposed that the names of those Agents are written there and then they sign because if you just sign, one may not know the Agent and it may later on cause confusion.  May I suggest that the names - that he provides for the names and then the signature of those Agents.

Secondly, in (4) it talks of putting one copy in the ballot box.  Suppose there is more than one ballot box in the polling station in case there are very many voters.  What happens to these other boxes?  How are you sure - can he clarify on that one?  Because really I am not very sure of how one ballot box and one paper would facilitate the other boxes which are not provided for under the Resolution.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr. Chairman, I just stand to support the Resolution on the ground that in Clause 25, those who know that they are going to lose these elections have been very loud and talking of re-rigged elections.  Now, if their Agents are going to sign, I do not know what other alternative they will have there left that will make them still complain of rigging.

Secondly, I would like to caution here that in future to avoid any luckily embarrassment, some of these areas should be sighted ahead of time.  For example, the viewing, which we are talking about, has ended.  We are now seeking time when it should be opened again for another ten days.  So, some of these retrospective proposals being brought here should be safeguarded.  I beg to support.

MR. KIRYA GOLE:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Resolution.  But I would like to amplify further the sentiment expressed by my Colleague just bellow here that the symbols we are using for actual voting is there symbols.  A cross is internationally accepted as a reject -(Interjection)- okay, if it is not internationally most people here in Uganda understand a cross as something not good.  So, they will vote one candidate with the tick and look further and put a cross on one they will reject.  So, you will find that most ballot papers or votes will be spoilt.  I would like to attract the Minister’s attention that we should use only symbols such as the ‘tick’ and the ‘thumb.’

MR. KASAIJA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I will just only add one point which I think has been missed out.  That is on Section 3, where they said, after the agent has countersigned the results, there should also be the writing in words.  That thing I think many people have talked about it.  For example, the candidate may have got 150 votes and the presiding officer could countersign then agent also counter-signs.  But it is easy to change that figure to 1500.  So, it should be written, One hundred and fifty, and that is what I want to add, Mr. Chairman. (Applause)

DR. MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Resolution, but I would like to draw the Minister’s attention to Rule No. 21.  This is the assistance to be given to these supporters.  I realise that maybe the Member of the family can help an immediate person.  But I would rather even the agents if the voter comes in and he or she cannot read or write, he should be able to say, ‘I want to vote for Magezi’ and my agent should be able to assist.  But here where you are debating where you are saying it should be even the voter’s family to do that.  I beg to move.

MR. OPIO GABRIEL:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I stand to support the Amendment.  But when the Minister says that because of the financial constraint, it may not be possible for every agent to have a copy.  I would like to say that this exercise is so important that I think the Minister should concede that after the assignment, it should be possible for every agent to have a copy, because displaying as it has been said on a tree or on a building most of you have gone through elections and you see how the Motion to be is.  In a short time that piece of paper will be torn from the building.  So, I would suggest that despite the fact they will require a lot of financial resources to be spent, it is very good for every agent to have a copy of the results.

Lastly, I am saying that the last table where the voters will be putting their ballots in the box is very crucial. I would like to say that at that point if a voter not only because he is blind or incapable, if a voter asks for assistance to go to the last table, an agent or the agent should go to that last table and say, ‘okay, what is your problem?’  If the problem is to find how to put the thumb at the right place, all the agents other than the returning officer should help that voter, because it could be said that the returning officer will be biased.  With this view, I suggest that definitely an agent should be asked to go the third or final table to assist a voter to put a ballot in the box.  Thank you very much.

MR. SIBO:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  It is just two points.  First of all, I would like to express my disappointment in the absence of Ministers here.  I do not know why they are interested in CA because they are never here, and I do not know whether they would have time for CA.  Mr. Chairman, I want to perhaps warn the Minister because it appears to be managing the CA elections by crisis.  We have told the world these elections to be the mode of elections at least in Africa.  I would like to think in advance and to keep his eyes on the ground.  

Instead of coming to the House for further approval, I suggest he should take the proposals now; particularly the ones approved.  He does not have to come back here for that.  So, when he is making Amendments, he should take one as amended.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. LATIGO OLAL:  I do not know whether the hon. Minister has taken to account the assistance of the old age to the voting.  That came out during our civic education because I had to do it.  They need an assistance to the old lady or old man who is going to say, I want to vote Latigo and then Latigo agent must tell here, try to vote and that is not rigging at all.  But if you give it to a polling assistant who is biased; he is going to show her or him somebody else.  That is very crucial, and after that one, I think everything is complete now.  With all these amendments accepted, they should be complete.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  As you can recall the registration exercise was very successful.  But today, we have some problems in amending some parts of the Statute.  I would appeal and recommend to the Government that to avoid any future inconveniences, waste of time and the tax payers money we should promote the Akabway Commission to become a full time or permanent Electoral Commission.  Because they would have experienced such that they could advise the Minister concerned because we have so many elections.  Right now, we have the Youth and Women Elections but they are not so successful, and in future we shall be holding RC elections and maybe general elections.  But if we put in place a permanent Electoral Commission, we could be saving a lot of time, money and inconveniences.  Therefore, I appeal to Government to appoint a permanent Electoral Commission.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I support the Resolution.

MRS. SEBAGEREKA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to support this Amendment and to add or to request that civic education continues because as they said about the signs, somebody goes and says, you tick the one you want and if you do not want me, you can just put a cross on me.  That has also been taking place.  So, I would really strongly recommend that civil education continues and the ones that they were showing the signs we eliminate any other sign except the right and thumb; and on the Youth and Women Elections, there is a lot to be said and a lot of loopholes and I am so sorry that the Minister is not around - of Women in Development, but I am addressing this to the Minister for Constitution, that these elections of Youth and Women Council have not been given proper guidelines and Women Representatives - they are hanging in the air, and they do not know when they are going to be nominated, they do not know their nomination date, they do not know their election date.  We know the general one is the 28th of March, but the Women date we no not know.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Sam Njuba):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I must thank the Members and yourself for being so patient and allowing Members to express their views.

It is not true, that we are managing by crisis or I am managing by crisis.  This country is still in problems.  We all sat here and looked at all these things and thought they were okay at the time.  But as time passed, we discovered one or two and three, and I am obeying Members to be accommodated as we have been today and assist whoever you can and I will in return cooperate.  

Now, to the point.  I have had serious discussion with the Commissioner on the dues of the Clause, which appears in Rule 18(b).  This team insists that it has been through civil education, widely understood to be part of the vote.  I am persuaded by the contrary views expressed in the country about the likely confusion.  If it is the wish of this august House that we should cross out the word ‘cross’ under Rule 18(1)(b), so be it. (Applause)  Otherwise, I accept that there will be only two methods of voting - the ‘tick’ and the ‘thumb.’

CAPT. GASATURA:  Point of order.  Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the Minister to move a dangerous amendment with a House with a questionable numbers in the House at a time -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  He is in order.  Take you seat.

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr. Chairman, if the Minister went ahead - this is dangerous - civic education is going on countrywide and to move at this time such an Amendment, would that be in order, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Take your seat, please.

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Njuba):  Mr. Chairman, I am sorry I have said that I have had representation because countrywide, I have had representation from this very House yesterday and today, we have had it yourself in this House.  So, among the Amendments, I move it be not there.  But it came from this august House and it is sovereign in law making.  

So, I do not think I am doing anything dangerous.  I accept that the signature of the agent may not be sufficient and sometime may not be readable and therefore, in three - in the last sentence those who have the Statutory instrument - in the last line which begins with the ‘Append’- we shall say, ‘append their names and signatures’ with regards to the box containing the results rather putting the results into each box will be counted separate, the records noted and its contents put back.  Now, I cannot do everything; let us go slowly gentlemen.  The words will accompany the figures. (Applause)  

Now two points; one deals with, in which capacity there are those who cannot read or write.  Now, there has been a dangerous trend countrywide and I am afraid it has been raised by an hon. Member from Jinja in this House - for such a character - a weak character to go on the first table and say, I want to vote for so and so - so that he may be assisted by his agent, that is a very dangerous trend.  

What has been taught in civil education and what I appeal to you to continue telling these people is that they should come with a trusted friend, his first choice to assist to accompany this incapacitated person or elderly person or a blind person.  His first choice because it is his choice rather than publish it at that table, and you may discover to the surprise of many that some people do not, may not have agents at polling stations.  

So, it is better to ask a trusted friend to accompany the weak, the aged or the blind.  If that fails, then there will be an official, a government official, who can be asked to assist this elderly person and we have recommended to the Commissioner that such a person should not be from the locality to avoid favours but not his agent.

Lastly, Sir, this is provided in the law, civic education must continue until the last day -(Applause)- and it is a responsibility of the Commissioner I agree but, I disagree with him when he says it is his alone.  It is a responsibility of all of us, Ministers, Civic Leaders, all leaders to continue with civic education so that we can achieve the best results.  I thank you.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Resolution adopted).

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN:  And with that we have come to the end of today’s Sitting. We adjourn until 1st February 1994.

(The Council rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until 1st February, 1994 at 2.30 p.m.)

