Friday, 12 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair. 

The House was called to Order.

THE LATE LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA

LAYING OF WREATHS

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF THE 
NATIONAL RESISTANCE COUNCIL SEEKING TO PAY TRIBUTE 
TO THE LATE HON. LT COL SERWANGA LWANGA

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR DEFENCE (Mr Amama Mbabazi): Mr Chairman, I beg to move that it be resolved by the National Resistance Council duly convened and sitting in Kampala, on this 12th day of January, 1996.  That whereas Council notice with deep sorrow the sad demise of hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, which occurred on the 5th January, 1996; and whereas the late hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga has had an outstanding career as a Freedom Fighter, an Army Officer, a Public Servant and a Distinguished Legislator in this august House and in the Constituent Assembly that deserves national recognition.  

Now, therefore, the National Resistance:

(a) Collectively conveys its deep condolences to the bereaved family, relatives, colleagues and friends of the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga and the whole nation upon the loss of a distinguished and gallant son of Uganda.

(b) Do register its recognition of the distinguished services that the Late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga had in the course of his life rendered to the people of Uganda.

I would like to briefly inform the House that Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga about three weeks ago, complained of chest pain and he developed some chest infection.  He was treated in a clinic in Kampala for about a week before he was flown to Germany in Hamburg for treatment.  Although he had responded to treatment positively for those two weeks, on Friday 5th January 1996, he developed internal bleeding in the stomach, which could not be stopped.  His health deteriorated rapidly and the doctors did not think he would stand an operation.  He, therefore, died of excessive internal bleeding.  We have not fully translated the results of the postmortem because it is written in Germany.  But this is the information we were given by the doctor on phone immediately after he had passed away.  

Mr Chairman, hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, had many qualities.  He was first and foremost a freedom fighter.  When the forces of terror and darkness usurped political power in this country, hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga abandoned the comfort of this world and risked his life so that Uganda could be free.  He joined the army in 1981, in the struggle for freedom being waged by the National Resistance Movement then.  In the army, hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga served in many capacities and held many important appointments.  As a Political Commissar as early as January 1982, an Intelligence Officer in the same year, a Deputy Chief Political Commissar by December 1983; an Acting Commanding Officer of the Task Force Black Bombers by 1984; a Brigade Commander, Northern Brigade 1986, and a Chief Political Commissar from 1989, till the time of his death.  Hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, was among those that greatly contributed to the creation and building of an army that is accountable to the people and committed to the people’s defence. (Applause) 

He not only commanded units which dealt a decisive blow to those who bent on usurping the rights of our people, but has since the capture of State Power been participating in the consolidation of their achievements.  

Secondly, hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was a democrat.  After the rigging of the 1980 elections which decentralised the people of Uganda and thought piece of instability; hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga did not only fight for the return of stability, but also for constitutional rule in Uganda.  At the exception of our people’s struggle, Lt ColSerwanga Lwanga participated actively in the formation of the Resistance Councils and Committees which brought the people at the centre of the politics of their country.  As Members know, Resistance Councils and Committees are the foundation of our present democratic practice.  As you maybe aware, the President of the Republic of Uganda His Excellency Yoweri Museveni, appointed hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga on the Constitutional Commission which sensitized our people on Constitutional issues and prepared the Draft Constitution which formed the basis of our new Constitution.  

Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was also elected by the Army Council in April 1994, to represent the Army in the Constituent Assembly which task he ably executed to its fruitful end.  I can give testimonythat Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga devoted most of his time during this period, to the making of the Constitution and as a result of his efforts; Uganda has now been firmly set on a democratic direction. (Applause)

Thirdly, Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was totally immersed in his duties as a public servant.  He would never rest unless he had accomplished the duties assigned to him.  I remember very well on the day of his wedding, on that Saturday, Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga entered the church immediately from a meeting in which he was executing a public duty.  Indeed Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was such an indefatigable worker that he earned himself the ‘epitome the horse’ during the struggle, Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga would travel miles on foot to carry out tasks that had been given by seniors and if there was any one that never got tired, Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was on top of the list and he earned himself the ‘epitome the horse’. 

His forth and most indelible characteristic which Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga showed the people of Uganda is his personate desire for the unity of Uganda. (Applause)  This was easily exemplified by his work as a Legislator in this august House, and in his contribution in the Constitution Making Process, all this is on record and has been covered widely in the print media.  He was an exemplary public servant who proved himself when he served as a Principle Private Secretary to the President of Uganda.  When Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was appointed PPS, he came from the bush into the highest office of the Republic.  He had no prior experience, because he had gone to the bush right from University.  That he managed to hold this office and to do his duties effectively for about three years.  I think he is proof that, he was a good worker; at that time I think he was only 30 years or even below without any experience.  This clearly was not a mini achievement.  

We have lost a brother who represents a new generation of leaders in this country and a new out look to political or public life.  In this House Mr Chairman, which was the creation as a result of the fate of the life of Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, we have representation of many generations of leaders.  We have people like hon. Obwangor, hon. Abu Mayanja, hon. Nekyon, hon. Ssemwogerere, who represent one set of political leadership.  They represent a generation of leaders.  There is another generation represented in this House of people like, the hon. Kintu Musoke, the hon. Bidandi Ssali, the hon. Kirunda Kivenjinja, and hon. Maumbe Mukwana, who went in election later, than the first one.

We also have another generation of people like President Museveni, hon. Eriya Kategaya, hon. Moses Kigongo, Myself and others -(Laughter and applause)- who represent yet another generation.  I am giving just a few names for these examples of these generations.  Hon. Serwanga Lwanga represented the latest generation of people like himself, hon. Mugisha Muntu and others of that age, who have come up as a result of this generational effort.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to pay tribute to the sense of sacrifice that this generation has developed and I would like to say that, if the young generation who are also beginning to take up leadership role continue with this sense of commitment and sacrifice for community work, then obviously the prospect of Uganda developing and becoming a better place to leave are obviously high.  It is of utmost importance that citizens who distinguish themselves in public life be honoured by the institutions through which they serve their people, in order to build a culture of distinguished service to the nation.  Mr Chairman, I beg this House to accord hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga the honour in recognition of his distinguished service to this nation.  I beg to move. (Applause)

MAJ. GEN. MUGISHA MUNTU:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I stand to second the Motion.  I knew the late Comrade Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga at our university days.  We were in the same year, same faculty, and finish in the same year in 1981.  I joined the struggle in April and he joined the struggle in May.  We found at that time the force was composed of about 200 officers and men.  I have an occasion to talk about the military career of the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga.  But I would like now to talk about some of the characteristics of the late from which possibly all of us could learn lessons.  I remember in 1981, a few months after we had joined the struggle, our Commander in Chief left the bush and went outside for an external mission.  

He spent some months outside and came back.  But in his absence, a few things happened.  A few things in terms of ideological positions, in terms of how an army or a liberation force should be created and how it should operate and its relationship with the people; and how the struggle besides the armed struggle how the ideological struggle within our people should be carried out.  Two positions more or less emerged.  There was a position of warlords, as it has been noticed more less in most of the African new colonial armies; a position that an army is an army.  You just follow orders if you are told to do this, you do that, you do not question.  

But a different view emerged that an army alright is an army, it is supposed to fight.  And soldiers are supposed to follow orders.  But that is only when there are orders in the process of fighting a battle.  But when it comes to how the army for examples relates to the population, orders peace; a soldier from that point on wards, should only do what is right.  The Commander in Chief came back and he passed through quite a number of units, and he found the later message had gained the upper hand in all the units.  

Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga at that time was in Nkrumah Unit, there had been no communication between the units at all whatsoever, but there was a generation of freedom fighters who more or less had the same thinking and who thought that the way the freedom fighters should shape up the struggle internally within the forces and externally the relationship between the forces and the people should be based on the premise that you should do only what is right and the people are supreme.  And ultimately, it is the people who act as discipline for the small emerging force and if those were pushed in the line of warlords, we were to take the upper hand that the struggle would die a natural death even before it started.  

The late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was one of those young people who spearheaded that move.  Until that time, it took root, got strongly established and as of today, the former NRA, which is presently Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, is rooted in that struggle that succeeded even at that time.  We have seen many struggles die a natural death in many parts of Africa; even when the objective conditions arrive on the ground, everything is ready for change.  But you find that, there is a weakness in leadership, you find that the strategy is led and the tactics used as a wrong one and therefore, the struggles fail.  The Commander in Chief in the strategies that he laid and the tactics used certainly was supported by that emerging few within that committed leadership within the forces in which the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga falls.  That brings me to the character of courage. (Applause) 

Not courage only in the terms of using weapons in a battle, but also courage in terms of expressing and standing by what one knows is right in regardless of the consequences. (Applause)

Many times we have heard blame put on leadership in many parts of the third world; specifically in our own country.  The ultimate blame is put on the leadership; in most cases the President is singled out.  Some of tend to disagree with that position in the sense that, there is absolutely no way one person even if a President has got the authoritative instrument of coercion at his disposal.  There is absolutely no way the President can terrorise the whole society year after year, when there are institutions within that country.  When there are people who are within those institutions, successfully and mess the majority of the people who are within those institutions absolutely do not have any sense of sacrifice.  Because if there is Resistance within institutions of government, if there is resistance within the people who lead our societies, there is absolutely no way any regime who would terrorise a society at will. (Applause)  

We have lacked that character in our leadership in the past, in the sense that often times people who lead our people either compromise it with terror or they ran away from terror.  They do not offer the required resistance that the people ask for.  Because if they were to offer that resistance, there is absolutely no way any dictatorship would survive.  The late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga had that courage.  The courage to fight in patrols and the courage to fight and stand for right.  There may not be so many people maybe who have that character, but when they exist, however few they are, if they are coordinated and organise the people, the result of that resistance is to have free societies like we do have today.  Thanks to the likes of the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga.  They have showed the example that if there is a sense of sacrifice, if there is a sense of determination to fight for rights, there is absolutely no way a society can be terrorised by any force be it internal or external.  

The late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, those who know him very closely, would know that he is not a person who would be intimidated.  If he knows he is standing for right, if he knows something is right, he would speak for it and he would speak for it in the open.  That is another characteristic.  He was never an intriguer. (Applause)  

We have suffered in this country because of the type of politics that we had played since independence; well some of it was in the colonial times as well.  The politics of intrigue.  The late had a characteristic of talking, saying whatever he thought in the open.  It is one of the reasons why the National Resistance Army presently UPDF; survives and has developed as the cohesive force and it has got a lot of reverence.  We have under gone a lot of tests, internal as well as the external, but we have survived all and we are a force which we are absolutely sure, we stand to defend the democratic gains of the people in this country and we support all development that do occur within our society, all positive developments. (Applause)

Why it has survived is because of established methods of work.  Mechanisms which were established to develop internal contradictions.  We are human beings.  There is absolutely no way you can expect that at any given time, you will all agree there abound to be disagreement on points of view, on different issues.  But as long as an institution or any organisation does not have an established mechanism of resolving internal contradictions, what happens ultimately is the disintegration of that institution or organisation whatever it is.  We have seen civil organisations disintegrate, we have see armies disintegrate, but our own army has not if anything it has been gaining strength every other day.  We integrated for example seven fighting factions, officers and men who the day before would have been fighting against each other; shooting at one another.

But all those seven factions were integrated within the National Resistance Army and you would find that the officers and men who were enemies the other day, would be fighting side by side without any suspicion -(Applause)- without looking on your shoulder as if the officer or man who is besides you is going to shoot you.  But why?  We did not have any external force, we did not have UN Forces or Forces under OAU, to come here and over see that integration exercise.  We never. (Applause)  But because of those established methods of work, being able to sit in forums and discuss literally anything that crops up within the army. Have our own disagreement even if a meeting takes days, we would not have a problem with that.  But at the end of the day, we would come out with what we think is right or what is correct for the development of our force.  

The late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, had that character saying what he thinks is right and saying it in the open, but not operating in a manner that we have seen often times used.  But operating in the open anyway.  It is a well-tested method and we think if anything, it creates positive developments for whatever organisation uses it, in this case we use it in the army.

The other character I could talk about is the determination and the bravery of the late. Comrade Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga.  I have occasion to talk about a history at the funeral, but some of the longest time he operated clandestining missions from the bush to Kampala carrying very sensitive information, contacting different people, some in government, others within Kampala; Kampala at that time was very hostile.  That takes courage.  He did that for quite a long time.  At times you go back to the bush, you find the camps where we would have been, would have already shifted.  At times you will find that, there will be enemy units all around the area where that unit would have been.  You will be able penetrate to find out from at times a civilian, at times the civilians would have left the area as well.  You find that, the unit has already moved out and you have to look around to know where the unit would have been re-established.  In most cases, we would leave their small units of course to keep monitoring the movement of the clandestine operatives.  But of course they will not also be in the unit.  So you would have to go round looking for small unit attachments that would link him to the other comrades who would be coming to pick them too; where the many would have relocated.  That courage that determination, that bravery.

The other characteristic is that, the late. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was a Pan Africanist.  He shared that commitment with quite a number of other cadres within the National Resistance Army, presently the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.  With a belief that, quite a number of us Pan Africanism is the ultimate objective why?  As a country we stabilised and will develop, we have got no doubt about that, we see all the signs.  Our society is able to get the basics in life.  But there is something else.  The question of dignity of the people over centuries.  So we have been humiliated generation after generation.  There are many factors that have caused that humiliation; some are external, others are internal.  But we do not believe that the external factors can influence anything in a society unless there are internal factors of weakness that cause anything that is external to effect that influence.  

So, our biggest problem is that humiliation has occurred largely because of the internal weaknesses that we do have within our societies.  So, the ultimate is that, even when we develop our own societies like here in Uganda, even if everybody became rich here, it would not mean that as an African people that would have wholly regained integrity as a people.  It does not necessarily mean so.  Because when you look at pictures on TV, if you see people starving or mass killings in any other African country, there is nobody who is going to know if they meet you in the street, say in some capital that you are from Uganda or you are from another African country; you are just the same people.  

So, the only way that we as a people can recover that dignity is all the African people develop, have all that human things are entitled to and recover that dignity the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was one of the officers who linked up with other leaders in government, in the formation of the Pan African Congress which is based here and he was one of those who went all around the world drumming up support.  There was a Pan African Congress that took place here and he has been a very active Member of the Pan African Congress (Applause)  

We have not lost the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga in vain, he is luckier than most in the sense that he has seen one of the greatest objectives of our struggle achieved, that is the Constitutional Making Process, having seen it to the end (Applause) 

Those of us who may be lucky to live up to the time when there is a small transition of power or handover of power from government to government through a free and fair election, will be much luckier of course that the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, but that would be one of the second most greatest objectives of the struggle that the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga with the rest of his comrades sacrificed for a number of our other comrades were never lucky, even to see the capture of power.  We have lost quite a number of others between 1986 and today as they struggled to establish stability within the country which they have done, but all those that we have lost and all those that we continue to loose in war, in accidents or whatever manner they will not be lost in vain.  Because what they struggled for is already a foundation set and we see no possibility of reversal of that process.  Thank you Mr Chairman (Applause)

MRS NJUBA (Historical Member):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, who is also known by his colleagues as the horse and also as the ‘Galipitawa’.  He earned these two names as a matter of appreciation by his colleagues, for the work that Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga did during the armed struggle.  Mr Chairman, if I was asked to say in a few words or to describe Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga in a few words, I will just say he was a perfect cadre (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, there are a lot of people today who call themselves cadres of the NRM.  A lot of them really just think that, it is a title to put against their names.  Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was a real model of what a cadre should be and any of us who would like to remain a cadre of the National Resistance Movement, should endeavour to live a life very much like the one that the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga lived.  The late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was an all round young leader.  We have many types of leaders.  We have leaders who are very good politicians, but know nothing about the military.  We have leaders who are very, very good on the military side, but know nothing about politics.  We have leaders who may know both about politics and about military, but who have no discipline whatsoever.  We have all sorts of leaders.  But Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga in my opinion had all the requirements of a good leader.  He was disciplined in his operations, he had no excesses.  Probably the only excess that I can talk of in the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga’s life is that, he was a very fast walker.  He walked very, very fast, so fast that one day we had to jokingly remind him that ours was a protracted struggle to request him to reduce the speed.  It is not surprising therefore, that a lot of people would say that, the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga may have made more kilometres during the armed struggle than any other fighter.  He walked quite a lot.  I do not know that, anybody else walked as many kilometres as Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga did.  

Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was a balanced politician.  He treated all matters with a lot of seriousness, but at the same time with a smile.  I do not remember seeing the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga in a threatening mood; he was always smiling.  But for everything that he had to deal with, he dealt with very seriously.  Mr Chairman, contrary to what a lot of people think, there were times during the bush war when the old politics tried to crip in and tried to take the better of us.  Sometimes sectarianism came in, sometimes we fought for food, sometimes we cried, we feared.  But all the time that I saw the late hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, he was doing his job as a Political Commissar.  

He was a perfect Political Commissar.  Because you would learn from Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga both by did and by hearing.  He did quite a lot of work in fighting sectarianism in the NRA.  And that is why at the time that the NRM took over leadership, most people who came appeared to be ideologically clear.  Mr Chairman, we may have noticed that a lot of our colleagues have been diverted since 1986.  There are a lot of colleagues who no longer see what we saw at that time as necessary and true.  But the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, has never been diverted, not even at the hardest time (Applause)  

As it has been said by the hon. Members who talked before me, Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga would say what he thought was right irrespective of what the rest of the people were saying.  He was willing to lead, to say the truth. to show the way.  And that is not something that a lot of politicians do.  Most politicians would like to find out what the people around would like to hear and then they will say that.  The country has lost a great leader in Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga.  The late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga was such a good Political Commissar that when he was arrested on his way to Nairobi for Peace Talks, you know these people they invited us for peace talks and then they went ahead and arrested the people who were coming for peace talks.  When he was arrested according to the story he told us after words, he decided to protect his life by politicising the people who were guarding him (Applause)   

And he did the job so well that the Commanding Officer in that place told those people not to touch that man.  Of course when he came out he was dirty, he was badly fed, but at least he came out and he was not badly tortured.  And all that he achieved because he politicised these people.  When the late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga entered Hinton Hotel in Nairobi, all the people around wondered who this VIP in rags was.  He was in rags, but he was being escorted and obviously he was a big person.  And he indeed came to Nairobi and continued to do his job of politicising the Ugandans who were there, the people who were involved in the peace talks, but also the Kenyans.  The late hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, was a great teacher.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to use this opportunity to remind you.  I have a suspicion that maybe Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga has died before getting his Medal? And if that is true, Mr Chairman, I think you have delayed. A lot of our Colleagues who deserve to have medals of this country are dying. (Applause)  

I sincerely think Mr Chairman, that it is the opinion of this country that Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga should have got a medal.  Mr Chairman, I want to appeal to all those people who consider themselves cadres of the National Resistance Movement, that the ten years of peace may have caused a dent in our performance.  Let us use the sorrow that we have got of the loss of our Comrade to renew our vows, to renew our commitment so that we continue to be the shining example of what a cadre of the National Resistance Movement should be.  Mr Chairman, I support the Motion. (Applause)

MR SSEMWOGERERE (Busiro County, Mpigi):  Mr Chairman, I support the Motion on the Floor.  I commend the Mover and the previous speakers for the comments made; and I think that this meeting will bring some consolation to the bereaved family of Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga; in particularly, the wife, the father and the mother.  Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga for avoidance of any doubt was born in Ssese Islands; he belonged to the Hippo clan.  In that sub clan in Ssese islands of Bwendero; there are other distinguished Ugandans who have left us.  Amongst them were close to him relatives; the late Prof. Posian Mulema, the late Dr Sebastian Kyewalyanga and late. Peter Serumanga, who was once a Member of this House; and the late Nyasiyo Mayanja who was a Senior Judge in Buganda Government.  All these were close relatives of Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga.  Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga’s father is my dear uncle Donald Sekatawa, old chief in Buganda Government; he is currently an official in the RC System.  And his mother Anna was a teacher.  Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga from birth it was obvious, had been well in and out; in good health, good intellect and good feeling to others.  And he developed all his attitudes to the full.  

That is why you find that, he was a great student and as those who worked with him in the bush now tell us.  He had such energy, such courage, such determination, such ability to perform and to accomplish that they called him the ‘Horse’.  Most of us who were not in the bush with him, but had occasion to work with him, could not fail to admire his capacity for work and especially in determination to solve problems as just as he could.  He spared no effort to work during the day and in the night as long as necessary.  

I remember when I was Minister of Internal Affairs and we were talking about his commitment to work with Lt Col Kiiza Besigye with whom I was in the Ministry then and we so no surprise because Serwanga Lwanga could spend the whole day, a whole night working, moving without even any need for food and there are not many of us who can do that.  It was a very difficult job clearly for him as for anybody else when he was principle private secretary to the President so soon after the take-over, when so many things were undecided and he kept imagining solutions and working them out.  Sserwanga-Lwanga in the Constituent Assembly must have been one of those who worked hardest and reached out anybody regardless of the generations which have been referred to by my hon. Friend Mbabazi.  He talked to the young ones, he talked to other people as well.  

On occasions, he would burn the night candles with anybody he thought would help find the solution.  He would come to our own homes in search of a solution.  He sought for compromises but principled compromises and when he knew he failed, he said so without any shame.  You will recall an occasion when he decided not to vote for any side. It was a great act of courage but it is not because he had not worked hard, he had worked hard for a solution in the CA and he thought he had achieved what the country need and has been said by the army commander, he was clear, he was honest and so he called a spade a spade.  Sserwanga-Lwanga had occasion to help in the development of the islands.  He was always making contacts with all those he thought were in a position to help to see that such islands had a development programme.  All the islands missed him regardless of their religious affiliation.  

As I said at the beginning, the family is here to witness the feelings of the House and I hope they will carry this message home that not only they have lost, the whole country has lost.  Let us try to learn from him.  Let his soul rest in eternal peace.  (Applause).

COL JEJE ODONG:  I thank you very much Mr Chairman.  At this sad moment when emotions run deep, it is extremely difficult to find the right words to use.  I knew Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga as a fellow student.  I knew him as a fellow combatant.  I have known him as a Colleague in this House; I have also known him as a Colleague in the Constituent Assembly.  We members of the Uganda Peoples Defence Force feel perhaps the greatest of losses today.  A loss of a brother, a loss of a colleague, a loss of fellow combatant, a loss of a leader and indeed a loss of shining star, an example of total commitment and dedication.  (Applause) 

Hon. Mr Members and Mr Chairman, Sir, you will all recall as Members of this august House, as Members of the Constituent Assembly, as Members of the Electoral Commission and indeed as members of society at large the seemingly and endless source of energy that the late Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga had and the commitment he always exhibited in whatever he chose to do.  Hon. Members, Mr Chairman and indeed fellow countrymen and fellow women, we will only do justice to the late Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga if we always bear in mind helplessness, total dedication, commitment and courage and fight for the freedom and democratic governance of fellow man, the virtues for which the late Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga stood for.  May his soul rest in peace.  (Applause)

MR WAPAKABULO:  I thank you Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to support the motion in farewell to our Friend Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga.  I have known him in a number of capacities, a personal friend, friendship which arose from interaction at work.  I did not know him before.  I came here in March 1986.  I daresay we began realising the friendship out of as I said interaction at work from that time on.  But also Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga was a Colleague here in this House and in this service of the people of Uganda generally.  Finally, I had the historic chance of being in the Chair of the Constituent Assembly when Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga further served the people of Uganda in that capacity.  

In Uganda as we know, we have gone through many difficult times but the National Resistance Movement had a mission and that mission can be summarised roughly this way: the mission of the National Resistance Movement was to liberate Uganda.  After liberation, to stabilise Uganda, after stabilisation or concurrently to democratise Uganda and subsequently to create a spirit of constitutionalism within our society and if you take these as the major tasks that were given to the National Resistance Movement and given what has been said, then you can see that Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga has achieved nearly 100 percent performance.  (Applause)  

Sserwanga Lwanga deliberated, the story has been told by those who were with him. Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga worked as an administrator in State House and also as a commander of a brigade at a time when creation of peace and stability in the country was crucial.  But his role in the process of democratisation of Uganda also stands out even more prominently.  He was prominent in the creation of legislation and the ideas that went into that legislation to give power back to the people through the RC system.  He was instrumental in participating and creating the ideas that gave rise to the draft constitution as a member of the constitutional commission and that formed the basis of our present constitution and indeed as a delegate of the army to the Constituent Assembly. He performed his role with a lot of seriousness.  I can say this because I was chairing those meetings.  Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga had instructions from his constituency but he never parroted them that you can be sure.  He applied them selectively with a sense of judgement and if in his judgement, it was apparent that he must depart, he never, at any single moment feared to do so.  

You will recall those of you who were in the House on a number of occasions more prominently two, when Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga would go and sit in the centre abstaining from taking a side even on matters where those of the movement side were very enthusiastic in taking a particular side because he was convinced that his view was right and for that, I can say nothing but evidence of courage and a deep sense of conviction.  (Laughter)

It is only unfortunate that he has had to go at this time when we are just beginning to implement the constitution and given his job in the army, that of chief political commissar, my view of it was that he was going to be a major instrument in creating a sense of constitutionalism and understanding of the constitution in the minds of the people who are now in the Uganda Peoples Defence Force.  We miss him because that has been cut short.  That is why I said, he nearly scored 100 percent because he was just about to begin really to now tell the people in the army their sense of direction, what does it mean when you have a constitution, what does it mean when you have an army which is supposed to be at all times subject to civil society?  Unfortunately he has not had the chance and opportunity to accomplish that mission.  

But I am sure those of us who are still around, the only thing we can do in honour of Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga is to push on that mission to fill the gap, difficult as it may be so that in honour of him, we accomplish what he has not been able to accomplish.  But Uganda will always remember the son of Uganda dedicated to unity and in service of that dedication, he played a major role in all the tasks that stood before us in the desire to liberate and create a modern Uganda.  On behalf of all those of you and others not here who were Members of the Constituent Assembly and on behalf of the members of the constitutional commission, who are not able to speak on the Floor of this House and also the staff of the Commission and the Assembly, I would like to pass our heartfelt condolences to the family and friends of Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga and wish his soul to rest in eternal peace.  I thank you Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

REV. ONGORA ATWAI:  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the motion. The motion seeks two things from us, that we place on record our deep grief at the sudden demise of the late hon. Sserwanga Lwanga and that we register our unbounded admiration and gratitude for the services the late has been rendering.  To the first area of the resolution Mr Chairman, we all can remember very vividly the participation of the late Sserwanga Lwanga up to about three weeks ago when he came into this very House, removed his cap and saluted us in this House as if God was telling him that this the last participation in this House.  

And for this, therefore, I think there is not a single person in this House who will not agree that this part of the Resolution should be adopted and to the second one Mr Chairman, which is also asking us to register our gratitude to the services that the late has been rendering to this country, to me personally Mr Chairman, my knowledge of the late dates back to the time when we were elected to the expanded House.  Him and the other late Major. Victor Bwana were those people who inspired us, who actually impressed us to take our proper role as the legislature among other people who encouraged us here Mr Chairman.  (Applause)  

In this particular area of his national service, we know quite well that the late has been a bridge as the mover of the motion did put it.  I belong to the other generation but here was a bridge connecting our generation with the incoming generation.  Here was a bridge connecting us with the army.  I say so Mr Chairman, it is through his participation and through his leadership that we in the north had known of an army that on site, you will not be able to run away but you will be able to come nearer to be told what exactly to be done.  Here is a young man who was born away in Ssese Islands but whose influence and vision has now escalated and radiated to the full length and width of Uganda.  His theme was freedom.  We in the north especially if I have to scale it out to Lira area, Lira has become another of Uganda.  This is because there is that freedom.  The late has left us there with only one word now and that is development.  There is nothing in our vocabulary like war or whatever else that can bridge the peace that the late has brought in together with others.  

Mr Chairman, if we are to mourn him as Christians and other believers, we have always gone through these nasty experiences.  Behind me here, I lost Hajat, near me here, I lost Vincent Odongo and all this time and days, we are losing people.  I think the only consolation is that which Paul has given us in his second Epistle to the Thesalonians, Chapter 4 verse 12 that we should not mourn as if we are ignorant.  What do I mean by this?  I think it is proper especially to the generation of the late Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga that is to say, we have lost him.  

We must not mourn as if we cannot create yet another Sserwanga Lwanga and if this is to be our consolation Mr Chairman, we need to mourn and at the same time pray that a replacement or some other people should come up and take up this sort of leadership which the late had already brought in place.(Applause).  

Finally, Mr Chairman, in the book of Revelations, it is just written it has happened.   That which has happened we cannot now reverse.  I think let us mourn him, give him a befitting burial and also begin to restructure ourselves so that this world be a better world than we found it.  I beg to support.  

MRS MATEMBE:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, as Uganda mourns its great son, I feel privileged to stand up here in this House to say a few words about the late hon. Sserwanga Lwanga as a Friend, workmate and as a Brother.  The death of hon. Sserwanga Lwanga brought very, very vividly in mind, back in my memory the death of great useful men, men of courage and determination, men like the late Victor Bwana, the late Frank Guma, the late Aliganyira, the late Ondoga, they are so many but these are useful men of courage and determination that inspired me personally and many Ugandans to commit myself to the ideals of NRM.  They have gone.  These young men were a challenge to me personally.  Major Kazoora is my uncle but he was just a young boy when I left and came to Kampala to do my studies.  When he went to bush, we thought he had died.  When he came back, he was DA Kabale and they were talking about him on the radio and I said, who is that?  I thought it was this hon. John in this House because I could not imagine that that young boy was now that one. But when he came to Kampala and brought all these Colleagues and I saw them, I felt challenged.  I said, that am I so useless as I am, old as I am?  If these young people could go and fight and bring us peace and freedom, I felt very seriously challenged and useless and that is why I committed myself to the ideals of NRM. I said, what can I do even for those who had perished like the late Katabarwa and the rest.  I committed myself.  

Now, when Sserwanga Lwanga dies, all his memories came to my mind.  I really felt hopeless, shaken.  I said, God, this cannot happen.  I really felt it but one thing I must tell you as hon. Members, when you are so deeply depressed and frustrated and lost, the Lord is always around.  I can assure you, we who believe in Jesus Christ, I felt comforted because the Lord told me this is the time for you to stop putting faith and hope in people.  They are just flesh body just perishing.  This is what came to my mind and I was challenged that I should put my faith and hope in the almighty God who gives the life and takes it; and that is the courage in which I stand here to talk about hon. Sserwanga Lwanga.  I had an opportunity Mr Chairman and hon. Members to closely work with the late hon. Sserwanga Lwanga as a Colleague on the Uganda Constitutional Commission, as a Colleague in CA and as a Colleague in the House.  I found hon. Sserwanga Lwanga with a spirit of commitment, selflessness and tirelessness.  You know it is well to stand and talk about people because they are dead; because you do not want to talk bad things about them but it is another thing to talk real, genuine and correct things.  

Whatever is being talked about hon. Sserwanga Lwanga here is the right one.  It is not pretence I can assure you.  Let me tell you hon. Members.  On the Commission, we were divided into groups.  Hon. Sserwanga Lwanga was in my group and hon. Kasujja and they allocated us chapters.  Each Member had to write about two or three chapters.  I am not here to report about my colleagues but we were not as hardworking as everybody. One thing that really amused and surprised the commissioners, hon. Sserwanga-Lwanga was ready to write all the chapters if anybody said no.  You can imagine this army man wrote a chapter on Judiciary and we were surprised.  We were many lawyers and we were saying, aha! that one, me that one, Sserwanga Lwanga would say, give it to me, I will write it.  

We used to walk down in darkness with Sserwanga Lwanga and Kasujja because his spirit of hard work would never also go.  He said, tonight, let us finish two, tomorrow, we finish three chapters, you know the chapters in the commission. But Sserwanga Lwanga wrote chapters and chapters I can assure you.  He was somebody committed to the nation, I have not seen many.  Hon. Sserwanga Lwanga’s patriotism, boldness and honesty, the qualities which Ugandans too badly need now, Uganda needs those qualities and they are going in the name of these great men.  Can anybody stand here and fit in the feet of hon. Sserwanga Lwanga?  That is the challenge I put here.  Hon. Members, Sserwanga-Lwanga was ready to work day and night with or without pay.  His payment was clearly the progress and well being of Uganda.  (Applause)  

And as he lies here, I am sure he is saying, I have gone, you are mourning for me but mourn for yourselves if you are not going to commit yourselves to the ideals for which I worked.  I want to say that dying, we must die there is no question about that.  All of us will one day die but one thing God did was that while we die, he told us that there are two places where to go after here.  It is either hell or heaven and God is good.  He did not tell us the day when we die but he gave us the right and powers to choose which direction we shall take and as we live on this earth - me I want to say that this man lying here chose a right path; because you cannot have the qualities of hon. Sserwanga Lwanga if you do not have God in you.  

As to how we live on this earth is very, very crucial.  It does not matter how many years you live here.  The question is, have you accomplished any mission on this earth?  So that when God asks you, how did you use the talents I gave you?  We shall have an answer.  Hon. Sserwanga Lwanga has an answer before God he used the talents God gave him.  Mr Chairman, the spirit of hon. Sserwanga Lwanga must continue moving on.  He cannot just die and perish.  You cannot consider yourself a successful leader unless you have a successor.  We must be successors of Sserwanga Lwanga.  His spirit must move on Mr Chairman and it does not pay Mr Chairman and hon. Members for us to say, who can replace Sserwanga Lwanga? But I want to give this challenge, if all of us here said - of course God made us long ago, we cannot change so easily unless you get saved and get closely with him.  (Laughter)  

But we can say that if each of us can pick at least one quality of hon. Sserwanga Lwanga’s qualities and put it on yourself, Sserwanga Lwanga would live, he will not die.  I want to say this lastly.  We people who believe in God and Jesus, we are told in the bible that Jesus asked Simon Peter as he was nearing his death three times and he was saying, Simon Pete, do you love me?  And Simon peter said, yes my Lord.  And Jesus was saying, feed my sheep.  Sserwanga Lwanga is asking people here, my Colleagues, do you love me?  If you say yes, feed his sheep and the sheep is the qualities you have heard here.  Be honest, be bold, work for this nation, work for nothing and in conclusion Mr Chairman this is a very serious matter I am bringing forward and I am using this opportunity to state: the widows and orphans of the fallen heroes need the proper care. (Applause)  

Mr Chairman, these people are great men who fought, who are dying.  They leave widows like that young lady who wedded a year ago and an orphan.  But we come here, we mourn, we stop, we go.  The widows and orphans are suffering.  We are not looking after the widows and orphans.  It is a challenge to us as I sit down and wish my Brother, my Friend hon. Sserwanga Lwanga a good rest until I meet him.  I thank you Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

BRIG. KYALIGONZA:   Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for allowing me to say something as a last memory of my Colleague Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga.  I also want to express my thanks to the hon. Members especially the mover of this motion to recognise to pay the glowing tribute to the fallen comrade.  I am thanking you hon. Members for having recognised the important job and the role which our late comrade Sserwanga has played to the national bridling of this country including peace.  Mr Chairman, you may notice that we have always as Members of this House missed quorums but as you may notice now, the House is full to capacity. It is raining, people have got a lot of commitments and they have sacrificed their time to come and pay their tributes to the late Sserwanga Lwanga.  So, I thank you very much hon. Members.  Mr Chairman, Sserwanga Lwanga is a fellow many of us have spoken who was known to us individually.  I knew him as a fellow combatant, I knew him as former senior commander.  We worked together.  He was my second in command at a particular time.  

Sserwanga Lwanga when he joined the bush in 1981, he was introduced to me when I had gone to one of the units called Abdu Nasser by late Magara. During that time, we were yearning for recruits.  Among the first and useful recruits was Sserwanga Lwanga who was introduced to the bush by one of our supporters somewhere and among them, he came with his friend called Major Mbuga.  These fellows were great friends right from Makerere.  Mbuga was a footballer, Sserwanga was a marathon runner.  Now when they came to the bush, they were introduced as intellectuals.  They were actually 12 intellectuals who had come at ago in the bush including some of our present high ranking military commanders now.  Mr Chairman, the beefing up of the military intellectualism within the struggle was part of the present successes which formerly the NRA now UPDF has achieved.  

As you may notice Mr Chairman, many speakers have already said that Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga is an equal.  It is true.  There are some people who will tomorrow tell us that Lt Col Sserwanga Lwanga is a difficult person to replace, we have lost a great leader, we have lost a great friend.  Those are the usual semantics normally said to fallen comrades.  But as hon. Matembe has said, that it is true certain words are said.  

Sserwanga Lwanga is a very difficult person to replace.  Many of us could pretend that we shall replace.  It is difficult. We shall not replace horse, we shall not replace a galimpitawa because all these things were as a result of experiences and practice.  We shall have a new cadre who may be broad politically, broad militarily, consciously but when it comes to the facts and reality of life, he will miss the experience.  

So, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I beg that when we are mourning a comrade like Sserwanga Lwanga, we should also remember and imagine what is our country about.  We are losing people nearly everyday and every person has got his own quality.  One of the qualities of hon. Sserwanga Lwanga, all previous speakers have spoken about it.  I will say another special quality in Sserwanga Lwanga.  The army commander, when he was contributing said a certain culture, when the chairman of the high command then, who is now our President, went for a certain mission; he left us in the bush.  We were fidgeting to command and lead a protracted war group.  I was a warlord in Mukono, somebody was a warlord in Nkurumah which Lukoola there, another one was a warlord around Matugga and so on and all of us had our own interpretations of situations because we were new comers to these type of struggles.  Either I would have my own faction which faction included people who would come to bring me kaunga and bijjanjalo and then I would say these are great supporters.  Now when it came to the issue of sectarianism, tribalism, which was of course developing very fast in our struggle, Sserwanga Lwanga. 

I may also mention the living, Major General Salim Saleh and another small man called Seguya and Kyobe.  They had different beliefs and factions.  So we held a meeting.  Of course it was initiated by late Magala.  I came with my faction which included Major General Salim Saleh and Sserwanga Lwanga.  Now we were saying, Buganda or no Buganda, we are all struggling for Uganda. The other ones were saying, no, mulwanira ku ttaka lyaffe.  Meaning that you are fighting on our land.  Go away, you are recruiting only Banyankole and you are not including us, you are not making us commanders, go away.  Then we were saying, this is just the beginning.  The army is just developing.  We just do not have to promote a person over night because of tribalism.  Sserwanga was the champion of those fellows who were opposed to the idea of tribalism.  (Applause)  And likewise, he was identified as a very potential person who can be a very good political commissar and all of you must have seen in practice that he has been a fantastic political commissar.  He has died as a chief political commissar of the army.  The present army which all of us are proud of is a result of the inputs of the people like Sserwanga Lwanga.  (Applause)  

Mr Chairman, I am also feeling sorry to these people who are developing our present cadres, leaders who are recruiting our own leaders in this country because when somebody is about to develop, he passes away.  Naturally, we have no capacity to identify so and so is about to die.  It is - as hon. Matembe is putting it and hon. Atwai, that it is God’s call and once God calls you, there is no appeal.  You cannot appeal to continue for another day or two.  But what I am saying, I am feeling sympathetic to the leaders because producing and developing people of the likes of Sserwanga is not easy.  

We shall have good speakers, good actors, good everything, but people who will have a reference point to say the other time, we were eating kayinja, we did this, we had tribalism, we developed this, we recruited this, we integrated the following armies and now we are living together, we are able to live with the enemy, have peace talks, be arrested, then we capture some of the aeroplanes, then we say unless you release Sserwanga we cannot also release.  There is a time when Sserwanga walked 72 miles one day.  He was deployed - I would say deployed because during that time, we were expecting doctors; Dr Kiiza Besigye with due respect.  He was in charge of a particular service rendering his medical professional service in the army.  One of our leaders was sick.  He was suffering from a unique sickness we did not know, which was this river blindness.  Somebody would have lost his eye if it was not for the work of Lt Col Kiiza Besigye.  He deployed Sserwanga Lwanga to immediately move as hon. Mrs Njuba was saying that Sserwanga Lwanga was a fast walker.  Indeed he was.  He was walking to come to Black Bomber which was my unit so as to pass a message to look for a particular drug which the doctor had prescribed and I was moving towards the area where that person was.  Now, on the way, Sserwanga told me that I am coming to your place.  We are supposed to get this and that drug for the treatment of the river blindness.  Now, we walked back and as one hon. Member has said, this was through thin and thick.  We would walk in an enemy infested area without guide but using the common grid reference; common knowledge and then we would arrive.  I arrived, I was tired, I said, no, I am not going, the drug we have received go back.  So he walked back.  Now when the name of horse came into being.  It is not because he was a horse being ridden but he was a fast walker, hard worker and so on.  So he became a horse.  

Similarly galimpitawa; he had a fantastic jacket.  It was like a raincoat but it was a military jacket which he was putting on and whenever you would look at him, actually that jacket he was wearing he was so small, not fitting in that jacket.  But every time we would say, where is your jacket?  Oh! galimpitawa; meaning this is my bullet proof; because when it would rain on him, he was using the same jacket.  When it was cold, he was using the same jacket.  So the word again galimpitawa came.  

Now when we have a person like Sserwanga and he is in our midst, we are mourning him now.  Everybody is here, what are we required to do?  To replace him.  Our country must continue, Uganda shall continue but I as a person, I feel disappointed because hon. Sserwanga has not witnessed his last mission.  He has participated in the warfare, he has done the politics, he has deliberated in this House but he has not seen the last portion of democratisation.  He has not seen us voting to change the powers of government democratically using a ballot box except he has participated using a gun and now he was moving away from using a gun to the more civilised and democratic method of using a ballot paper which he was about to accomplish.  He has gone.  

Mr Chairman Sserwanga Lwanga is a fellow whom I would describe as somebody who was not subversive.  The office that he held as a PPS, many of us were surprised.  As you have heard, he was a fellow who just came from the university, fresh not with any experience, not with any generation of political experience and he becomes a PPS.  Even in the bush, he was doing certain jobs which were not actually suitable for his experience.  When we came or during the meetings of the High Command and so on, he would act as our secretary and you would find the kind of work he was doing was fantastic and I admired the late Sserwanga Lwanga because things he was doing were so difficult that actually serving three years with our Head of State, who is so critical especially when one is missing the experience, was a fantastic achievement for Sserwanga Lwanga. (Applause)  

He is the man who introduced the issue of as a leader not being pushed into cheap popularity.  Sometimes because the public was so excited with seeing the new liberators and the Head of State, I am sorry to say our Head of State sometimes would be swayed, he would stop where he is not supposed to stop.  He wants to shake hands but in terms of security, it was dangerous for Sserwanga Lwanga.  So he gave advice and said, Your Excellency, this is not correct.  Please, let us move on and it needed courage because you would not tell your Head of State, please, tuondoke.  The wanainchi would be annoyed of course that this man is taking away our leader.  Who is he?  And at the end of the day, they would say Sserwanga is difficult, he does not want us to see the Head of State but what has he achieved at the end of the day?  Perfect work, perfect system of security of our leaders.  

So, let us thank him for that achievement and having laid the foundation of perfect service, perfect morals.  Being a PPS many people were saying, ogudde mu bintu.  He would have been diverted.  You are virtually a person steering the welfare and services and activities of State House.  

Sserwanga was a worker, he was not diverted, he was a good cadre.  He knew the ideals of strugglists.  So if Sserwanga now was here to be with us, he would ask or remind us that yesterday, - hon. Atwai has reminded us that when he came in, he saluted.  Now he would remind us and say that yesterday, I was like you because he was useful, he had every life, so he was like us.  But today, I am as you see me there.  Now tomorrow you will be what I am.  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  (Applause)

MR KANYOMOZI:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I am standing here with grief because of the little association I have had with the late Sserwanga Lwanga.  Mine is just going to be a short personal testimony about our Colleague who has gone away from us.  I normally as you know speak long but I do not have the ability to because it is so difficult and my thoughts may not be coordinated fully.  But let me say this Mr Chairman.  When we came into this House as the reverend has said, we found a group of young men army officers and as I have always said, this army has a difference from the armies we have seen.  (Applause)  I have said it in public, on television, I have said it in the papers, I have said it on radio not because I have friends who are so close to me but just because of the character of the persons in it.  The young men we found, there was Aliganyira, there was Victor Bwana and the others who are still with us.  To me, they showed me something different; not a question of generation but that ability to look at the nation and the people they are supposed to protect and lead in the field they are in.  

My personal testimony is that this man once rescued me from a house arrest and Ester Mugarura here is my witness.  During the RC elections, I was actually taken to my house and kept under guard.  This young gentleman who is here now in a box or coffin came, he asked for me because we used to sit on this bench and we would exchange pieces of paper; that is the way Parliament communicates at times.  So he came looking for me.  And they said this man is in his house.  He cannot move out. He said, but I expected this man to give me lunch and I have come, I want lunch and who is going to give me lunch?  So, this young man with his Land Rover and another Land Rover drove to my place. It was a shock to those that had kept me there.  Because we sat down, ate lunch and he drove me back now in ceremony.  If he was one of the army officers of the past, he would have first asked legal authority which had kept me there.  So he thought it was wrong as the army commander has said, it was wrong for me to be kept in the house in a constituency which I represent.  He took me and introduced me formally and said, let him go wherever he wants to go.  This was during the RC elections.  Later he was the same man who supervised the Rurangaranga knowing the character involved.  You know he supervised Rurangaranga’s election in Sheema and he was able to bring him to RC 4 and 5 without any skirmishes and Rurangaranga now happens to be the chairman of education committee in Bushenyi under the able leadership of my Friend here.  (Laughter)  

I am saying this, because, this is the type of character and leadership we expect in all people in our society.  Then comes CA. During the CA, this young man would go to the CA and come here, those of us who did not make it and compare notes with us.  There is another soldier, I do not want to mention his name, but I can see him over there; these people if they had an idea, they would buy these ideas amongst even those of us who in courts do not belong, because, they thought we were also Ugandans and we were part and parcel of the system and we have got to live in this country together.  These are the particulars that one would say, that these need to be development.  

There is another aspect Mr Chairman, which I want to speak of, the courage and the spirit. Being born here in Buganda and standing up like this young man did and say what he said, it takes men of back and spine so to say, to say what this young man said, but he said it and to me, with my other republican spirit, I said, eh, there are some people still there who hold beliefs of this nature.  First, it was right, he would say so, because, he believed in it. Secondly, he was looking at the common good may be of this nation when he made that statement.  There are very few people politicians who dare stand and keep their principles.  People sway from one side to another side, to another side and another side, if you have believed in something and as the Army Commander said and you think it is right, say it; try and say it in the open and persuade others to believe as you do.  Do not coerce them, but persuade them to believe as you do and this young man had that element and there are others, I think who have that quality.  Well, the religious ones, I am not a religious man, but I always find it very difficult, if it God’s call, God’s call, yes, it is there Mr Chairman and he calls, but why does he call the good ones and not take those ones who do bad things?  This God of Rev. Atwai, our God, who calls, should also be a bit selective, he should see the problems we are in, we needed this young man; we really needed him, especially during this transitional period when we are likely or possibly going to change guards, the composition of this House will be different and we needed people like him to be around to help during the transition.  It is this element which makes me really sad; I was supposed to be at a wedding, because of the attachment I had to this young, on this day, and as a Colleague whom I communicated with in informally, I thought I should just be here and it is nice, Mr Chairman, for you to have given me this opportunity at least to bid farewell to him.  

The other day I went to his office and I saw that young lady and the mother and the baby, I found the Vice President there and he said, now that you have come, you are the one to lead us in prayer.  Since, my scripture days, with the President at Ntare school, I have not been practising these things, but I applied the courage, the old lady is here, I said, we are going to pray and the easiest way to pray is for me to use Runyankore because, at least I can recall word that I was taught and I led them in prayer for the family and the kid; because, my concern is the family that he has left behind.  

I hope, that we will develop a system of Government and governance in this country which will take care of these unfortunate citizens of this country, because if that young girl is to live, because, after all these good words and there is system to take care of her, there is no system to take care of the mother and the old man there, and the widow, then we will not have helped Sserwanga in the ideals that the stood for.  I hope and I also pray now that we look further and involve a system that can accommodate those of our people who have fallen and look after them.  I wish providence will give him peaceful rest.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR MUTEBI MULWANIRA  (Bujjumba County, Kalangala):  Thank you very much, hon. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity to pay tribute to my muzukulu here, and fallen Colleague NRC and NEC member as well as a gallant son of Tsetse Islands; on behalf of the Parliamentarians from Kalangala and on behalf of the parents and widow with whom we are sitting here in this august House.  

Mr Chairman, as NRC Member of the Constituency where Serwanga Lwanga is born and comes from, I wish first of all, to extend my sincere and heartfelt condolences to His Excellency, the President and Minister for Defence as well as Commander in Chief of UPDF and Chairman of the National Resistance Movement for having lost a man of a charismatic calibre and a speciality of late hon. Serwanga Lwanga.  In the same vein, Mr Chairman, I wish to extend the same condolences to the Army Commander of the UPDF Major Mugisha Muntu and the entire UPDF for losing their National Political Commissar and distinguished officer.  Allow me too, on behalf of my Colleagues to extend our condolences to you, Mr Chairman and the entire House, of losing a man who never minced words or to talk vaguely whenever he stood up to contribute.  

Mr Chairman, I have a lot of difficulty to talk about Serwanga Lwanga as a relative, because, his mother comes form my family and accidentally the father is related to our grandmother.  So, he is deeply part of our family, he is a musese, a person I have closely worked with as a political leader for my Lake district of Kalangala.  Time does not allow me, Mr Chairman, to go deep on paying tribute to our unique son, Serwanga Lwanga, but let me try in a nutshell, to say a few words.

Serwanga Lwanga, born of a father and a mother, still alive and with us here, has left a very big scar and a gap in the family, which not long ago, lost his elder brother and his elder sister.  So, we have got to pray for this family to be able to accommodate God’s test and trials.  Serwanga Lwanga actively joined our political campaigns in the 1980s with all the hope that Uganda was going to see a change in the political arena; this idea was short lived, thus forcing Serwanga Lwanga to leave the University and go to the bush.  When we were celebrating, Mr Chairman, the graduation of his younger brother, the man broke down into tears and said, as we celebrate the graduation, how do I know that my other son is alive?  Mr Chairman, at times, the late hon. Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga made statements that some people thought were outrageous, but hon. Chairman, the lesson to learn from Serwanga Lwanga in this aspect, in this country, is that the truth is always very bitter.  Serwanga Lwanga at his age, displayed very unique characteristics; he was humane and many of who have been interacting with him and he was courageous for those of you who have been with him in the bush, he was patriotic and a nationalist, because, whenever he moved, Serwanga Lwanga was not thinking of Ssese Islands, he was not thinking of Buganda, he was thinking of Uganda and Serwanga Lwanga had a vision for the future of this country; we shall miss him immensely.  

As hon. Kawanga Ssemogerere has said, Ssese has lost. Many people may reach Ssese Islands for the first time, when they come to burry this hero.  Tsetse is a problemed district, we have tirelessly worked with Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga to try to lessen our numerous problems of Ssese Islands as regards transport, both on water and on the road, as many of you will see, to create the infrastructure in Ssese Islands, in education and health; only recently, Serwanga Lwanga was behind a fundraising for Kalangala District Schools, where hon. Kategaya was, hon. Amanya Mushega, and as though God arranged it, the last site of Serwanga Lwanga in Ssese Islands, was when he went back home to distribute the outcome of this fundraising.   Now, they are going to see him still and silent.

Serwanga Lwanga has served in many capacities as already mentioned in all aspects; he displayed a national outlook as a Ugandan.  We, as people from Ssese Islands are proud that our son served one day, as a Principal Private Secretary to his Excellency, the President as he died, he was serving as a National Political Commissar of UPDF.  As you have already heard, he has now and then been assigned responsibility of high magnitude in the Army and his fulfilment of all the tasks he has been assigned has been an honour to our people from Tsetse Islands.  He was also instrumental in the Constitution making as a Commissioner of the Constituent Assembly and a CA Delegate for the Army and we have been following his contribution in the CA and of course, you have heard many times people doubting, what is Serwanga Lwanga and what does he think he is, but he stuck to his guns.  

Serwanga Lwanga, you deserve a big reward before God your Creator; because he has taken you at a tender age, but your service to mankind was of an elder and of full time.  We shall always remember you in this history of the making of the nation called Uganda.

On behalf of the people of Ssese Islands, we than you through the Minister of State for Defence, for honouring our son with this special Session of Tribute and lastly, but not least, I wish on behalf of the Kalangala district to extend appreciation to Government for all the arrangements for the honourable burial of Serwanga Lwanga in Ssese Islands on Sunday, because, ever since Serwanga Lwanga died, Mr Chairman, I have been with the Preparatory Committee including the Army officials and Government officials and all arrangements are in order and we, people in Tsetse Islands are very glad that our son has been given a deserving farewell for which he has worked.  May God give Serwanga Lwanga eternal rest and reward in eternity where we shall all meet.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR PULKOL  (Matheniko County, Moroto):  Mr Chairman, hon. Members, of this august House, I have to place on record our grieve on the sudden demise of our Colleague, late Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga and as we register our gratitude for the services rendered to this country and indeed this House, it is indeed very important that we search through the archives of history and particularly the brief life of our Colleague, selflessness, stands as one of the most key pillars of his personality.  Courage has been mentioned here and indeed hard work.  He is one man who taught me never at all to apologise for the truth, in as long as it is truth, it must said without any regret, without any fear or favour and indeed, some of us who strive and who join the rest of the leadership of this country to make Uganda a better place to live in, indeed live to remember the late Serwanga Lwanga for his courage and hard work.  The sense of responsibility, commitment and particularly knowing no boundary of tribes, as he stood and he was able to speak in any part of Uganda and be welcome and radiate confidence from all parts of the country and make friends from all people regardless from which part of the country one came from; you would not help becoming a friend to the late Serwanga Lwanga.  The unity and freedom for which he stood in Uganda, the democracy and constitutionalism in Uganda that he stood for and worked tirelessly to bring about, is indeed, a reality in our midst today.  

Many challenges still remain, Mr Chairman, for some of us who were politicised over a cap of tea in State House, the speeches in this House and meetings that we continue to interact with clear level-headed people, like the late Serwanga Lwanga, indeed have a lot to remember him for.  Trying to put on his shoes, I am sure is going to be a difficult task for many of us in this House.  First of all, his shoes were very small and it is going to take a lot of hard work for many of us to fit in those shoes; it requires that we really humble ourselves, because, many times we take ourselves to be too important in the national service, not knowing how unimportant we are in the whole development process of this country.  

It takes humility for us to humble ourselves and be as simple, as approachable, as possible to the citizens of this country, just like the late Serwanga Lwanga was.  I was one young man, who in 1987 was faced with a very difficult decision to take, that is, to join Government and therefore, when I was being appointed to the position of Deputy Minister, it was so scaring immediately after school to join politics and the manner in which I was appointed.  I did consult him, because, it was very scaring for me, politics having been a dirty game in this country, no young man would have wished to waste his life in that kind of game that was - and that was one of my fears.  I remember he said, it is good you know politics has been a dirty game in Uganda, it is only those of us who know what was wrong with politics that can change it.  How many people who are in politics today, know what was wrong and therefore, can change it?  So, rather than using that as an excuse not to join Government, he saw it as a good reason for me to take the appointment.  

So, these words live very vividly in my mind and constitute part of the encouragement and inspiration that I got from a Colleague that we are biding farewell today.  Again, from time to time, as we continue to interact, he said, that you see, many problems are really the absence of ideas.  The problem with some of our Colleagues is that, they rush to easy solutions, to doing things the way they have been done all along, they do not even stop to think which other way could we do this better, could we solve this problem better and therefore, try to look at the problem from many angles, even if it is not palatable to the ears of those who are in the Chair, I think it is important to take time and survey and look at problems from different angles and come out with a more practical solution.  

So, that is something which I stand to remember the late Serwanga Lwanga, for saying, that most problems we are dealing with, are really the absence of ideas and therefore, we should be in a mission to look for ideas, because, once you have ideas, then problems get solved.  It is those who do not talk, who do not encourage creativity, the search for new ideas to solving the Ugandans problems who will actually plunge Uganda into those problems I have sat here and listened why he went to the bush.  Surely, the unity for which he stood for, the unity of the whole country, but now, as we bid farewell to our Colleague, Uganda is yet again in a situation like it was in 1979, when the National Consultative Conference or Council (NCC) and Uganda National Liberation Front stood for the unity of Uganda, even when the NCC had voted overwhelmingly democratically to maintain the unity of Uganda, yet, some Ugandans in the political parties particularly allied themselves to defeat that process and issued a statement which in words, in reason, is similar to what we are hearing again in our time now.  

It is a shame of our time, that one, for example, that we remove Museveni and that we remove Article 269 which some of us thought to put there, to keep there, because, that Article seeks to give Ugandans a holiday from chaos, a holiday from tribalism, a holiday from dictatorship and tyranny, a holiday from all things that tend to default democracy; at least within our present circumstances, that each of these parties will go to the pursue their individual programme, these are statements that Uganda is being treated to in our present circumstances; yet, it is the unity of Uganda, the freedom of Uganda, the democracy in Uganda, constitutionalism in Uganda, that took place, like the late Serwanga Lwanga to the bush and once taking over power, being a member of the Uganda Defence Forces, the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces now named, did not keep the instruments of power to itself.  On taking over power, they gave those instruments of power to the NRC to govern the country, to bring Uganda from anarchy, from chaos, from tyranny, from dictatorship, from poor economy, to a better country and as we, Colleagues in this House sit here now, to bid farewell to yet another fallen comrade in arms of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces, we need, in leaving this House, not again, to go and ally ourselves, to cause fire, to flaw the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda, to flaw the laws that this House is putting in place, like we have heard some politicians talking recently, ready to break the rules, ready to break the laws that we are going to put in place.  

The best way we can honour the services of friends like Lt Col Serwanga Lwanga, is indeed to strive to put Uganda to a position where those who stand for anarchy will not have a position in leadership but rather, will take instructions from the progressive people of Uganda.  Let us strive to look for creativity, let us try to look for new ideas in solving Uganda’s problems. So, may God rest his Soul in eternal peace.

MR KATEGAYA (Historical Member):  Thank you Mr Chairman, hon. Members.  I also arise to support the Motion for the House.   Mr Chairman, many attributes of the late hon. Serwanga have been mentioned by many speakers and I do not intend to repeat them.  I totally agree with those attributes, because I have known Serwanga in the bush, in the NRC here, in the CA and in the State House.  I think he has done his part.  

Mr Chairman, the political life of Serwanga is the political life of this Movement. Serwanga was originally a DP youth winger before he came to the bush.  Hon. Mulwanira has mentioned that he was struggling 1980 elections, but it was on the factions of DP; he was a youth winger.  But he came to the bush and joined the Movement and was accepted and he has been in the Movement up to the level he has come to.

The second aspect of Serwanga’s political life is the group of young graduates who then joined the Movement.  These graduates were almost out of the ordinary, because, in the old days, if you finished University, you would be looking for a job and a house and a car, but these young men said, no, the country could not give them a car, could not give them a job, could not give them safety and stability.  I think in 1983, there was one graduate who came to the bush and interview our fighters and we came, he told me, I was surprised to find graduates in the bush, but Sergeants; most of them were Sergeants.  So, we said, really there is something fundamentally changing in the country, for graduates to dessert good careers and the rest and go in the bush and Serwanga was one of them.  This was a group which had brains but learned good politics and also the military and they have changed; to know that the Army is not for the rejects.  You know very well in the old days, if you did not do anything useful, you would go in the Army, but this time, these young men have changed the image of the Army.  Of course, it is my Friend hon. Kanyomozi who was saying, these are good men, but I think he should have said, good organisations which created these men, because, the training, the ideas they have, have come from the Movement, it is rules which have actually shaped them.  

Now, we are talking of ‘lubimbi’ these days - our lubimbi.  Hon. Serwanga Lwanga has done his part, because it is short lived, but the time he has lived, he has done his part.  He found Uganda in a bad shape; he has left it in good shape.  I think now we can discuss our problems, we see, we have changed the Army, then leave the Army, the people have power now, I think that is a good contribution in terms of lubimbi. 

Mr Chairman, I am sad, because, it is unfortunate to see that people like Serwanga Lwanga are dying now.  These are the people who should be taking over in future; some of us could be right now in our prime or sometimes in the evening of our lives; these are still young people whom I hoped may be will take up the blanket or take out button when we are no longer around; even if you are around, you could just go home and leave these young people to run the country.  But it is sad, that we should loose a person like Serwanga at this age.  Hon. Mbabazi was talking of generations, I think some of us are too much - we have been on the scene for too long, which I think is a problem; we should be starting getting off the scene so that, new generations can come up, but it is unfortunate that we are losing a person like Serwanga Lwanga, because, as somebody was saying, training leaders is not or one day affair.  This has been a problem in Africa, you think you can wake up and become a leader without training; but the training these young men have had, it should have continued, so that they can practice what they have learnt. 

Lastly, I also like to show my condolences to the parents and also thank them for producing a good, courageous son.  I am sure some of the qualities Serwanga had, must have come from the parents themselves.  I would also like to pay my condolences to the young wife and the young child of the late Serwanga and hope that they have the courage to face the world without him. With these few words, Mr Chairman, I also support the Motion.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DEPARTURE OF THE BODY OF THE LATE SERWANGA LWANGA

THE VICE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, I wish to inform you that the Government will provide transport to those who would like to go and attend the burial. So, those who would like to go should register to go to the Clerk’s office and register there on Sunday.  It is better to register today, you can even register tomorrow, but the transport will be available on Sunday morning.  There will be a Service tomorrow at Lubaga Cathedral, at 10.00 a.m. 

And with that, we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Tuesday, next week, at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Tuesday,16 January 1996.)



