
Wednesday, 10 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

MOTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS  (Mr S. Kavuma):  Thank you very much, hon. Chairman, hon. Members of the House - (interruption) 

MR TIBERONDWA:  Point of order.  Is it in order for us to proceed on this important Motion without a quorum in the House?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Well, according to Section 8, I am satisfied, we can proceed. Please, proceed hon. Minister.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I stand before you Sir, to move a Motion under Section 7 of the Electoral Commission Statute 1995.  I move Sir, that in accordance with Section 7 of the Interim Electoral Commission Statute 1995, this hon. House, the legislature, determine the emoluments of the members of the Interim Electoral Commission and the Secretary to the Commission and that the packages of emoluments, payable to each of them should be in terms of the schedule attached to the text of this Motion.

Mr Chairman, the Schedule mentioned is as follows:

Chairperson to the Commission;

Basic pay - UShs1,200,000 per month
Housing - UShs 500,000 
Transport  - UShs 500,000;
Telephone expenses - UShs 200,000
Electricity  - UShs 200,000
Water   - UShs 200,000
Servants - UShs l00,000

TOTAL - UShs 2.9 million

Deputy Chairperson:
Basic pay   - UShs 1,000,000
Housing     - UShs 500,000
Transport   - UShs 500,000
Telephone   - UShs 200,000
Electricity - UShs 200,000
Water       - UShs 200,000
Servants    - UShs 100,000
TOTAL    UShs 2,700,000

Other Commissioners, each of them to earn a basic pay of UShs 900,000
Housing   - UShs 500,000
Transport - 500,000
Telephone - UShs 200,000
Electricity - UShs 200,000
Water - UShs 200,000
Servants  - UShs 100,000
TOTAL   2,600,000

Mr Chairman, I also move that a Safari Day allowance of UShs 7,000 be paid to the above officers of the Commission when they work outside the station during the day and that a night allowance of UShs 62,000 per night be paid to them when they work outside station overnight.

The package also proposes an allowance of U$240 per day when any of the officers travel outside Uganda and a 40 per cent gratuity to be paid on all honoraria received.  

There are also standard rates of what is called transit allowances and we propose that these should apply to all the officers of the Commission in the above categories when they travel outside.

As for the Secretary, we propose that the Secretary be paid emoluments that are paid at the level of a Permanent Secretary.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, you will recall that a few weeks ago, this honourable Council approved the appointment of the members of the Interim Electoral Commission in accordance with the provisions of the Interim Electoral Commission Statute 1995.  A Secretary was also duly appointed, by the President on the advice of Cabinet in accordance with Section 5 (i) of the same Statute.  

As I have said, Sir, under Section 7 of that Statute, the level of emoluments of members of the Commission and the Secretary are to be determined by the legislature which is this House and it is for this requirement, Sir, that I am prompted to move the Motion I have just moved.  Sir, in making these proposals, Government has considered a number of factors which include the fact that the Commissioners have onerous tasks to perform which could result in them being subjected to public attack and pressure.  The Commissioners are also expected to devote their full time and energies to the work of the Commission; this is a requirement of the laws.  This work involves extensive travel within Uganda and possibly outside the borders of this country. 

We have also considered that the Chairperson and the Deputy Chairperson can be expected to carry particularly heavy burdens in terms of public exposure as they go about their duties and Mr Chairman and hon. Members, it is part of our wage policy that Chairpersons and Deputy Chairpersons entitlements always bear a difference from the other members of Commission like this Commission. 

We have also considered that all Commissioners appointed have held senior and very responsible positions prior to their appointment as members of the Commission. To attract and maintain persons of the high calibre, these members have, which is also needed to carry out their vital tasks of the Commission effectively and with neutrality, a suitably attractive emoluments package must be provided.

We are also mindful of the legal provisions requiring the Commissioners to be independent.  One way of assuring this dependence and motivation is to pay whoever serves in the capacity they serve a package that is motivative and attractive.

We did refer to payments for allowances outside this country.  These are more or less standard payments the U$240 per day and also transit allowances are fixed and they are categorised in terms of what part of the world a traveling serving officer visits.  These are specified in Standing Instruction No.6 on 1989 issued by the Head of the Public Service.

As for the Secretary, as I have said, the law requires that the Secretary to the Commission shall be of a rank of a Permanent Secretary and in appointing one, that consideration was taken into account.  It is therefore, prudent for this House, Sir, to approve a package that is similar to that paid to Permanent Secretaries.  These are also standard and they are well outlined in Government instructions.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

DR KIYONGA  (Bukonjo County, Kasese):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs in moving the resolution for emoluments for members of the Interim Electoral Commission.  

By comparison to pay levels in the country, one could say, the proposal of the hon. Minister is very generous, because the only comparable people we passed similar terms for, were the judges and therefore, people could be tempted to say, no, this is too high, let us reduce them downwards.  My own view is that, if it were possible, they should even be higher.  I am Chairman, in appointing the Electoral Commission, we were following the provision of the Constitution which calls for an independent Electoral Commission.  In appointing an Electoral Commission, this country is consolidating its desire to consolidate the democratic person which we have started and an independent Electoral Commission is going to be a key element in this process of democratisation.  

We were looking for people of a national character, both in body and mind and in a way, I think, Mr Chairman and Colleagues, we have found these in the brothers and sisters that we appointed.  We expect and we are convinced that these people have analytical and just minds and that they are upright in terms of morals, so that they are able to withstand temptation that would compromise their positions; either for financial or sectarian interest.  

It would be unrealistic, Sir, for us to expect these eminent Ugandans to do a very good job, to stand against all sorts of temptations but think that they will get away without something to service themselves as individuals and also the families and other responsibilities that they look after.  In my view, in making this rather humble provision, that the hon. Minister is proposing, we are enhancing their capacity to do the work that we set them to do.  I do expect of course, that they are listening to our views and that in the passing, which I hope Members will support, in passing this package, they know that our expectations of them are very high.  We expect them to be impartial, to be fair, to be very hard working and to stand against all sorts of temptations.  

I therefore, Mr, Chairman, support, my Colleague, the Hon. Minister for Constitutional Affairs and call upon Colleagues to do likewise.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR ELYAU  (Kalaki County, Soroti):  Thank you Mr Chairman.  I also stand to support the Motion.  But Mr Chairman, what is important that people of Uganda would want these days, it is the work the Commissioners will do.  Time has come for us to have a very independent Electoral Commission which will do a nice job, so that nobody extends periods in Government unnecessarily, that has been the quarrel of Uganda.  If we can have an independent Commission that will reach, if it is Friday, they hold elections, people will be happy, nobody will go to the bush again. So, I support the theme, but I want to inform hon. Members that there is nothing very important than having somebody pleased and put in state where he does not want to think twice and regret.  Let this Commission be a national Commission, for every body, because everybody is anxious to stand either for Presidency or Parliament, so that these people stand independently.  I have nothing to argue, except, I urge the Commissioner’s office to stand independently with regard to who says what.  I thank you.

MR KASAJJA (Bulamogi County, Kamuli):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I also stand to support this hon. Motion.  After having appointed the members of the ELectoral Commission, it is imperative that we appoint their terms of their service; because it becomes incomplete for us to appoint Commissioners without them knowing exactly what they are going to get. 

In a period of liberalisation, mobility of labour is always free; it moves where it is going to get the highest returns.  Therefore, since we are looking for the best qualified people to do the job, we have to pay that wage, which is also going to make them be attracted from other alternative employment.  Therefore, the schedule that the Minister is proposing here at least, looking at so far, the salary structure which has started being paid in the country, in this era of liberalisation, I think it is a noble suggestion, because UShs 2,900,000 is only 2,900 dollars and yet, in a country like Zimbabwe, which I think could be looked at comparably with our standard here, you would find a person of this level getting in the region of about 5000 dollars, but because we are looking at our economy which is trying to come up, I think 2900 dollars is a realistic figure.  May be a person - Mr Chairman, might come up and query and say, under this schedule there is water which has been given UShs 200,000, that is where somebody can come up and say, how much water is this, which is going to cost UShs 200,000; because, my little calculation, Mr Chairman is; at least having worked in the Ministry of Water, I know these rates.

1 Cubic metre of water costs UShs 675 and 1 cubic metre is 1000 litres, 1000 litres is equal to 50 jerrycans.  Therefore, it means, UShs 200,000 will give 300 cubic metres of water.  Mr Chairman, this water is only used by a school which has about 1000 children for one term.  But Mr Chairman, despite that, of course, if you look also at these other costs, definitely, you will realise that they are low, because, if you look at housing, UShs 500,000, looking at house which is comparably attractive to a person of that level, I think this is a little bit low, because this is what the Ministers are getting.  

Of course, you remember that time, when Ministers were given this amount of money, we, the back benchers started complaining, they are getting so much money, but having looked at the rent, and being a man working in taxation, I know some of these houses where some of the officers who at the rank lower than a Minister are sleeping in houses of about UShs 3.6 million per month.  Therefore, you find that the Ministers, actually, are leaving a humble life and therefore, this UShs 500,000 is actually a reasonable.  In fact, for me, if anything, I would have suggested that accommodation should have cost about UShs 1,000,000 that is to get a house which is reasonable. But despite that, at least the Ministers have not complained.  

Analytically looking at these rates, of course, when you look at the telephone.  One unit of telephone costs, of course, this is according to the distance; if you are just ringing, say from here to Jinja, you are going to be using 1 unit about UShs 80.  So, if you divide UShs 200,000 by 80, you will get about I think 240 units but unless you are ringing outside, you will find that this rate is also a little bit high, but despite that, because, these Commissioners are going to be doing a job, whereby they have to ring most of the time to ascertain the complaints, to ascertain reality, to ascertain the facts, which are really pertaining at various situations in the country.  This figure, I would have pushed it to UShs 250,000.  

So, despite that Mr Chairman, I think hon. Members, if we are to look at these figures, realistically, the Minister has been conscious, he has looked at the economic situation, he has looked at the ‘A’ levels, pertaining in the country, the only thing may be is that the hon. Members might come up and say that, but, what are our levels?  Of course, we continue to earn the UShs 60,000 per month and as you are aware, the Members of Parliament in Uganda here, we have been doing what we call a voluntary service and we should continue to do this voluntary service until the next Parliament, when we shall be able to come here and set realistic figures which will make us at least also be good politicians, because, for example, in Kenya, a Member of Parliament gets the tune of U$6,000 per month, but for us here, we are getting actually U$60 Dollars per month.  But I think I am not suggesting that we should really - I am being heckled behind, but I know my figures. Despite that, I am not suggesting that the Members now should use this chance to come up and page it to their salary which is U$60,000; we should continue to show the public, to show the nation that we are doing what we call a voluntary service - (Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the Member touched also something about the hon. Members salary and I understand this is even subject to taxation.  So, it has been said and reported that this hon. Members would pay tax out of that.  Now, you do not know, one gets worried whether also this one which are proposing, will not be taxed.  Thank you.

MR KASAJJA:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate the information being given by the hon. Member.  I think his complaint, Mr Chairman, is that, even though I am saying we are UShs 60,000 per month as hon. Members, even this amount of money is subjected to taxation. I think let us look at the principle.  What is taxation?  I think taxation is a voluntary contribution, to the building of the nation.  

I was saying that, I think the principle we are looking at, taxation is a voluntary contribution to the development of the nation, though in most cases, this contribution is unrequited. If it is unrequited, it does not mean that it is equivalent to what you are going to receive in kind, only that it is voluntary, you are trying to build the nation.  Therefore, I think every body is entitled definitely to contribute. I think the issue which I have brought up here, Mr Chairman, is, the hon. Members are free and me, I am suggesting, may be in the next Parliament, at least to come up, claim for higher pay, but as of now, I think the taxation issue should not come in and say that we are getting 60,000/= therefore, we should not pay. In any case, even the thresh-hold was increased by the Minister of Finance and I think it is UShs 1.6 million - UShs 600,000 x 12 is 720,000, therefore, which means, it falls below; in which case, we may not be even paying the tax.  So, for that matter, I think the hon. Member, should not be unduly worried about this matter.  

With those few remarks, I would like to request the hon. Members, that in the interest of making the members of the Commission to start doing a good job and in order to attract them so that they do not leave the work in the middle, because they want to go to look for better places, let us approve the terms as the Minister has presented.  With that, I support.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you Mr Chairman.  I rise to support this resolution and I wish to thank the hon. Minister for having come out with a reasonable wage level and I believe and hope that this is going to be the trend for all the future proposals for payments to our workers and all civil servants.  Because it is high time that we stopped pretending to pay people and hope that they will work, because, if you pretend to pay them, they will also pretend to work.  Therefore, I feel that this is a reasonable salary for the Commissioners and I hope they will do their job.

I only wish to asks the Minister to clarify on the question of transport.  Is this UShs 500,000 meant to say that they will not get official vehicles, but will actually get a cash allowance for their transport or will they get a vehicle and then get the cash; because, there is some confusion, when after monetising the benefits of various civil servants, they then retain Ministry vehicles, use Ministry fuel and get their allowance of transport. So, we should either call it a fuel allowance and then we know they will not get fuel, but they will get vehicles, because, if we say, transport allowance, UShs 500,000 may actually not be enough for transport; because, even if you hired the simplest of the cars, the minimum you will pay is 15,000/= per day, when you are not getting the car to your home in the evening.  If you keep the car to yourself for the whole day 24 hours, the minimum you can pay a day, is UShs 50,000.  

So, we must distinguish and know that the Commissioners will have transport all the time, but they will get this a fuel allowance.  I wish also to raise an objection to this word of ‘to attract and retain persons of the calibre needed to carry out the vital tasks of the Commission’.  I do not think this is a necessary reason, we should only actually, forget about it, because, whether you are in Parliament here, whether you are in the Civil Service, we need high calibre.  So, it should not be a reason that high calibre is the only one which attracts high salary, because, that creates a situation to say, that those who are getting very little, have got very low calibre, which is not necessarily true.  So, I think we should have kept quite about that part as a reason.

Thirdly, I wish to say that we should get out of the language of saying that, somebody gets a job and has servants, they are domestic workers; they are actually workers but not servants, because, a servant has a connotation of showing that there is something wrong with the person and since he is being paid, I think he is a domestic worker, but working in the house and in fact, in some organisations now, these workers are part of the general pay roll of the organisations that they work for.  The reason being, that if you add this money to the salary of the person you are giving the job, then it is liable to taxation and that  is very important, because, all these allowances are actually taxable.  

Therefore, to minimise, because there is a difference, when evading and avoiding.  In order for us to avoid the Commissioner being over taxed, this money should be separate and be put on a separate pay roll for the domestic workers, rather than include it in his salary, because, when I was working, roughly on 2.9, the tax burden is UShs 800 and UShs 5000.  So, actually, the his take-home pay, is only UShs 2 million which means that he is will not pay for what he is supposed to be paying for.  Mr Chairman, otherwise, I think the Minister has done a very good job and given the right salary and I hope in future, everybody who works for the State, will get a good salary to be able to keep in office for more than eight hours a day.  I beg to support.

MR NTIMBA  (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. Like those before me, I raise to support the Minister’s Motion and I wish to make a few comments about the adequacy of some of these allowances that have been proposed.  While I am happy about the rates of housing allowance, I feel a bit uneasy, at the fact that only UShs 7,000 has been proposed for Day Safari allowances within Uganda and UShs 62,000 per night allowance.  I am imagining a case where a Chairman or members of the Commission have to travel, raise early in the morning, spend a whole day in a place like Jinja and come back in the evening.  This UShs 7,000 will not be enough to pay for their lunch and mid-morning tea or afternoon tea and speaking about Night allowance, even for hotels upcountry, I do not think this is really quite a enough to pay the members’ meals and accommodation.  I am citing an example of a hotel like one we have in Mbarara, Lake View, with UShs 62,000 these Members will either be forced to dig out of their pockets or be forced to stay with friends, the relatives and in-laws; some of whom could turn out to be candidates and compromise their neutrality.  I would have expected that a rate of say, UShs 80,000 or some comparable to what the Members of NRC here, earn, would perhaps be reasonable to enable these distinguished citizens to maintain themselves when they travel upcountry and will not be forced to stay with friends and relatives.  What normally happens when allowances are not enough, people traveling tend to be tempted, either to stay with friends or to claim for allowances for more days than they have stayed and I do not want us to expose our distinguished Commissioners to this type of practice.

The question of transport, I agree with hon. Manzi Tumubweine, that the Minister needs to make a clarification as to whether UShs 500,000 is allowance paid to somebody who uses his or her own car in addition to mileage or whether these people are going to be provided with official transport. I am talking about transport; there is no provision for paying a driver of a Commissioner, if a Commissioner decides to use his own private driver or whether Government is going to provide these drivers and escorts and is done for Ministers and other people.

With regard to telephone bills, I doubt whether UShs 200,000 will carry these hon. Commissioners through the month.  I am comparing this with what most of us spend per month, when our responsibilities are not as much as what these people will be expected to undertake.  These people are going to be making many, many, telephone calls, especially, long distance telephones and as you know, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, the telephone rates in this country are very, very high and I will not be surprised if after two/three months Commissioners come back and start saying sorry, this is not enough, please, do something about it.  So, in view of the fact,  - (Interruption) 

MR MWANDHA:  Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to agree with hon. Member, that the estimate for telephone appears to be definitely on the low side, because, I would imagine that the Chairman, his Deputy and even Commissioners, may have to be accessed all the time and therefore, it may even be necessary to provide Celtel unless that will be costed on the general cost of the Commissioner.  But otherwise, I think it is important that these people cannot be accessed, because, he may be in the field and for some reason, he may be required in a different place or even at headquarters.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I would like to agree that the estimate is a little bit on the low side.

MR NTIMBA:  In conclusion, Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that in view of the inadequacy of some of these allowances, consideration be made to exempt these Commissioners from payment of taxes on some of the allowances; whereas they should be required to pay income tax on the basic salary but if income tax relief was given on other taxable allowances, it might help them to do a very decent job.

With that, Mr Chairman, I fully support the Motion and I hope my other Colleagues will do the same thing.

MR KAHERU  (Historical Member):  MR Chairman, I would like to thank you and I would like to support the Minister’s Motion, but I would like to make a few comments.  The first one is, I would like to support what hon. Ntimba said, regarding the allowances and I will not repeat that.  

Secondly, I would like to comment on the emoluments of the Secretary.  You may remember, Mr Chairman, a few months ago, we approved certain indicator living salary for civil servants.  Now, this was to take effect from July this year and yet, the Secretary to this particular Commission has already begun his duties and I wanted to get clarification from the hon. Minister, whether we should not get a living salary for this Secretary for the Electoral Commission to start immediately.  Instead of under paying him from now, through the period when he will be busiest, during the election time, with all the pressures and so on and then give him a living wage in July with the other civil servants.  So, I would be grateful if the hon. Minister could clarify and whether he would be persuaded to this point of view. Thank you.

DR ADRIKO:  I am responding to the point of information which has been raised by the last speaker, as regards the emoluments proposed for the Secretary.  In fact, the figures which are proposed are above living wage.  The living wage for that grade of officer is UShs 700,000 and at the bottom end U 7, is UShs 70,000.  so with a compression ratio of 10.  Therefore, officers at U1 Scale currently are enjoying remuneration which is about a living wage and in my statement earlier last year, I said, that those who are enjoying salaries above a living wage would remain at that level until such time those who are below catch up with them.  Thank you.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, first of all, I wish to thank all the Members who have contributed to this Motion for the overwhelming support they have given to the proposals contained therein.  A few things have come out, Sir and many are true; we may think that we over generous here, but compared with other areas, you will find that actually, we are not all that so generous.  So, we tried to strike a balance and see what we can afford within our own situation.  We know what kind of pocket this country has and yet, we are also recognising the significance of the assignments entrusted to the hon. Commissioners and the Secretary to the Commission.

Sir, a few areas have been pointed out as having suffered from some deficiencies in that the allowances are inadequate, but answers have been given by Colleagues and on the whole, it appears taking into account all the circumstances obtaining in our economy.  This is the best we can do. 

About transport, I think the problem here Sir, comes in by way of what this item has been traditionally known as when we consider our Public Service and its set up, but definitely, this is - the Commissioners are going to be availed with official vehicles, but it is recognised that over and above that, there is need for the State to assist them, even if it was in a kind of token manner to meet other transport requirements that they may have to incur the cost of.  Sir, one hon. Member was saying we should run away from this question of - (Interruption) 

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman.  Having just listened to what the hon. Minister has said about this transport, UShs 500,000, all along I had the impression that this is the allocation that would enable the Commissioners to run from office daily in their duty station rather than being an additional incentive.  Can he clarify?

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much, Sir.  Mr Chairman, I had said that much in very few words, that it is realised that over and above the official transport the State is providing, the Commissioners and the Secretary will have to incur additional transport expenses and I would wish to proceed, Sir, by saying, that there was a call that we move from this question of talking about calibre, but Sir, unfortunately the law which set up these offices, specifically talks about what kind of calibre and when I use it, I am using it because, it is a requirement of the law under which these officers were appointed and under which we are going to approve their package.   

There was a question as to whether - why there is no reflection of payment to drivers and escorts.  In this respect, Sir and hon. Members, these drives and escorts, where they are employed, they are going to be catered for by another arrangement, they are paid in their own right as such.

As for the telephone, yes, it may appear inadequate, but I want to clarify that we are now talking about domestic use of telephone, because, during office hours and when the Commissioners are in the office, definitely, there will be a telephone facility which goes directly to the State, but we do recognise that even after office, these officers may be required, because, of the nature of their work to make these telephone calls from places other than their offices.

There was a question about taxation, Sir.  My understanding is that - (Interruption) 

MR ETEKER EJALU: Point of clarification.  I would like to seek clarification in the paragraph above the tabulation, they are called packages of emoluments and then below that, there are called honoraria.  Now, depending on what they are really, we should know the regime of the Commissioners, because, if they are honoraria, they may not be taxable, I say they may not, because bonuses, I understand, are taxable.  So, we should know that and if indeed, they are honoraria and they are getting 40 per cent gratuity, which is the honoraria?   Are they going to get the 40 per cent of the telephone expense, of the transport, of the house servants and so on?  I think the Minister ought to clarify to us.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you Mr Chairman and hon. Member.  All this 40 per cent is not on these expenses, the telephone, the water, the rest of it, it is really directly connected with the first column at the top of the package.  Sir, I was saying about taxation, whoever is employed, is employed in accordance with law; the law specifically dealing with his employment and the taxation laws of this country.  So, Mr Chairman, where taxable these officers as of now, will meet the tax liability.  

With those few remarks, I beg to thank hon. Members for the support they have given to this proposal and I would request them to in the same vein, approve the package so that we go on with work with the Commissioners who will now be in a position to know exactly what terms they are being offered or paid by the State for the work they are called upon to do.  I thank you Sir. 

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question for the adoption of the Motion.

(Question put and agreed to.)

With that, the Motion passes and is adopted.

MOTION

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move a Motion in accordance with Article 159, sub-Article 1 (ii) and (v) of the Uganda Constitution 1995 seeking approval of the NRC by resolution to authorise Government to give a grant to the private Sector Foundation.  Mr Chairman, the resolution runs as follows:

Whereas under Article 159 (i) of the Constitution, Government may borrow money from any source, -(Interruption) 

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification Mr Chairman, I have no problem with resolution, but in the board of the resolution, it is stated that a copy of the Development Credit Agreement is attached.  I do not have a copy for myself; I do not know whether other Members have it; that is one.  Mr Chairman, that agreement is not with us and I think it will be better for us to read it first, so that we know what we are approving.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, I was going to explain that; so that Members could understand the situation under which we are operating.  I have a copy of the agreement which I am going to lay on the Table because of technical difficulties, and these copies were available to the sectoral committee and or both the project and the agreement.  Mr Chairman, whereas under Article 159 (i) of the Constitution, Government may borrow money from any source and whereas under Article 2 sub-section (ii) such borrowing has to be authorised by Parliament or by an Act of Parliament and whereas by the Development Credit Agreement, which is Private Sector Competitiveness Project between the Republic of Uganda and International Development Association, Government has secured credit from the International Development Association for the purpose of giving a grant to the Private Sector Foundation and whereas it is required under Article 159 sub-section 5 of the Constitution, that the National Resistance Council do by resolution authorise such a grant, now therefore, be it resolved by the National Resistance Council that the loan that has been secured by Government is hereby authorised, -(Interruption) 

MR WOGWAWABI GWAIVU:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, we have been several times here embarrassed and ridiculed as rubber stamps. Now, in circumstances that we do not have a copy of this agreement, are we in order to proceed to discuss it or even for him to move the resolution?  Are we in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members, the matter which hon. Gwaivu has raised needs to be fairly thought of and in my opinion, it will be fair to give the hon. Minister 15 minutes to distribute or to lay at least a copy of the Resolution - order, order.  The hon. Minister can be in order if he lays a copy of the Resolution on the Table.

Secondly, we can give the hon. Minister 15 minutes to distribute the copies of the Resolution which he has. 

With that, we are adjourning for 15 minutes to give the hon. Minister time to circulate the Resolution.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa): Mr Chairman, going to Article 159, Clause 6, ‘an agreement entered into under Clause 5 of this Article shall be laid before Parliament and shall not come into operation unless it has been approved by Parliament Resolution.’  In accordance with that Article, I take the opportunity to lay on Table the Agreement entered between among the International Development Association and Private Sector Foundation.  

Mr Chairman, I have asked to take this opportunity to explain what is involved in what we call the Private Sector Foundation.  This is non-profit company limited -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of Order.  Mr Chairman, I think the House is being taken for the ride.  When we asked for adjourned, we thought we were going to be availed copies of this Agreement.  Now, what is the use of laying it there and then we are told to debate what we have not read?  What are we going to approve, Mr Chairman?  Is it in order?

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you do not need to have a Motion here.  We are going according to the Constitution of Uganda.  The Provision of the constitution of how to handle this matter has been quoted by the hon. Minister himself.  Then we are in order.

MR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Mr Chairman, as I was explaining, the Private Sector Foundation  involves and is a non-profit company limited by guarantee whose subscribers include all the major business associations in Uganda.  The list of subscribers include Uganda Manufacturing Association, Uganda Women’s Finance and Trust, Uganda Coffee Exporters Association, Uganda Grain Exporters Association, Uganda National Farmers Association, Uganda Small Scale Industries Association, Uganda National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Uganda Cultural Association, Uganda Security Brokers and Dealers Association, Uganda Commercial Farmers Association, Uganda Insurance Association, Uganda Development Corporation, Northern Uganda Manufacturers Association, Uganda Investment Authority.  The objective and role and functions of the Private Sector Foundation to serve as the vocal point for a regular and tragedy dialogue between the public and Private Sector on Policies and regulations which affect Private Investment; 

To undertake applied research and analysis required to resolve short and long term issues affecting Private Sector growth and then develop detailed proposals for implementation by Government; To build on and strengthen the existing dialogue between the Government and the Private Sector;

To encourage removal of constraints to Private Sector Development by promoting Trustee and inform dialogue between Government and the Private Sector;

Lastly, to take responsibility on behalf of Government of Uganda and effectively implement the proposed World Bank, Private Sector, competitiveness project and if possible, other donor funded projects.

The Private Sector Foundation praise an important role as advocacy.  It will be to follow up on the implementation or Private Sector reforms as defined and prioritised by the Private Sector Foundation Board in consultation with the Government and the Donor Community.  A number of such reforms have been identified already.  In the policy arena, the Private Sector Foundation will advise Government on policy issues affecting Private Sector development such as taxation, investment promotion, infrastructure and Government regulations.  

The Private Sector Foundation will enhance the ability of the Private Sector to lobby Government and will compliment existing channels of dialogue between Government and the Private Sector.  Mr Chairman, the Project under discussion is called, ‘The Private Sector Competitiveness Project’, and the Project purpose and beneficiaries are as follows:

The purpose of the Project is to make the Uganda Private Sector more competitive so that it can expand sales on both domestic and international markets;  

To achieve this objective the Project will among others, help and improve the business and investment environment by decreasing policy constraints;

Strengthen institutions supporting the Private Sector; and 

Enhance the dialogue between he Private sector and the Government and alleviate problems associated with inadequate know how and the weak financial system.  

Mr Chairman, there are several project beneficiaries.  First, this project will enhance competitiveness of individual enterprises directly.  Secondly, other stakeholders will benefit from serving as a means to this end.  

The Private Sector foundation will help institutionalise the process or Public Private Sector dialogue in Uganda, to build Trustee and sustain business confidence.  

By working to eliminate the remaining constraints to private sector development, and by strengthen consultative processes such as on going national forum and the private sector foundation will promote a business environment more conducive to enterprise development and profitably by enhancing the consultative process.  The Project will help build a more responsive public sector and a more responsible sector.  The Private Sector Foundation will challenge business associations to improve the quality to their services, to their members, and enhance their public image.  The Uganda Investment Authority will be strengthened further and assisted in its job of promoting and facilitating investment in Uganda, thus, increasing the level and range of new investments.  A strong Uganda Investment Authority is particularly important in attracting foreign investors.

Non-Governmental Organisations involved in Private Sector work in Uganda and the Private Sector Foundation will have a strong stake in cooperating with each other.  It will also, having successfully implemented the key elements of its adjustment programme, the Government of Uganda will come closer to realising its stated goal of building a modern self-sustaining economy based on the free enterprises.  The country as a whole will benefit enhanced economic growth; great employment and higher living standards.

Mr Chairman, the summary project briefly the complaints are as follows:

The project will have a total cost of U.S. 2.9 million dollars, equivalent of which U.S 12.3 million dollars funded by I.D.A. and the balance by the Private Sector itself.  

Shaping the business environment, the Private Sector Foundation component.  The Project will also be managed by the Private Sector itself through this Body what we have called, ‘a Private Sector Foundation’ established in August, 1995, during the preparation of the Project.  The Foundation will advise the Government on policy issues affecting the funds and implementing the Project.  It also enhanced know how, through markets, the Business Uganda Development Scheme.  The Business Uganda Development Scheme is the programme to support the injection of know how and expertise into Uganda Firms  It will be a demand driven business.  In other words, that those enterprises will have to apply.  

At the score of Business Uganda Development Scheme is a cost-sharing grant scheme in which Ugandan Firms can receive 50 per cent of the costs of using consultants and other service supplies.  Whoever seeks the consultancy you have to pay 50 per cent of the total cost.  

Services may cover a broad range of subjects including marketing, production and business planning.  If any private enterprise is envisaging going into any business of which its consultancy to know where to get materials how to market and whatever related to that success of that business, this will be available at disposal.  

Firms may obtain these services through individually tailored services or through group schemes where Uganda Firms come together to obtain such jointly.  They can be individually or they can be through their associations which I mentioned in the opening remarks.  In addition to the grants, it will provide free hand-holding advice  to firms on the basic of business planning deciding on what services will be most helpful.  Selecting a service supplier and obtain the best services from the supplier.  The scheme will be managed by private contractor on behalf of the private sector foundation.

Mr Chairman, enhancing know how, financial partners, the financing component, the project will fund the Uganda equity facilities.  This facility would provide equity resources under management contract to two international finance participated equity funds to mobilise resources from private investors and to reach small and medium size enterprises.  In total this is empowering the local private enterprises to compete fairly. 

I wish to add that since NRM came to power, thus, 1987, we launched a recovery programme and since then there have been a Financial Sector Reform and all along there have been complaints that this has been biased towards the foreign investors.  Now, at this stage we are coming in to empower the local enterprises -(Laughter)- to compete equitably with the foreign investors through these consultancies who have knowledge management and areas where one can invest.  The Government feels very strongly that this is a component which will support the Uganda Investment Authority in its effort to focus on promotion and facilitation of Private Investment.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY VICE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, the Document has just been laid before you and I think there are some of you who are interested in going through the Document, and I think it is proper for me to give you humble time to go through the Document and for this and other reasons, I will, therefore, adjourn the House until tomorrow starting at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.05 and adjourned until Thursday, 11 January 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)



