Thursday, 11 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, you yesterday you had the resolution from Minister for Finance and the agreement has just come.  I do not know whether you have read through. We should go ahead with it or -(Interruption)

DR KISAMBA MUGERWA: Point of clarification.  According to the constitution, yesterday I laid the paper on the table, and what was missing are the enough papers for the House; and yesterday at 4.30 p.m. we sent 100 copies to supplement them this morning. According to the Assistant Clerk these were put in the Library -(Interjections)- this is the thing, it was not from me.

According to him, when you lay the papers on a table such papers are put in Library.  Now to facilitate this work since we had supplemented that paper, with other copies it would have enabled the Members to read them. That is the situation.

THE CHAIRMAN: I give you time to go through the papers and then next week we can discuss about it.

HON. MEMBERS:  Yah.

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995

MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTION AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity you have given me to move that as I indeed hereby do that a Bill entitled the Presidential elections interim provisions Bill, 1995 be read a second time and I beg to move Sir.

I rise to speak on the occasion of the second read of the Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1995 which I had occasion and the pleasure to present to this hon. House last year.  Permit me to begin by making some general remarks about both the Presidential Elections’ Bill, and the closely related Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1995. 

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, those two Bills represent the long standing commitment of the NRM government of ensuring a smooth transfer of power between the Interim Broad Based Government established by the NRM in 1986,and the New government which is to be based on the 1995 constitution.  It is essential for Uganda’s future that we demonstrate to ourselves and to our friends all over the World that we can manage the interim period in peace.  It is also our hope Sir, that in so doing, we shall have laid a firm foundation from which all future transitions from one Government to another will be handled peacefully and in an orderly and smooth manner. After all, our history has shown that we have never had a smooth and peaceful transfer of power since our Independence. Managing this transition peacefully, will demonstrate what a long way Uganda has come from, from the dark days that begun with violent overthrow of our Independence constitution early, in 19966.  

To ensure a smooth transfer of power, it is essential that the elections are perceived by all major interest groups in Uganda, as being legitimate. The NRM will do all in its power to ensure that, that goal is achieved.  In doing so Sir, our concern must not be legitimacy only in the eyes of elite. Our rural population, the peasants or the ordinary people of Uganda must know fully what is happening and why. Hence it is essential that electoral procedures and electoral laws provide clear and simple procedures. The most thorough voter education is required to explain all stages of electoral process.  Achieving a smooth transfer of power through legitimate elections might not be a major task in many countries. But for us Sir, it is important to note that, we have not had this long experience of transferring power peacefully; and we have not had many elections that can be described as free and fair.  I am aware Sir, that, the CA elections were our first step toward arranging National elections, and while they went well, they were not elections for Parliament.  A fact of equal importance about the elections provided for under these Bills is the fact that for the first time Ugandans will be directly electing their own President.  

For all previous elections held under the previous constitutions and 1966 constitution, the leader of the nation was to come from a party which worn the majority of seats in Parliament.  This meant that the ordinary person did not exercise his right to decide who should be the occupant of the highest office of this country. This development Sir, whereby we are going to have every Ugandan who qualifies to vote and wishes too, participating in electing the President of this country, through universal adult suffrage is to my mind one of those important corner stones of the fundamental change, the NRM Government has strived not only to bring about, but also to ensure that it takes root in the management of our public affairs as Ugandans. As for the elections themselves Sir, I will deal with the extent to which the bills go to ensure transparency at all stages of the electoral process; and the measures intended to ensure the independence of the electoral authorities.  But before I do that, I must mention the need for us to consider these Bills as a matter of the uttermost urgency. 

 As all Members of this hon. House know, the New Constitution provides for an interim period within which the NRM Government is entrusted with that task of establish a new government for Uganda under the constitution.  That interim period expires early in July.  To be precise, a new government must be in place on or before the 7th of July, just under 6 months from now.  

The main thing which must be done to establish the new government is to hold the Presidential and Parliamentary elections. The timetable for doing that before July is very tight.  In part this is because the constitution requires that no person can be elected President unless he or she has been supported by more than 50 per cent of the valid votes cast in a Presidential election. If no candidate gets that support, then a run off election must be held within 30 days of the date of the declaration of results in the first round of voting.  

Mr Chairman, it is of course unlikely in the extreme that a run off election will be needed, or that there will be any challenges to the outcome of the Presidential elections.  However, to be prudent, we have to be plan for these extremely remote possibilities in making the timetable for the elections.  As a result Sir, the first Presidential election must be held at least clear two months before the beginning of July.  That will allow time for both the unlikely run off, -the unlikely challenging of the results of the Presidential election, as well as the preparation for Parliamentary elections within the time frame provided by the constitution. The two months Sir, I am talking about therefore, is intended to act as a safety valve in the unlikely event that we may have to have these repeats or challenges. In preparing for the forthcoming elections, there are numerous steps which have to be taken each of which takes some time, and without attempting to be comprehensive, I can mention some of those steps for the information of this hon. House. The up date of the voters’ register has to be completed.  That process which has been going on for some months, already involves receiving and processing the requests for transfer of registration of voters from one polling division to another, and registration of new voters. The rolls have to be printed and then distributed for display in each polling division.  There must be time in which people can make objections to the names on the register or any commissions there from; and time in which those objections can be decided upon and consequential changes made to the register.  The commission needs time to demarcate constituencies.  Election officials must be appointed, nominations must be called for.  Nomination papers received and processed, and photographs taken of intending candidates. Lists of nominees and their photographs have to be supplied to printers who can guarantee total security for the ballot papers.  

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, according to current estimates, over 8 million ballot papers have to be printed, transported to the commissions ware houses and eventually distributed to all the 16,000 or so presiding officers. All of this and more must happen before polling day.  While the Interim Electoral Commission is busy working on preparing for all these steps, its planning cannot be in full until these Bills are passed.  

So, Mr Chairman, although I want this House to study and debate the Bills in full, we must also remember that it is vital that the Bills are passed as soon as possible. Any unnecessary delay could jeopardise our chances of establishing the New Government before the end of the interim period under the Constitution.  Clearly, nobody and in any case not the government has any intention or harbours any hopes of causing a constitutional crisis arising out of a failure to organize or to hold elections within time fixed by the constitution.

Mr Chairman, with your permission I will now turn to some aspects or some key aspects of provisions of the two Bills.  It is important that this House recognizes and understands some of the key futures of the Bills. Of course, while we are first going to debate the Presidential elections Bill, it must be emphasised that, the two Bills are closely related. In particular, the Presidential elections will be conducted using many of the provisions of the Parliamentary elections Bill. That is explicitly provided for in section 12 of the Presidential elections Bills.  I will therefore, make a few comments about the overall scheme for the elections created by the two Bills before highlighting essential futures of the Presidential elections Bill.  

A free and fair election can be held only if the bodies administering the election are independent.  Neither the government of the day nor any other group local or foreign shall manipulate or unduly influence the election process to its advantage.  Our New constitution seeks to guarantee the independence of the electoral authorities.  So, the Bills follow the requirements of the Constitution and seek to ensure that both the interim electoral commission and other institutions involved in the administration of the elections are truly independent. Members of the commission are to be appointed by the President, but only with the approval of this House.  It is Parliament, which will determine the emoluments of the members of the commission. Section 4 of the Parliamentary elections Bill states that the commission shall be free from direction and control of any person or authority in the exercise of its functions and our constitution says the same. In general it will be the Commission that will determine the timetable for the elections. It will bear in mind of course, the limits of the transitional period and the requirements of the law.  But the days set for nominations for display of the register and for polling will all be set by the commission.  Other institutions involved in the election process include the High court of Uganda and the Supreme Court.  

These are involved in dealing with the election petitions and various other matters of dispute; they too will be completely independent in accordance with our constitution.  It will be by respecting the independence of the bodies that will achieve the smooth transfer of power I had talked about earlier on, and the legitimacy of the elections which we all desire, and are determined to achieve. 

Mr Chairman, another important aspect of these elections must be the transparency in all the electoral process.  One of the main aims of the Bills is to ensure that the entire electoral process is as transparency as possible.  There should be nothing hidden, it is only when our people are satisfied that an election has been truly free and fair that they will testify to its legitimacy and that of the resultant government. Of course, we have learnt much from the experience of the 1980s, then 1980 elections and from the CA elections.  That experience is reflected in the Bills. 

Transparency of the process is intended by provisions of such things as the following. The requirement of section 25 of the Parliamentary Bill, for public display of the voters’ rows at the local level, so that people can check their names and can be satisfied that others on the row are properly qualified and provision for objections to names on the register must be meaningfully provided, and utilized.  Public inspection of the nomination papers filled by candidates and provision for objections to nominations as is contained in sections 44 and 45 of the Parliamentary Bill are provisions to this direction.  Provisions in sections 61 and 77 (3), permitting agents of candidates to be present at all polling stations during voting and counting, and also at tallying centres.  Provisions of section 59 sub-section 7 for the ballot boxes to be opened in public and turned up side down so that people are satisfied they have not been staffed with ballot papers in advance. Provision in section 59 for all ballot papers to be placed in the ballot box by the voters in the open, and for all candidates to go into the same ballot box.  

The requirement Sir, in section 77 that counting of ballot papers be done at the polling station immediately after voting, and in the presence of candidates and their agents and that, results at the station be announced and the form declaring the results at each station be signed by candidates, all their agents wishing to do so. Provision in section 83 that the tarrying of each constituency be done on the basis of the signed declaration of results forms and in the presence of the candidates and their agents is another important provision direction.

Lastly Sir, provision for automatic recount either by the returning officer in a close election, equality of votes or 20 or less votes between the two leading candidates, or by a Chief Magistrate or on the request by a candidate is another important provision emphasizing transparency.

 Permit me now to say something about the sources of these important Bills.  Both Bills Sir, are based primarily and necessarily on the constitution.  Many sections repeat or are implementing articles of the constitution.  For ease of reference, I will mention the main provisions of the constitution relevant to the two Bills before focusing my comments on the Presidential elections Bill.  Article 264, 269, and 271 of the constitution are the main provisions which govern the interim requirements to be made for the first election of both the President and Parliament.  Articles 59 to 68 and 76 set out the general provisions needed to govern all national elections including the duty to register, right to vote, creation of the electoral commission and method of voting and so on.  

Sir, and hon. Members, articles 77 to 83 provide for the composition of Parliament, qualifications of Members and their election to Parliament, and article 86 provides for among other things reference to the courts of disputed elections. Article 102 to article 105 provide for the qualifications and elections of the President and court challenges to such elections. Article 140 deals with the way courts handle all election disputes. All of the above provisions Sir, form the basis for various provisions of the two Bills.  

Mr Chairman, again for ease of reference I intend to circulate to Members of this hon. House a table showing the sections of the Presidential elections Bills which repeat or are authorised by or which implement particular constitution provisions. When we later come to debate Parliamentary elections Bill, I intend circulate a similar table concerning that Bill. The Bills have other sources of course, including the constituency assembly statute, 1993 now repealed, the National Assembly elections Act chapter 131 and election laws from other countries. 

Members and Mr Chairman, will no doubt realize that, a lot of research and time has been put into these works to make it convenient for this hon. House to consider the important provisions of the Bills expeditiously but with confidence.

With your permission Sir, now I turn to some details of the Presidential elections Bill. The Presidential Elections Bill contains only the details of things which are directly relevant to the election of the President.  All the details of the method of organising voters’ rows appointing election officials, setting up polling stations, casting votes and counting and tarrying of votes, are set out in the Parliamentary elections Bill; and under section 12 of their Presidential elections Bill, they will apply to the Presidential elections as well as Parliamentary elections subject to whatever authorised modifications the interim electoral commission may find it may have to do. Sections 1 and 2 of the Presidential elections Bill, set out the title and the definition of terms used in the Bill.  

Section 3 deals with the qualifications of candidates for election as President, and it simply in the main repeats, the provisions of article 102 of the Constitution, and empowering the interim electoral commission to require evidence of such qualifications.  Sub-sections 1 and 2 of section 4 largely repeat the requirements of article 103 of the Constitution as to the nature of the election for the President, and the nomination procedures which must be followed.  Sub-section 3 to 9 of the same section elaborate on the nomination requirement.  Section 5 Sir, concerns the method of dealing with the deposit paid by a candidate. In the interest of ensuring serious candidate’s nominated, it permits a refund of the deposit only where a candidate polls more that 25 per cent of the valid votes cast.  This matter is not new Sir, it has been with us in all-previous elections and it is universal.  We should accept it without any unnecessary delay.  The method of campaigning by candidates is the subject of section 6. That provision of course, is limited by the requirements of article 269 of our constitution.  

Mr Chairman and hon. Members, section 7 requires the interim electoral commission to provide security to candidates, and permits it to provide facilities to them as well.  While the Clause permits candidates to raise their own additional assistance. they are not to seek or obtain assistance from foreign sources hostile to the Republic of Uganda and its people.  Candidates are to maintain records of their sources of assistance.  

Sir, let me say something about security. The state as we all know has a duty to provide security to every citizen or to every person in Uganda. Hence the existence of state organs entrusted with that kind of responsibility to mention but one, the police. But Sir, the policy behind this provision is, that when one becomes a Presidential candidate the state obligation to provide security to him or her becomes even greater. It becomes obligatory and mandatory. The reason of course is, that that person has now become a little more than a simple Kavuma or anything of that kind. 

Sir, on soliciting facilitation from hostile countries first of all it is criminal and dangerous to state security and the stability of this country; and the people would not have any kind treatment to kind of approach and hence, the very progressive and healthy provision to guide the candidates who aspire for this highest office in our land. The use of government resources is prohibited by Clause 8 of the Bill. This is part of the much talked about notion of leveling the ground. A concept virtually never heard of in developed democracies but often very popular in under developed countries. 

Section 9 makes provision for what happens in the highly unlikely event of a candidate dying before the end polling.  Section 10 largely repeats those portions of article 103 of the constitution concerning the declaration of results of elections, and the holding of the a run off election where no candidate obtains more than 50 per cent of the valid votes cast in a Presidential election.  Clause 11 in the main repeats the provisions of article 104 of the constitution concerning challenges to Presidential elections.  

As I have already mentioned Mr Chairman and hon. Members, section 2 of applies to Presidential elections, the arrangements and I emphasize, the arrangements for elections proposed to be made under the Parliamentary elections Bill as stipulated in that Bill.  Section 13, 14 and 15 deal with offenses specific to Presidential elections while Clause 16 permits regulations to be made to give effect to the provisions of the Bill. There are also 3 Schedules to the Bill providing the nomination form and other forms associated with nomination all of which are required by section of the Bill.  There is some material I must say, which has been inadvertently omitted from the forms which I will provide to hon. Members at the time of making amendments to the Bills.  

Mr Chairman, allow me before I conclude to say a word or two about elections for local governments. I do so because there has been some different interpretation of the constitutional provisions in respect of the local government as established by the constitution and its election. To some, it appears that. the constitution suggests that these elections should be held even the before the Presidential and Parliamentary elections.  

Mr Chairman, in simple and straight forward terms I want to assure you Sir, and the House that the position is, that there is no provision in the constitution stating explicitly that such elections should be held in the transitional period.the provisions of the chapter on transitional provisions which mention elections cannot be interpreted to require local government elections to be held during the transitional period. Perhaps the most important to note is that, it is Parliament which is required to pass the laws establishing the new system of local government provided for in chapter 11 of our constitution. A system which in many significant respects is quite different from the existing local government system established under the local government Resistance Councils statute 1993.  That new legislation cannot be passed by this House during the interim period. 

So, until the new system of local government is established by the new Parliament, elections for local government are not necessarily required to be held during the transitional period.  In any event Sir, that is good news for all of us committed to having a new National government established by elections before July 7th this year.  For if we had to hold local government elections as well as Presidential and Parliamentary elections, the time table could become impossible; and our resources would be stretched beyond our capacity.  In conclusion, Mr Chairman, I can only emphasize once again, the grave and historic importance of the Presidential Elections Interim -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of clarification.  I am seeking clarification ,Mr Chairman, in light of Clause 181 (5) of the new constitution. Clause 181 (5) which states that, elections of all local government council shall take place at least 60 days before the expiry of existing council. But shall coincide with the Presidential and Parliamentary elections. The clarification I am seeking, Mr Chairman, is that, the councils which are existing under this present administration which we are in should be held within the 60 days before we expire, and that will be in this transitional period.  That is why I am seeking clarification.  If I knew I would not rise up.  I would like guidance and clarification whether the local councils which are existing at the moment called RCs, do not comply with the provision under article 181 sub-Clause 5.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I will be brief in response to this matter.  Mr Chairman, it is clear that the local government anticipated in this chapter, is to be based on a law that is going to be made by Parliament, the new elected Parliament under the transitional provisions.  That system of local government Sir, I will repeat, is in many ways different in character and set up from the present local Resistance units and councils we have.  It would, therefore, be over stretching this provision too much if you were going to interpret it, would mean that they must be elected within that transitional period.  

Lastly, even if one wanted to entertain that kind of argument, we must remember that an argument could be advanced that local governments are also in the transitional period, are part of the NRM Government organs.  Which are required by the Constitution  to continue together until the expiry of the interim period when a new Government is elected.  So you can see there can be a lacuna and it is prudent to deal with the constitution in the way it is written, and then action taken to handle those matters of establishing local government the modernity of electing those local governments under the provisions made by Parliament which is authorised by chapter 11 of our Constitution; and I will invite my colleague my good friend and other Members to closely go back and study this chapter in relation with the provisions of the transition period and he will realize that there is definitely a legal and constitutional difference. I was concluding and I will say -(Interruption)

MR KANYOMOZI: Point of clarification. I was reading section 181 in conjunction with article 263 of the constitution.  A transitional provision which says that the NRM administration will continue; and I thought that the RCs or now local councils are a part of this administration and when this administration ends they also end with it, they expire. Does that mean, Mr Chairman that on the 7th of July, on Sabasaba day in fact -(Interjections)- yes it is a Sabasaba day. In the neighbouring country call this a Sabasaba day, we will not have local administration until Parliament has reconvened and enacted laws concerning those local administrations.  I need guidance, Mr Chairman.

HON. MEMBER: Point of clarification. I would also wish the hon. Minister to clarify on the elections of District women representatives.  Because, Mr Chairman, if these hon. ladies will be elected by electoral colleges, to be constituted by the local council members or executives, if they are not elected, will they be elected by the existing local councils, or by the new local councils?  Can the hon. Minister clarify on that one?

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, clearly this is why - I think what is coming out from the contributions of the hon. Members, and it is healthy, is a realization that in the constitution as it stands, there could be political lacunae which must be attended to; and the answer is abide by the constitution, during a transitional period accomplish the task that you must, and then the next administration takes it upon itself to take the fastest route to cure the lacunae as mentioned.  As for the women, I would request the hon. Member to exercise a bit of patience so that when we come to debating the provisions relating to there, you will see how they are framed and definitely -and clearly they are not contrary to the constitutional provisions governing the transitional period which must be as far as possible, in accordance with the implementation with rest of the constitution.  It may not be possible or practical to do some of these things during the transitional period.  

Mr Chairman, I was saying that in conclusion, I wanted to emphasize once again the grave and historic importance of the Presidential election interim provisions Bill and need for this hon. House to deal with the Bill as soon as possible, to ensure elections are held well before the expiry of the transitional period on July the 7th.  

I must also place on record my sincere thanks to the chairman and Members of the NRC committee on legal and security affairs, and to the Members of this hon. House who made submissions to that committee concerning the Bill now under consideration.  My thanks also go to members of the public who have exhibited extreme interest or keen interest in this Bill and some of whom have appeared before the committee I have talked about. I must say I have derived much assistance from these sources of assistance which have enabled me to consider some improvements to the text of the Bill. Much as we can consider a little later at the appropriate stage of our debate.  I commend the Bill Sir, to this hon. House and look forward to hearing the views of hon. Members of the House on its provisions.  I beg to move Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now propose that the Presidential elections interim provisions Bill, 1995 be read the second time. Debate is now open for you to discuss.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Bill. Before I address my remarks on certain provisions of this Bill, I would like to put it on record that this is a historic day in the democratisation of this country.  Mr Chairman, the rebirth of democracy which was ushered in by NRM in 1986. (Applause) 

Mr Chairman, I may compare this to a gestation period. The gestation period begun in 1986 for democracy. Since then, a lot of steps have been taken.  The democratisation process was like a woman who is pregnant.  This Bill and the Parliamentary Elections Bill mark a situation where the mother is now in labour pains.  Democracy is about to be born. (Applause) This emphasizes the importance of introducing these Bills at this juncture.  As the hon. Minister has said, for the first time in this country, we are going to elect a President by universal adult suffrage. (Applause)  I think this is a historical achievement of monumentus importance. That every Uganda now has got an opportunity to elect a President of his own choice. We have done away with indirect elections of Presidents, we have done away with Presidents who usurp powers, we are going back to democratic ideals. (Applause) The Committee of this House -(Interruption)

PROF. WANGUSA: Point of information. May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that whereas I agree with all that he has said, since there was never a time when we had election of President by universal suffrage, now that we are going to do so, we cannot say that we are going back to, I think we are going forward. (Laughter)

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I realize Prof. Wangusa, is a Prof. of English.  So what he is saying really is just a question of language semantics there is no difference. (Laughter) Mr Chairman, the committee on legal and security affairs of this House has had an opportunity to go through this Bill and hear views, we have also heard views from members of the public who were interested to appear before us; and we sat for several days and I am happy to report that we have found the provisions of these Bills apart from few areas I am going to point to which need some minor adjustments, we have found the provisions very good, and we support them. (Applause)

Let me now comment briefly on some of these areas. Mr Chairman, as I said I am just going to highlight to you.  I begin with the issue of public campaigns contained in Clause 6. Clause 6 allows individual public campaign meetings.  Mr Chairman, you recall last time there were some misgivings; some of the objections about not allowing some people to carry out their own private campaigns.  This provision is very democratic, it is consistent with freedom of expression and association, which enshrined in the Constitution, and it is welcome.  It says however, that these public campaigns have to be conducted in accordance with the existing law.  

Now, what is the existing law?  The existing law is the constitution, existing law are any other laws that ensure orderly conduct of meetings.  It is a vital provision because we are not going to allow meetings take place which for instance are likely to incite a breach of the peace. The Police Act which we passed ensures that meetings are to be conducted orderly.  So this provision is to be read in accordance with say, police act, in accordance with Penal code, in accordance with laws of sedition, that is what actually it means by saying existing law, and it is welcome. 

The Committee, however, has proposed an amendment on 6 concerning the-may be they may be a necessity to organize a joint meeting.  A joint meeting can be organised subject to time and other logistics.  So we are saying that, a commission may organize a joint candidates’ meeting in addition to any other meetings, which are allowed.  So that may be those would be Presidents can have a time to publicly debate together and they see their performance. (Applause) 

So, we are proposing an amendment to that effect. Now, there is a provision concerning giving in advance notice of your meetings.  I think this is really important it does not prohibit you from holding a meeting; you give a notice so that relevant authorities ensure that there is peace, there is stability, and no breach of the law is contravened.  This is a harmless provision but necessary.  

On the issue of security, I am addressing you on this because we had representation from some members of public that why provide for Presidential candidate for if you do, why don’t they choose their own security personnel.  Mr Chairman that would be dangerous.  The security personnel who are maintained by the state are neutral, they are there to guard and safeguard the security of everybody.  Once you start discriminating, you say no, no not this one, I think we are introducing a dangerous element which will undermine the impartiality of our security set up. Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. member holding the Floor that, in 1980, we also had a similar function and we were supposed to have impartial security organs.  But unfortunately, there was deliberate establishment of Road Blocks under the guise of insecurity to bar candidates to reach to the place where they were supposed to go.

HON. MEMBER: Further information.  I would like to give further information.  The security of Uganda in 980 was used to detain an opponent so that the period for nomination past.  This is where sometimes security can be misused.            

HON. MEMBER: Additional information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the two Members who were informing the hon. Member on the Floor that the security personnel of today are far different in efficiency from the security personnel of those days. (Applause) 

Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, in Clause 7 (2) which says the Commission shall with the approval of the legislature offer such facilities to candidates as the Commission may consider appropriate. We feel here that there could be a requirement of urgency, it should be done as soon as possible, whatever facilities are offered so that would-be candidates would know in advance.  So, we are intending to move an Amendment to the effect that the Commission shall as soon as possible with the approval of legislature, offer such facilities to candidates as the commission may consider appropriate for fair election.  

On sub-clause 3, I want to have an explanation:  “Subject to the section a candidate may raise additional assistance for his or her campaign through lawful means.”  Some quarters have doubted or questioned the question of lawful means.  Again lawful means here means according to the existing law.  If you look at the Constitution, for instance, it prohibits anybody from partisan funding.  It prohibits, for instance, any of the existing parties from sponsoring a candidate by funding him, it is in the Constitution, it is prohibited.  So, here that is what it means lawful means, you will have to conform with the existing law.  

Now, on sub-clause 4, the committee also intends to move a slight Amendment and this concerns raising funds from organisations or institutions outside the country, that may have demonstrated an intention overthrow the lawful established government or to endanger the security of Uganda.  When you read it, a would-be candidate is put in a difficult position.  How will he know these sources?  To whom will he ask?  No doubt much of this information is of a security nature, and Uganda is not an exception, every country has got lists of organisations which they call subversive or whatever they are, they are kept there and everybody knows those organisation are outlawed.  But here how will you know?  So, we are trying to move an Amendment that this information will be supplied by the Electoral Commission.  Mr Chairman, the logistics of framing that particular provision will be up to drafts people, but it is important that the sources are indicated where you can go and get information; and obviously it is the Electoral Commission because that is the body that is in charge of elections.  

Mr Chairman, on -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Thank you very much, and I am grateful to my hon. Learned Friend for giving way.  Could he clarify a proposed intention of the Legal and Security Committee to move an Amendment here; how the Electoral Commission which is supposed to be independent of the government, never-the-less how the Electoral Commission will come across this information of governments or organisations which want to overthrow the lawfully established government of Uganda.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, obviously they will be supplied with information from relevant security organs of government, that is an obvious thing.  Mr Chairman, on Clause 8.1; “Except as authorised under this Statute, no candidate shall use government resources for the purposes of campaigning for elections” and 2, “Notwithstanding that a candidate who is for the time being, President... is exempted.”  

The purpose of this provision is to level the ground.  You may ask why then provide for an exception in 8.2, why not leave it?  It is a fact that it is a fact that if the incumbent President is a candidate he will not shade off his presidency and hire a tax in order to go for campaigns, this is impossible.  We know, for instance, the President of United States flies in Airforce 1 conducting his campaign.  So, it is unrealistic and demeaning in your quest for leveling the ground to reduce the President to really something below his status.  We have a saying in Runyankore -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, I will translate it.  We have a saying in Runyankore, which goes like this, ‘Twingane etahamaru’, which means that those who say they are equal, the equality is only at the drinking place.  The essence of this is that you find a very poor man at a drinking party, and once he is drunk he can now say we are equal, I am rich and so forth; that is the only opportunity that equality will come, and after he has been sober he goes to where he was.  So, Mr Chairman, you cannot say that an incumbent President who is a candidate will, actually, be the same as hon. Tiberondwa who is aspiring; it is impossible. (Laughter)  This provision makes it incumbent on the - in fact, puts a burden on the incumbent President who is going to stand to make sure that resources of the government are not used for campaigning purposes, as far as possible, beyond his normal duties as a President.  

Mr Chairman, I am about to conclude, and I move on to the last clause 16 of the Bill which reads:  “The Minister may by Statutory Instrument make regulations for giving effect to the provisions of this Statute”.  Now, we looked at this provision and we think that the regulations which are to be made should be with the approval of Parliament.  If you look at the Interim Electoral Commission Statute 1995 which we passed, which touches on these elections; there is a similar provision that any regulations which were made under this have to be approved by Parliament.  So, we are intending to move an Amendment to the effect that clause 16 will read:  “(1) The Minister may by Statutory Instrument on recommendation of the commission, make regulations for giving effect to the provisions of this Statute” this is consistent with the Interim Electoral Commission Statute which we passed.  Further, any regulations made under this section shall within 14 days, after being made, be read before the legislature for approval, and shall be approved by the legislature, in any case before the nomination day.  So, we feel, therefore, that gives this House an opportunity to look at these regulations and approve them before nominations (Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am surprised and flabbergasted to hear from the Learned Lawyer of this hon. House stating that the Electoral Commission will be in power to suggest the regulations rather than the Chief Justice.  It cannot be, he should be the Minister, because has got the political power and subsidiary power of making regulation.  It cannot be the work of the Electoral Commission, otherwise it is biased and bought easily.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, if hon. Obwangor listened properly, he would have seen that it is, actually, the Minister making regulations on recommendation of the Electoral Commission.  So, it is still the Minister who is going to make these regulations.  So, I cannot see and understand the rationale of hon. Obwangor’s interjection.

MR KANYOMOZI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, just to get the matter clear; within those 14 days when the regulations have been made, will they wait approval before they are applied, or will they start functioning while awaiting approval?

MR BUTAGIRA:  I think it is self explanatory, Mr Chairman, if you read it; any regulations made under this section shall within 14 days after being made be laid before the legislature for approval.  It means what it says!  Mr Chairman, if you interpret this, it can mean, for instance, they take immediate effect, subject to approval by Parliament.  But where there is this time frame is that the Minister has an obligation to bring these regulations before Parliament for approval, within 14 days, and the restriction that should be before nomination day means that before that day all regulations concerning elections will have been approved by this legislature. I think this is a very safety and a very good measure which I think should be supported. 

Mr Chairman, I want to conclude -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, since the hon. Member now on the Floor also doubles as Chairman of the Legal Affairs Committee of this House, I would like to ask him to make some clarification regarding the statement made by the hon. Minister at the beginning of this debate, that many of the details and regulations related to the presidential election are contained in the other Bill which deals with parliamentary election.  In view of this very important statement which is really correct, made by the Minister, I do not know whether before passing the Presidential Elections Bill we shall have to refer to the other law, whether it would not have been wiser to start with the Parliamentary Election Bill which contains these details?

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, when you look at that provision of clause 12 of this Bill, whichever way, Mr Chairman, this Parliament will have full opportunity to discuss the Parliamentary Elections Statute, whatever is passed will be applicable to this Presidential Elections Bill where applicable.  So, there is no prejudice at all -(Interjections)- I was trying not to trade on dangerous ground since I have to handle my Colleague properly since sooner or later he might be somewhere.  What I was saying is that there is no prejudice, whether this comes now or the other one comes next, whatever, all the provisions have to be approved by this House, so there is no prejudice as I was saying.  

Mr Chairman, allow me to conclude by saying -(Interruption).

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I want to give one very clear example; in the Presidential Elections Bill it is stated that in order to qualify to be a presidential candidate you must qualify to be a Member of Parliament, and there is no provision in the law unless we make some annexes or schedules to this one in a way of Amendment, how shall we, for example, be able to know?  The Constitution does not give details of the qualification; section 80 simply talks about HSC or its equivalent, and those equivalents are defined in the law relating to parliamentary elections, but they are not defined in the law related to the election of the President.  Can we just pass the Presidential Election law without knowing the details of the other one?

MR ASIKU:  Point of information.  May I have the pleasure to give the information to the last speaker.  In order to qualify to be a presidential candidate you must qualify to be a parliamentary candidate.  I think this is what is clearly spelt out.  Therefore, if the qualifications for being a parliamentary candidate are clearly stated in the schedule, it automatically means those are the same qualifications for a candidate to be a President!

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I want to conclude by stating what I said at the beginning that the country is waiting for these electoral laws to be passed so that we put in place a government elected by the people.  Mr Chairman, this Presidential Elections Bill, as I was saying, is a landmark in the history of restoration of democracy in this country.  Mr Chairman, I wholeheartedly support the Bill (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE (Nominated):  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill and in the same vain I would like to point out that this is a very important Bill and those of us who have been reading the signposts on our way to democracy must look at this very, very closely and understand that the road is being made clearer and clearer every day.  When hon. Butagira was saying that this is an important occasion, there were mummers, sometime you can exaggerate, but I think on this occasion, like may other occasions, exaggeration is not the attribute of what one could associate with hon. Butagira.  Mr Chairman, there are many people who talk of restoring democracy.  We sometimes use the word ‘we are restoring democracy in Uganda’ my own study of this country, there was not a time in the passed where democracy was practised and was abandoned; there were some droppings of democracy, there were some colouring of democracy but sure there was not enough foundation for democracy to talk about, and if anybody wants to look at this, one can ready the history of Uganda from many sources.  Democracy could not have been with us in 1962 when the second election was aborted by the indirect elections in Buganda. It could not have been democracy!  And many points, you could not have had democracy in 1966 or 67 when again there was an extension; you could not have had democracy when Amin took over; you could not have had democracy when UNLF came and overthrow Amin.  We tried here in the NCC to practice some democracy but in a medium that was not conducive to democracy; we tried in 1980, elections took place but you know what happened.  You do not rig elections and you say, yes, democracy has been born when you have aborted it with rigging.  

So, really - even in 1986 the overthrow of the regime at the time did not go through democratic means in the normal sense of democracy.  So, we really are talking now of establishing principles, institutions of democracy in Uganda, and now we have reached a point where we are going to elect a President by universal suffrage, which to me is really the of that process of electing a leader in Uganda.  So, here we are, therefore, talking about a major milestone in the democratisation of Uganda and I really thank hon. Butagira for pointing that out as graphically as he did.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to briefly talk about two areas mainly.  One is the amount of money that the presidential candidate is supposed to present for his or her nomination.  There are people who have complained that UShs 2,000,000 is a lot of money, and it is even proposed here and I intend to move an Amendment that this is refundable, whereas for Members of Parliament it is a contribution.  Why?  This man or woman is pursuing, is competing for the highest post and then when he or she puts a deposit then it is refunded, and when a candidate for Parliament - you know, that one is regarded as a contribution to the election.  Why should a presidential candidate not only contribute to the election? (Applause)  So, surely Members of this House must that as logical and accept that Amendment when it is finally brought so that -(Interjections)

Secondly, since that is generally agreed and almost passed, I think the second point is the amount.  There have been people talking about UShs 2,000,000 being too much.  Now, really when you look at the conditions we set requiring the number of people who are to sign the nomination from the different two thirds of the constituencies, we are trying to put some kind of guidelines that not anybody wakes up in his dream and wants to be a presidential candidate.  Surely, if you cannot martial over 2,600 voters on your side, then you surely are not worth the name.  Now, equally, surely UShs 2,000,000 for a presidential candidate is supposed to be too big for him, please, you are going to rob our state; please do not consider yourself material for presidential candidature when you cannot raise two million; sell your chickens, sell your goats; in fact the figure should be more, and if it is generally agreed like it looks like, a figure of UShs 5,000,000 may make sense -(Interruption)

MR KASAJJA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the point the professor has mentioned, but I wish to inform the Members that in a developed country like America, which I hope most of you are aware, to be a candidate for presidential election you must prove that you are a wealthy man.  Therefore, I do not see why here we shall allow candidates who are poor; who are going to take up high positions to be members of presidential election.  Therefore, I think this point is in order that this candidate has to be a candidate of high profile.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to correct the impression created by the Member who has just given information about the wealth of the American presidential candidates.  Mr Chairman, maybe, I should only tell him what they used to say, because what he is talking about is what happened before this century actually started.  But at that time the argument was very interesting, they said a man comes today and he has a horse; then you decide that since he has property he is wealth enough and you allow him to be a voter or a candidate.  The next day the horse dies and you say he does not have anything now, he is not proper any more; and the question was, who was the voter, the candidate or the jackass (Laughter)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Mr Chairman, I think the information that was given by the hon. Member in my opinion perverted the point I had made.  I am not talking of a wealth man or woman in the sense of a billionaire or whatever; I am talking of someone who should be able to afford a deposit of UShs 2,000,000 or UShs 5,000,000 for that matter.  I am not talking of somebody who has to be measured on the amount of millions he has in his bank, but surely he ought to be able to mobilise UShs 5,000,000 as a contribution to the election.  

Now, the second area, Mr Chairman, I wanted to touch on is the campaign under clause 6.  Mr Chairman, many of us who run for the CA elections, enjoyed our time when we had joined candidates meetings.  We addressed the people together, if anybody wanted to tell a lie, he told it there and the people checked and you avoided telling lies because you could not tell a lie about somebody who was present, and the way the meetings were organised, even helped the public to make judgement of the two or the three, or the ten or 14 candidates as one case in Soroti.  So, me I would have preferred that these presidential candidates present themselves together to the public at joint meetings.  But when I talked to the minister, hon. Kavuma, the time limit was the barrier; that if you were to have joint meetings throughout Uganda; if you have 39 districts and you have to think of, at least, one joint meeting in each district, then you would need 39 days to cram all the meeting in 30 days which seems to be the anticipated time, it would be too much!  However, I would like this House to think seriously about this; because there are several types of meetings that these candidates could hold.  One would be to go physically into these areas, into the districts, and talk gently; the others would be to organise joint presentation to an audience, which is made possible by videocassettes throughout the country.  

Now, here the question of money would be looked at, whether there would be possibilities of reproducing joint performance of these candidates to many situation, many audiences in the country.  Because to me these separate meetings have two disadvantages.  One is that if you have five, six, like so many seem to be aspiring, you have Ssemuju in one corner, you have hon. Tiberondwa in another, you have hon. Ssemogerere in another, you have His Excellency Museveni in another, and so many others that may find it exciting to compete.  Then you could have your system stretched to the limit in terms of security, in terms of organisation, and in case you could be having two or three rallies in one area, and you usually when you have that kind of competition you have highly charged emotions, and that is when you could have breaches of the peace.  So, to me we could have a joint meeting which is reproduced for the population to see, and where our Radio cannot reach, perhaps, in considering the election we could think on how the information could now reach there, as part and parcel of improving our communication, but I would really prefer that these candidates present themselves.  The advantage in my opinion is that when you present yourselves together, you give the audience a chance for them to make a judgement and objective judgement.  But when you go and talk to yourselves and invariably individual rallies may be attended by your only supporters.  It is most likely, if I am not supporting Ssemuju, I may find it absolutely a waste of time to go and attend Ssemuju’s rally.  But if I know that Ssemuju is going to perform from the same rostrum as President Museveni, as Dr Ssemogerere, as Dr Tiberondwa, I may even discover that this Ssemuju had something I never knew, just because you are now forced to be there because you have a choice. So, joint meeting gives us a chance to evaluate so that at the end of the day when we are deciding on our vote, we do it decisively so that such a person is completely defeated and never rises his head again to waste the time of the public.  

I would like also to have this occasion and talk to intending candidates for the presidency -(Interruption)

MR KARUHANGA:  I wanted hon. Prof. Kabwegyere to tell me if we go for these joint meetings, as you say Ssemuju people will discover that he has got some good qualities also, maybe; supposing on that day Ssemuju has a headache and he does not turn up, would the meeting be postponed because of Mr Ssemuju, and if he decides to have ten headaches, what will happen?

DR TIBERONDWA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, Prof. Kabwegyere, that the situation which hon. Karuhanga has just mentioned, did arise in some cases during the CA elections, but it did not stop these candidates meeting from taking place!  Since we now have joint candidates meetings in the law governing the parliamentary election, I think, in all fairness we should treat all these elections in the same way (Applause)

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to thank the hon. Member representing Igara for supporting my position.  Mr Chairman, hon. Karuhanga’s point does not call for extra-ordinary thinking.  If you want to show your failure or your timidity by having a headache and not turning up, you can do so freely and you do not have to attend joing meeting, in which case the voters will make their judgement on the bases of your political behaviour.  Because, after all, if you have a constant headache you may not be good material for the big post. (Laughter)  

Now, I was coming to advise the presidential candidates.  I think, one of the thing that we have been going through is to establish principles, to establish procedures and the next Parliament has a duty of establishing institutions by passing laws and so on and so on, and we have also done so in our life time as Parliament.  There is one thing that we have now which anybody should not ignore and cannot ignore with impunity, we have a Constitution.  Now, if intending candidates for presidency start immediately, even before the elections have been declared, and they say they are going to flout the Constitution; should it not be possible that they disqualify themselves by, actually, saying.  Because some people are saying -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I want to inform the hon. Members speaking, it was the President of this country when inaugurating the Constitution who started by criticising the Constitution he was inaugurating.  He is the one who gave the example.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  I thank the hon. Member who is severally here being referred to as the Vice President; that showing a weakness or announcing that there is some weakness in the Constitution does not mean disrespect, and does not threaten the overthrow of that Constitution.  The Constitution says that political parties as entities will not sponsor candidates or will not this and that, as we all know.  Then you as a candidate you say I am going to this and that, contrary to those provisions.  Now, is that normal behaviour or is that disrespect for the Constitution?  Because the procedure of amending the Constitution is there, alright?  You can come later on and go through the procedures that have been provided for.  Because really if we all express the hatred of whatever it is, that we imagine exists, then hatred would rule.  But we always allow the better part of human behaviour to be in charge, otherwise we are in chaos.  So, to me I would not want really to see pushing for confrontations for no good reason.  I do not want people to imagine that you are fighting an individual or you are fighting a system for its own sake.  If you have an alternative view, please the methods are available, the principles can be followed and you will establish your alternative.  Democracy many people seem to think is a system where you do what you like and anyhow.  That is not democracy!  Democracy, in fact, simply defined, is a system of government where the majority takes over, but must follow principles that recognise those who are being defeated.  Otherwise, to say is what I like, no; if you do not like it, but the majority have supported it, you have to abide.  

Now, if today, the majority view has sponsored a particular line, now you must make sure that work your way up to that point where you will become a majority.  I do not know how many of us are familiar with the circulation of this theory where the lions as they grow older become folks and then process comes up when the folks now become the new lions.  In a way in Uganda today the conditions that we have had have helped us to see who at the moment are the lions and who are the folks, so much that if the lions outgrow their usefulness, then the folks may not becomes the lions; and I think,if the process if properly guided, this is really where we are.  The process of this change is to be guided -(Interruption)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House that allegorically speaking is not constitutional; either you speak for the Constitution or law, which is exact; why?  Because it is reasoning; now, the holder of the Floor is misleading our intellectuality in common wisdom to bring a good law to make a President.  We are no frogs by the way, and we are not swines, we are intellectually human beings.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, the hon. Members holding the Floor has only mentioned the folks, but he has not completed the whole chain; there are the swines, there are the frogs, there are the hyenas called Entehe, according to the pronouncements by the President of the Republic of Uganda.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to dispute very strongly that the use allegory is unconstitutional.  I think it is nowhere it is written in the rules of this House, that allegories, similes and all other forms of language are not supposed to be used.  I think, hon. Obwangor should appreciate the message from the shifting when the lions give way to foxes and these foxes become lions (Laughter)

MR OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  You see, those of us who have studied the rhetoric, allegorical speaking is a dodging of the truth, because in this House we want exactness.  We want our Colleague holding the Floor to convince us in the essence of the debate in the House, Presidential Election Law so that we know exactly how to contribute usefully for the common welfare of our country.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Regarding what hon. Tiberondwa said about other animals, I think we must be proud of richness of our cultures.  Most of these images are derived from stories we have heard as children, we have read about or we have been told about by our parents, and the messages are not really hidden, they are very naked.  So, even my old Friend hon. Obwangor has got the message like the way it is said - Mwangale used it in Kenya when he carried out a commission of inquiry regarding the killing of Kairuki and he said a hyena talked to a stone, but because he did not talk to a stone he did something else.  But a hyena talked to a stone and a stone never responded and then it said you have heard although you have not responded; and everybody was very clear that he was telling the state that everybody knew they were responsible but that they were not doing anything about it.  

Mr Chairman, by way of conclusion, I would to feel irritated by feeling that Ugandans are going to have a share in the President they will elect.  We have had Presidents we did not chose with our own free will, and there was a time when we had a prospect of welcoming a President to be a Chancellor of Makerere who might have difficulties reading his own name on the scripts.  Now, we are talking of electing a President of our own choice, and I am very, very encouraged by the way so many people are thinking that they are presidential material and are going in.  I am waiting to see on nomination day for the presidential candidates how many we shall have and what choice we shall make.  I certainly look forward to that occasion when we shall elect a President by everybody and other who will have competed will shake his hands or here hands and say congratulations and that will be democracy in practice.  I thank you.

MR NJUBA (Nominated):  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for this opportunity.  I would like to start by saying how happy I am that this Bill is being debated and the entire country is very anxious to see its conclusion so they can exercise its democratic right.  I therefore, support the Bill whole-heartedly.  We must restore democracy in this country; we must develop democratically and mature indeed.  It is for that reason that I feel it is my duty to raise one or two things so that we do not pay lip service to democracy but we really work for it.  I was rather intrigued by the Chairman of Legal Committee, hon. Butagira who has just left when he looked at clause 6 and made reference to the existing law; I think he is correct if he reads in the right books.  

But, let us admit there are among us some officials who imagine, who are over-zealous in some areas and will go the whole distance to make sure that certain meetings are not held, and they can imagine, for example, and inform the security organ that it is unsafe to hold a meeting here because of this and that.  Let us be clear, the majority of the officials are fair but there are those over-zealous who can go out of their way and block a meeting; it has happened before and it will continue to happen.  

What I would have liked to see in a law like this is to place the duty on the security organ to ensure that where a candidate wants to address a meeting he is assisted, he is helped and he is not prevented from holding that meeting.  This is a very, very important meeting and we must not brush it aside.  The other area, Sir, deals with clause 7 “The Commissioner shall provide security for the protection of each candidate.”  It is a very good idea, but I ask where will the commission get the security forces; has it got the capacity?  

My experience dates back to the days of the Commission, when we had to provide security for some of these commissioners, especially, in certain areas, and we went to the Police and the Police turned around and said we do not have the money for this and that.  I have not looked at the Budget of Commission, but I think we should provide more than asking the commission merely to provide security.  

Furthermore we should also provide in this law what kind of security does an aspiring presidential candidate require.  I think it is basically two types; personal security while he moves around the country up and town, and two, security at a public meeting.  I think we should not leave it to the commission to provide for this, we should specify the minimum security we should give to these people.  I am not a security man, but my Friend the Minister of Defence probably will advise on this, because he is the only one around there I can see; because there is grade one, grade two, grade three, what kind?  We should also provide that the candidate of this stature should be able to say whom he should have in his security or bodyguard.  It is not a matter of going to Police to get a policeman to be his escort and at the first confusion the gun may be turned against him.  He should be free to choose his own escort.  Then at the public meetings that are called, the security organisation should be able to provide near waterproof security so no meeting is put off because of some kind of insecurity, or excitement.  It can be violence inspired by the opponent, after he has spoken or before he has spoken; but to leave it to the commission to do all these, I think, it is a little too much.  We should spell it out here and make sure that we are not paying lip service to democracy but we really mean to give that person an opportunity to present himself and present his views and then let the people chose.  Another point, Mr Chairman, again I am sorry to dwell on the Commission -(Interruption)

CAPT. GASATURA:  Mr Chairman, I appreciate what hon. Sam Njuba is raising on security for presidential candidates, but I wanted to seek clarification from him as to whether he is firm on the suggestion that each candidate be free to chose his own security personnel or whether it is an intention he would like to push up later.  I would concerned, Mr Chairman, that somebody say, Dr Tiberondwa or Mr Ssemuju picks on a Maj. Gen. Mugisha Muntu to be his security and the law has authorised him so to do.  Rather I would perhaps expect a candidate to have the freedom to pick on or to reject any security personnel.  Unless otherwise, of course, hon. Sam Njuba intends for such a candidate to have a selected securiko guard. 

MR NJUBA: First of all I am very serious on these matters, but I think the informer the hon. Capt. Gasatura stretched his imagination too far; I do not think any candidate would ask the Maj. Gen. to be his escort. (Laughter)  I think that was a bad joke.

MR WAPAKABULO: Although it may be, difficult not to call on a serving Major General I have just been hearing a whisper from a Brigadier that if call upon he will be prepared in a present capacity -(Laughter)

MR NJUBA: Mr Chairman, this is a sign of a dedicated Ugandan soldier and a nationalist -(Interruption)

 MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I thank hon. Njuba for giving way and as a senior lawyer and a constitutional lawyer who have been in this business of public affairs for a long time, I wonder whether the good points he raises how he can put it into law by say, saying that a candidate would be permitted in law to choose his personnel I think it becomes very, very, difficult because if hon. Tiberondwa here was asked to choose his personnel among the policemen we have in Uganda and he comes with names which the police does not know - I mean he does not know the files of how those people are disciplined  supposing he just picks people who are drunkards and  -(Interjection)- no, but they have a record I am addressing this to hon. Njuba to see the complicated situation that he would be putting to the Inspector General of Police who is required to find the best  team that can take care of a national figure of that magnitude and it is up to him to look for the best of his team and here turns up Dr Tiberondwa says, I  want  kamugira, Kamuntu, Kakwezi, karuhanga, all from some place and then these people every time they put them on the guard there is a theft there, how can the  Inspector General reconcile with Members of parliament who would have passed the law in that situation.

MR NJUBA: I think these are divisions. I did not first of all, Mr Chairman, imply that Dr Tiberondwa as a candidate to recruit his own staff, but he would put a request to the head of the security as to who he wants and this is not a new thing rather than being told to go and guard hon. Tiberondwa he puts a request to the Inspector General of Police and then the Inspector General of Police can advise him that the man you are talking about has this problem and that problem he has all the files and all the facilities.  So, I do not think it is a serious problem it is administrative, but what I want to hear and it is known that, for example if you are recruiting for a President you do not take anybody to work in the State House without his approval or in his escort, why here, and it is a very small thing to conceit, I think that is in that way, but Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

MR LUBEGA DAMINANO: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr chairman.  Mr Chairman, the point the hon. Member is trying to put across was discussed extensively in our legal and security committee and if our Chairman hon. Butagira had given a written report as it is usually the procedure with these sectoral committees he should have probably elaborated on the fact that -should have come up with a strong point that the Legal and Security Committee observes as necessary that the Commission should provide security in consultation with the candidate I think that could have cleared it.

MR BUTAGIRA:  What hon. Lubega Daminano is saying about report, you will realise, Mr Chairman, hon. Lubega is the Chairman of the Rules and Orders Committee and he should know the procedure regarding committee reports, it is only when this House has referred the Bill or matter to a Committee that it has to report.  So, in this particular case the discussion we held on the Bills was not as a result of referral by this House, there was no obligation, therefore, to report to this House, but the method, Mr Chairman, if I may continue -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Let him finish.

MR BUTAGIRA: The method which has been followed is for the Chairman of this Committee indeed to give the report by way of contribution as he has done in the first place.  Mr Chairman, there is no need for a report and that is why it was not given.

MR NJUBA: Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  The last point is on Clause 7(2); where the Commission shall with the approval of legislature offer such facilities to candidates, as the Commission may consider appropriate.  Again, Mr Chairman, I think we are leaving too much to the Commission, I have not looked at the Budget of the Commission, but I am sure it is very small compared to the heavy weights that are standing.  So, what kind of facilities can the Commission offer?  I think it is the duty of this House if we want to plant democracy in this country, for this House to state clearly the minimum facilities that can be given to a candidate (Applause)  

We are shying away from our responsibility, and we are saying, Besweri Akabwai and the all team facilitate them, then you go their budget hardly anything let us say what we can afford, if we cannot afford let us put it out.  It is very nice on paper to say the Commission will facilitate and when you go in practice it cannot not do it and it cannot come back here, I had also a quarrel with this provision where they say, with the approval the legislature - at the beginning of this session we nearly failed to get a quorum and when this law is passed Members will ran up to their various constituencies and when we are going to approve these facilities, when will you approve these facilities - even if they were there or proposed by Commission.  

So, I would request the Chairman, rather than shying away from the responsibility of making provision for these ladies and Gentlemen we should do it from this Floor if we do not have enough money we say we will not give you anything rather than pass it  to the Commission, because as far as I know the Commission will have problems  First of all finding the resources, secondly, getting us together once this law is passed and the next one to approve this facilitation.  

As I started, I end as I start by saying if the law most welcome and the country has been waiting for a long time for it and as soon as it is passed the better.  Thank you very much.



THE CHAIRMAN:  With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  Announcement now, there will be a special Session tomorrow at 10.am. to pay tribute to our Colleague the late hon. Lt. Col. Serwanga Lwanga you are all requested to attend this special Session.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.10 p.m. and adjourned until Friday, 12 January 1996 at 10.00 a.m.)

