  
Thursday, 25th January, 2001

Parliament met at 3.07 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE ADVOCATES AMENDMENT BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS: (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) Mr. Speaker I beg to move that the Bill entitled: "The Advocates Amendment Bill, 2000" be read for the first time.  

(Mr Karuhanga rose_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, on this Bill? 

MR. ELLY KARUHANGA: Yes


THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Okay.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Is the Bill 2000 or 2001?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think we shall adjust it later but it was gazetted as 2000 subsequently we shall modify.  So the Bill is now committed to the appropriate Committee to consider and report within two weeks.

BILLS 
FIRST READING

THE COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT SCHEMES BILL, 2000

THE MINISTER OF FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (Mr. Gabriel Opio): Mr. Speaker I wish to move that the "Collective Investment Schemes Bill, 2000" be read for the first time.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Bill is committed to the appropriate Committee to consider and report within two weeks from today.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE TO THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well hon. Members, as you recall yesterday we completed the Committee Stage for the Bill dealing with election of Members of Parliament but we adjourned before we adopted the report.  Now before we can adopt it, I want to ascertain whether we have the required number to take a decision. Please ascertain!  While this is being done I want to impress upon you that it is important this Bill is passed as soon as possible, so that what was proposed in the Bill can be implemented.  So I appeal to you to mobilise your colleagues to attend parliament.  Well proceedings are suspended for fifteen minutes so that we can see how we proceed. 

(The House suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled: "the Parliamentary Election Bill, 1998" be passed with some amendments. 

Mr. Speaker I beg to move the Bill entitled: "the Parliamentary Elections Bill 1998 "– (Interjection) 

THE CHAIRMAN: No I think the motion is for adoption of the report.  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker I beg to move that the report of the whole House relating to the Parliamentary Elections Bill 1998 be adopted and be passed.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
THIRD READING

the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998

MR. BEN WACHA: Mr. Speaker I beg to move under rule 108 of our Rules of Procedure for re-committal of clause 12 of the Bill. The purpose of this re-committal is to provide for the method of election for: 
1 the Worker’s representatives,
 2 the National women and the Youth Representative,
3 Members of Parliament with disabilities.

I also wish to make a correction, which appears on the face of our records in respect to clause 12(2a).  Sir, I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You have heard the motion by the Committee of recommitting clause 12 for consideration of those particular provisions.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Maybe there are other appeals.  

MS. BAKOKO BAKORU (Woman Representative, Arua): Mr. Speaker I would like to move a motion under rule 108 for recommittal of clause 12(3a (I)) that is the method of elections for the Woman Member of Parliament – (Laughter and Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now hon. Members you have heard there is another motion to recommit clause 12(3ai) about the election of District Woman Representative.  I put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

BILLS 
COMMITTEE STAGE

the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Speaker permit me to draw your attention to page 5 of the Committee’s report.  Page 5 paragraph 9 dealing with clause 12 of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: You mean of the proposed amendments?

MR. WACHA:  Yeah, this proposed amendment.  Thank you sir.  Now the particular section 12(2) insert the word "interest" immediately after the word "special" appearing at the end of the first line and substitute the word "five" for the words "ten" and "three" appearing in paragraph (a) and (b) respectively. This was a topographical error. The correct position should have been; Sub-clause 2 insert the word "interest" immediately after the word "special," appearing at the end of the first line and substitute the word "five" for the words "three" appearing in paragraph (b) thereof.  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now you have heard there was an error, which affected another provision that was never intended to be amended.  Now I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WACHA:  Sir, I beg to move that on page 6 of the proposed amendment after three the amendment on top of – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: order, order!

MR. WACHA:  Mr Speaker the Amendment on top, which deals with District Youth Councils – that is the method of electing the youth in an Electoral College should form one part of the sub-clause.  I do not know how it is going to be numbered.  
Now the second part of the Sub-clause would deal with the election of the National Woman Youth Representative and I propose as follows:
"A National Electoral College of Representatives of youth shall elect the Representative of Woman Youth from each district as prescribed by the Minister."

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the amendment.  Yes, okay say what you want to say.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman I have not quite understood the Amendment the hon. Chairperson is moving on the youth.  The way I understood it – (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The amendment is this that for National Youth Representative national body should elect him.  I think, as for the others, it should be the regional bodies.  

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman I strongly oppose this amendment.  I support the one for electing the woman at the national level.  I have no problem with that.  What I oppose is stopping the National Youth Conference, electing MPs from different regions.  That is what l don’t support. 

MR. WACHA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker and thank you hon. Karuhanga for giving way.  Actually hon. Karuhanga and me do not differ in our position.  The position is this; yesterday this House passed the original amendment to the effect that the District Youth Council within the region of representation constituted into an Electoral College in accordance with such regulation. The election of the youth from each region will be done by Electoral Colleges of youth from each region.  

Now, when it comes to election of a Woman Youth member, you can not do it using the same regional representation.  So we are saying you use the National Youth – (Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA:  This is why I suggest Mr. Chairman that the whole thing be recommitted, the House revisits the issue completely and we avoid dividing the youth because it is very dangerous.  First of all we are trying to make our young people grow up thinking that Ugandan is not ethnically or regionally divided.  They have already marshalled a Youth Movement at the National level.  Every district is represented; the youth from the west have a chance to interact with their colleagues from the north, the east, the centre and when they are representing the youth, they have a national coverage and enhancing the Ugandan thinking not the ethnic thinking.  So I think this matter having been recommitted, I would like to ask the Chairman to make the amendment not only for the women but also for youth because it is really very dangerous and this House has a duty to develop our youth to think nationally.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well now you have heard the contribution on the proposed amendment by the Committee and you have heard the contrary view of hon. Karuhanga.  Now I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WACHA:  Sir, I beg to move that for purposes of election of persons with disabilities, which is 12(3) d – (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I do not want to number them please!

MR. WACHA:  We propose as follows:
"123d(1). the Representatives of Persons with Disabilities shall be elected by representatives of the district within the region of representation constituted into an Electoral College in a manner prescribed by the Minister. 
the representative of Women with Disabilities shall be elected by an Electoral College of Representative of such persons from each district of such persons from each district. "
 I do not know whether we are going to deal with one from each district in a manner prescribed by the Minister under section 1(01) of this Act?  A representative of members with disabilities gave me this formulation 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The policy is the same as the other one?  I put the question - (Interruption) - yes

MRS. BABA DIRI: I thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I would like to get this clarification from you whether we are amending what is already in the Bill or we are carrying on what is in the report?  I want that clarification.  If we are amending that we should go for the regional level I am opposing to it.  Let me have that clarification then I will say why I am opposing.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: What happened yesterday is that this House considered the original Bill as gazetted and agreed on certain provisions as originally presented and made some amendments. So what we are now dealing with is the outcome of yesterday's proceedings, in doing so it may return the original position or it may change slightly or drastically.  I hope that clarification is clear to you honourable.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Mr. Chairman what is in the original Bill is that we shall have an Electoral College consisting of delegates from the districts.  But what is in the amendment is that we shall have regional electoral colleges with delegates coming from districts. So, these are two different issues, which we must clarify, and I am opposing the original Bill 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Agreed.  But I was just saying we are not considering the Bill.  The Bill was subjected to a Committee of proceedings and it is the outcome that we are dealing with.  So you look at the Bill as affected by the proceedings in the Committee.  That is my explanation.  It is true you are disagreeing with the proposal, but that is a different matter and the Committee will pronounce itself whether to side with you or the proposal.

MRS. BABA DIRI (Representative of persons with disability): Mr. Chairman thank you very much for giving me this opportunity.  I am rejecting the amendment of the regional electoral colleges for the following reasons; first of all this amendment was brought without consulting all persons with disability and Members of Parliament representing people with disability. We have been carrying out consultations in our regions and this very morning we resolved this issue.   For me in the northern region the blind persons I represent agreed that we must use the National Electoral College and not the Regional Electoral Colleges as prescribed. One of the most important reasons is that we must not match disability issues with youth issues.  The youth will go away when they reach adulthood.  

Secondly, they are homogenous in that you are talking of only women and men.  But for us people with disability we are considering gender balance and disability.  If we go with the regional electoral colleges we shall not be sure whether Members of Parliament coming to this House will represent all categories of disability.  We have been consulting and realised that we have no problem with the former method of electing Members of Parliament.

I would like to assure you that the blind persons, the deaf persons, people with epilepsy and people with mental retarded, see is no reason of including the Regional Electoral Colleges because if we leave it at the regional level again they will not be represented in this Parliament.  That is why I support the national college so that when the delegates come up to condense we can gauge whether we shall vote for the blind, for the deaf, for the mentally retarded or for the physically handicapped.  That is why I am opposing the idea of regional.  Thank you.

MR. WACHA: Sir, let me read to the House the justification, which was given to the Committee by one of the Members of Parliament with disability; hon. James Mwandha.  It says: "having one National Electoral College requires a candidate with disabilities to traverse the whole country soliciting for votes from people with disabilities.  It is costly and burdensome to candidates and defeats the principle of affirmative action, and Regional Electoral College will lighten this burden.  Two, in the elections of 1996, those of us who were elected were either staff of NUDIPU or members of board of NUDIPU.  Although we were elected on merit many disabled today believe that you have to be an NUDIPU insider to be elected to Parliament.  This accusation undermines NUDIPU'S reputation as a leading organisation in advocacy for the rights of people with disabilities.  Three, if one Electoral College is used its likely that the majority of people who attend as delegates to NUDIPU general assembly will constitute the college.  However, if regional electoral colleges are used many other disabled people will participate in the electoral process as voters - I am giving information Sir - Four, apart from MPs representing institutions like UPDF and NOTO the rest of the Members of Parliament are elected in their constituencies which are geographically determined.  MPs for people with disabilities who represent regions should also be elected in their regions.  Five, regions of Uganda are not exactly the same in terms of social and economic development and therefore people with disabilities will be affected differently.  That being the case the disability electoral issues in each region would be different.  And then six, finally parliament has found it appropriate to have the youth MPs to be elected in their regions because of the shortcomings identified in one national Electoral College.  The same should also apply for the election of MP for people with disabilities".  Those were the issues, which were brought before the Committee.  The Committee considered them and thought they were appropriate.

MR. KARUHANGA: I need the chairman to clarify to me how that is going to be guaranteed? When we elect a one person who is blind to represent people with disabilities in the West, North, Central, and East. Yet when they meet together, they can easily distribute the disability question and have a proper representation.  This situation of regional thing which we have put- fortunately I hope, we have cleared the youth they will now be elected by all the youth and women at the national level.  That is because I made that amendment and it was passed.  Mr. Chairman, can you clarify that for me?

SPEAKER: You see there was an amendment, which was presented by the Committee you stood up opposing it, we put the question the amendment was guarded.
  
MR. KARUHANGA:  What about my amendment?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: How would it go because you were opposing an amendment, so we put the question to the amendment and it was a carried.  Therefore we did not buy your argument.

MR. KARUHANGA:  So in that case then my amendment-

MR. NDEEZI:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I wish to sincerely appeal to all Members of this august House to make an effort to listen to what I wish to say.  First, I must inform you that this morning we Members of Parliament who represent disabilities had a meeting to discuss this amendment.  During this meeting we agreed that this amendment should be redrafted. Some of the reasons given by our group include the following; One not enough consultations have been carried out to determine whether the provisions can not work or it is not required.  We have been with our people seeking their views on this Bill but none of them has ever told us that they do not want this provision.  You will recall, Mr. Chairman, yesterday while we were considering the electoral colleges for women we made reference to the many consultative meetings being brought out here with no evidence. I therefore feel that we are cheating our people if come here and impose issues on them. 

Secondly, hon. Karuhanga and hon. Baba Diri have clearly clarified the fact that people with disabilities are not a homogeneous category, you don't just look at us in terms of regions, and we have different disabilities. If you say elections on the basis of regions you are going to end with a situations where all the five Members of Parliament are either blind or are all with same disabilities. Now, I have been trying to consult a friend in the situation of being deaf and blind, he told they are deeply worried with this amendment because it means that they could be phased out of representation.  So, briefly I wish to appeal to the hon. Members of this august House to listen to the voice of our people. It is also important that we remain united because are the minority, we have to come for a national conference and elect our representatives. We are few and the minority and again you are dividing us when you are making Laws for us.  Please, drop this amendment.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed amendment as read out by the chairman of the Committee.
                   
(Question put and negatived)

  MR. WACHA: Mr. Speaker.  For purposes of electing representatives of workers under clause 12.3(e), the workers proposed to the Committee and accepted this formulation.  The representatives of workers- (Interruption)

  THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: In fact you are saying when we considered it, – it was it never decided.

MR. WACHA:  It never appeared.

THE DEPUTYSPEAKER: Okay.

MR. WACHA:  The representatives of workers shall be elected by an electoral college constituted in a manner prescribed by the constitution of federation of trade union organisations. 
  
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This was an omission it should have come yesterday.  I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

  
MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House resume and the Committee of the whole House reports there to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.
 
(Question put and agreed to)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that clause 12.3(a), clause 12 3 (c) and clause 12 3 (e) have been remitted to the Committee of the whole House. Clause 12.3 (a) has been corrected, there was a typographical error and clause 12.3(c) has been correct –clause 12.3(c) has been intact it has not been amended. I beg to report.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE WHOLE HOUSE
  
THE MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report of the Committee of the whole House regarding this recommital of clause 12(c) be adopted.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
THIRD READING

the Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998
  
MINISTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled: "the Parliamentary elections Bill, 1998" be read the third time and be passed.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

A BILL FOR AN ACT ENTITLED THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ACT 1998.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, Bill passed. Congratulations for passing it; and you go prepare for next election under this law and I think we can proceed with the next item on order paper, I think I give you five minutes to organise yourselves.  Proceedings suspended for five minutes.  

 BILLS
SECOND READING

THE National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999

THE MINISTER FOR THE PRESIDENCY (Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the "National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999" be read a Second Time. I am really very pleased that at long last this, very important Bill has had the opportunity to be debated at a very right time when we are preparing for the celebrations of the victory day of the National Resistance Movement. The principle behind this bill is for people who have excelled in their respective fields; social, political, military, academic, science and technology, and cultural who should be recognised for the contribution they have made in their respective communities of Africa and indeed of humanity.  Historically, it is well known that Uganda has had people who are talented and excelled in different fields.  We all know that in the resistance against colonial invasion and domination, people like Kabalega stand out for the great resistance they put before and against colonialism.  We also know that in the political endeavours for national independence, people like Musaazi made very distinguished contribution and many other fields like medicine. Only a few years ago, we did recognise professor Kyalwazi for the distinguished contribution he made in that field. This bill therefore seeks to put in place appropriate legislative framework that will be able to put in place a mechanism of identifying distinguished people. 

The highlights of this relatively short bill include a presidential awards Committee, which will be composed of seven people with high moral character and proven integrity.  It will also have a chancery, which shall be a department of government as opposed to the original proposal of a corporate body.  This rethinking came about because we are trying to reduce the number of institutions and cut expenditures.  A chancellor will head this chancery and there will be a number of other officers like the secretary and master of ceremonies. The funding will essentially come from government grants, donations, gifts and grants from other acceptable areas. A provision is made; where there may be revocation of an honour given to a wrong person by error or by impersonation or if somebody has been convicted of treason or any other grave offence.  So fortunately the Committee of Parliament responsible for Presidential and Foreign Affairs has had intense and thorough discussion and dissection of this bill and the chairman is ready to present his report.  So those are the highlights of the national honours and awards bill. I beg to move Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you hon. Minister. Do you have the report of the Committee?

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL & FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr. Karuhanga): Mr. Speaker, may I take this opportunity to thank the Minister in charge of the Presidency for the kind words expressed about our Committee.  It is true indeed that the report I am giving you and the timing is really very opportune considering that tomorrow is our victory day celebration.  This means that Uganda is now going to be counted among other nations who give awards to their heroic and valuable citizens. You meet people and they are called Sir so and so, to the extent that some Ugandans have adopted this nomenclature of calling themselves Sir.  The national honours and awards bill was introduced in 1999.  It was read for the First Time on the 16th of December of that year.  It was then referred to the sessional Committee on Presidential and Foreign Affairs pursuant to rule 99(5) of the Rules of procedure of the Parliament of Uganda.  The Committee held a series of meetings with the Minister in charge of the Presidency and a team of his officials and advisors.  It is from these meetings that the Committee came up with this report now l wishes to present to this House for consideration.  

Background:  The National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999 initially was conceived as a result of the liberation struggle that ran from 1981 to 1986.  After the January 1986 victory, the National Resistance Movement Government at that time saw it fit to recognise the individual heroism and bravery exhibited by both the civilian and the army personnel during the entire struggle. Indeed some people were awarded medals in this regard albeit without the bill being in place.  The bill seeks to uphold medals and awards that were awarded before the enactment of this law and make them valid and legal.  

It was later that the inescapable thrust of opinion of Ugandans who have / had contributed to the country’s development in various civic fields outside the period referred to above deserved recognition. The bill has brought in this particular aspect and enshrined in it that; you shouldn't have fought to be recognised as a valuable Ugandan, even civic leader who have done a valuable job like Prof. Nsibambi could be recognised without necessarily having to take up arms. 

It should also be noted that the 1995 Constitution of Uganda under Article 98.1 clearly states that: "There shall be a President of Uganda who shall be the Head of State, Head of government, and Commander in chief of Uganda Peoples' Defence Forces and the Fountain of Honour."  

This Bill now clarifies that function of the President of Uganda being a fountain of honour. It is against this background that honours, the corrections, awards and orders are proposed to be awarded by His Excellency the President on the advise of the Presidential Awards Committee, and hence the birth of the National Honours and Awards Bill 1999.  

All in all, the objective of this Bill is intended to provide for the creation of the Presidential Awards Committee and conferment of titles of honour, titles of decorations, medals, awards and orders.  It also seeks to establish a chancery; provided for the custody of awards and other related matters. The Committee is in agreement with the general principles of the Bill but makes the following observations and recommendations to the House: -  
3.1 Part 1, Presidential Awards Committee:  
His Excellency President bestows honours, decoration awards and honours on behalf of the nation.  The awards Committee should be referred to as: "The National Presidential Awards Committee/," rather than "Presidential Awards Committee." So as to give the awards a national character.  
3.2 Presentation of a Title of Honour or an Award to H.E. the President:
In the event of H.E. the President receiving a title of Honour, decoration, medal award, or order, the Chief Justice should bestow it upon him/her. 
3.3 Composition of the Presidential Awards Committee:  
We felt that meritorious contributions in a particular field are best recognised amongst members in the same field, and more so amongst members of the same discipline, and if it is in the forces of the disciplined forces.  This Committee, therefore, should consist of a chairperson and six other members including members of the disciplined forces and should where necessary co-opt members of different interest groups to give it guidance during deliberations when considering a particular discipline, a particular profession or a particular calling.
 
 3.4 Decision making in the Presidential Awards Committee:
 Decisions taken by the Presidential Awards Committee must be reached by consensus.  This serves to minimise controversy, therefore, giving credence and merit to the awards. 
 
3.5 The structure of the chancellery: 
The Committee feels that the structure of the chancellery proposed in this Bill is of a body corporate. In the view of the government policy on liberalisation and country’s limited resource envelope, the chancery should be a government department and not a corporate body.  This calls for the restructuring of the proposed chancery.  

3.6 Funds of the chancery:  
The Committee observed that funds meant for the chancery additional to government funding must be from the accepted forces.  This therefore calls for government approval of all grants, gifts and donations directed towards the chancery so as to ensure that this condition is fulfilled.
  
3.7 Privileges accompanying awards:  
It was noted that in the Bill, the Order of Katonga is the only award to be accompanied with privileges.  This limitation in the Committee’s view is not fair.  All awards would be accompanied with such privileges and benefits pursued as a National Presidential Awards Committee will recommend.  

Mr. Speaker, hon. Members, I thank and I beg your support for this report and the Bill, and I beg to move. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, the matter is now open for the debate. 

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA (Bugabula South, Kamuli): Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  I want to thank the Committee for taking time to look at the Bill and educating some of us into the rationale. I see more of the military than of the civilian in what we are talking about and it worries me.  I wonder whether this is the purpose of the Bill to tempt some of us to join the military at late stage of our lives in order to qualify for this medals.  I would really want to know whether honour is only or highly related to violence or war? – This to me is not honour as such; I know the highest that any citizen can give to their nation is to defend the country. But I wish I could see more civilian aspects that could qualify for honour so that we build a civil society that is not tilted towards war.  Some of these titles worry me, these decorations, Katonga, Damu – I do not know what it means – blood!  I really get worried and I wish the chairman would –(Interruption).

MAJ.KATIRIMA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to thank hon. Salaamu Musumba for giving way.  I would like to inform her that in the second schedule, part one, the Bill presents a number of civil honours which could be given to the civil society for distinguished services, for exemplary performance and the civilians in the performance of national duty in their various professions.  So, this Bill is not only about giving or awarding exemplary and meritorious performance for participation in the military, but it also covers the civilians when they do excellently in their various professions.  Thank you.


 MR. KARUHANGA: Thank you for giving way, hon. Musumba. Fortunately the hon. Member is on our Committee. The type of honours we have thought about, and actually put a strong thrust in schedule 2 is for civilian, and maybe, I should highlight them. The first one is "The most Excellent Order of the Pearl of Africa," awarded to Heads of States and Heads of Governments when they are visiting us.  So, there is class two, which goes to the Vice Presidents and Crown Princes and Princesses, and then there is the distinguished Order of the Nile.  So, do not worry about Katonga it is the heroic struggle for our army, and the war, which was waged at Katonga. We have powerful Orders for civilians like the honour of the Crested Crane, the Nalubaale medal and the Masaba star. So, a person like you cannot get, the Katonga order, but you could get the Nalubaale one.  Thank you.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  I thank you for the information.  My worry is exactly that, I cannot hope to get "The Excellent Order of the Pearl of Africa."  I have no chance as of today being a First lady and yet I want that to be my vision and aspiration. So, I would like to propose another 'Award for integrity', and remind the House that on the 4th and 5th of November last year, the Pope John Paul made Sir Thomas Moore, the patron saint for politicians and statesmen. So I propose a 'Thomas Moore Award for integrity and for statesmen to aspire,' I think that would go for religious people and those who have excelled.  I am thinking that a man like the late Bishop Kivengere would definitely posthumously qualify for that A ward. So, I would like to propose to the Chairman and to the Minister that a 'Saint Thomas Moore Award' be included in the list.  Thank you.  

DR. RUGUNDA: Mr. Speaker, the point made by hon. Salaamu Musumba is valid and the Bill actually recognises people who will be able to get posthumous awards so long as they have made significant contribution.  

MR. ONGOM ABSOLOM ABEDNEGO (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to support the Bill but before that, I wish to make some few observations on the orders. I am happy that some of the wards are going to be offered posthumously but my worry is that there could be conflict of interest in some of them. For instance, in one Government somebody could be highly a ward in a field like the military and when that Government is overthrown, the incoming Government may not agree with the order offered to that person. What would happen in such a case?  Are these going to be some of the cases that may be withdrawn?  I will give you the example, of the late Oyite Ojok who distinguished himself as a soldier in the liberation war against Idi Amin’s regime, I doubt whether he will be honoured by this Government which overthrew his Government, the Government that he supported.  That kind of thing worries me. 

I agree with the hon. lady over there about some of the names like the Order of Katonga.  In this Katonga battle, I understand a severe battle was fought and the soldiers of the Government of the day were defeated but some of these soldiers were very gallant soldiers of Uganda in defending a legitimate Government at the time.  Are they also going to be honoured in this Order posthumously?  These are some of the questions, which must be answered honestly. 

Again the katonga Order, in my view, I think Kabalega Star should be the highest order rather than the Katonga.  Some of these Orders would also be rearranged so that they reflect national character.  We know that the late Kabalega fought against colonialism, which we all hated and eventually overthrew. I therefore think this Order should be the highest in the military rather than the Katonga Order, which was a local affair. I do not think really that is an Order.  Otherwise, Mr. Speaker, I have no quarrel with the Bill.  I support it.

MAJ. OTOA TONNY (Army Representative): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the Committee for the work done so well. The Committee from the onset said that this Bill was conceived because of the liberation struggle that ran from 1981 to 1986.  I think the liberation struggle in Uganda dates as far back as 1962 and it would be very unfair if this Bill omitted the gallant sons of Uganda who fought for independence. We must also remember that the liberation struggle did not start in 1981 and ended in 1986.  In fact 1981 to 1986 was a continuation of the liberation struggle.  Let us not forget the struggle of courageous Ugandans who took up arms from 1971 to 1979.  So, 1981 -(Interruption)

MAJ. KATIRIMA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to thank my Colleague hon. Maj. Otoa for giving way.  I wish like to inform him that among the military owners which are listed in schedule 2 part 2; you will see a medal, which is called Kagera medal. This medal is the award for the anti Amin struggle, which covers the period of 1979.  And for each of those medals, which are listed, I have information that some of these medals are awards for individual notorious performance. 

I have seen in clause 30 of this Bill that the President may by statutory instrument make regulations prescribing the qualifications for illegibility for appointment to a rank of honour. I think it would have done a lot of justice to the House if some definitions had accompanied these order, stars and medals so that when Members come to debate these awards they know exactly what they are talking about.  I have heard for example the Committee –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, are you contributing or you are informing him?

MAJ. KATIRIMA: I was informing hon. Otoa, Sir, and with that brief information I want to assure you that the anti Amin period of struggle is covered and I think that is why the Kagera medal is included.

MAJ. OTOA:  Mr. Speaker, if the hon. Member listened to me carefully he would have known that I am totally not in disagreement with him, what I am saying here is that a liberation struggle debates back from 1962 today.  So, if you confine yourself to ant Amin struggle and the anti Abote struggle in the 1970 and 1980s you are excluding some of patriotic Ugandan who died in the struggle for this country.  In 1965 Uganda was invaded by Congo in West-Nile people died what medal are we going to give these people, what name are we going to give it?  So, I am in total agreement with my Colleague because the 1971 to 1986 struggle was the consolidation of the struggle against dictatorship. 

The recommendation to bestow honour on the President, who is the incumbent president must be given in an exceptional case otherwise it will be taken after his departure that it was a favour. I would like to suggest that if a recommendation has to be made to bestow an honour on a president, it must be done after he is out of office because a Committee in place will not have an influence in giving a deserving honour to a president. Similarly the legacy that the president has left will be an incentive to the in coming president to march the work of the out going president. 

I want to know from the Chairman who appoints this Presidential Awards Committee. Is it the President or is it Parliament? And once they are appointed what are the criteria? I would suggest that those who have not exhibited political inclinations should be the ones to constitute the Committee.  We should avoid appointing religious leaders who have been preaching the issue of marginalisation. We should also make sure that the composition of this Committee reflects the regional representation.  Mr. Speaker, the period - (Interruption)-

MRS. ALINYIKIRA OWAGAGE: Thank you Mr Speaker and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like to inform Maj. Otoa holding the Floor that there is no inclination of parties or Movement in our Constitution we are all Movement.

MAJ. OTOA: Mr. Speaker, I am not talking about today, I am talking about the future when we are all gone. I would like to suggest that every award must have its schedule of privileges spelt out, so that when I get the Katonga Award I know what my package is whether it is in monitory or certain honours or if I get the least honour I know what it carries.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MRS. KABABUMBA MARSIKO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I rise to support the Bill and I agree with the Members who have contributed to it.  First of all, I would like to agree with hon. Ongom that Kabalega Star should really be the highest award.  Kabalega's contribution has been documented, it is known world over and even the if Kabalega had been supported and succeeded chasing away the colonialists, the Katonga incident would not have happened. So, I would like to really beg government and the Chairperson of the Committee to change the order of Kabalega Star be the highest order.  

I also wanted to contribute on what hon. Otoa has said.  We have several orders and stars, but what is the value of these orders and stars?  The report says it is only the order of Katonga, which attracts some monetary something.  But I would like to agree with the Committee that all the orders should attract some value; so Katonga value will be maybe a copper coin and Kabalega maybe, I do not what? They should be as valuable as they appear here, the value should also be equally very high. I hope government will not come to this House to tell us that we cannot afford them.

 Lastly I think we have a drafting problem on page 2 about the presidential awards Committee, because they are suggesting that it should be called "National Presidential Awards Committee". The justification is to give the awards a national character but when you say National Presidential Awards Committee, it is the Committee, which is national not the awards.  So, may be I will be helped here, but I would rather suggest that they will say 'Presidential National Awards Committee'.  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BUTELE ANTHONY (Madi Okollo County, Arua): Mr. Speaker, I rise to support the Bill. Since before Independence people struggled to get Independence in the first place and after that confusion started, people had the opportunity to run away and come back.  Some people could not run away.  The tendency is that people who stayed here suffered more than the people who run away did.  So the Committee should also consider these 'stayees' whom I call internal liberators.  

Take the example of 1979 war, People who went to exile in Tanzania and came back, they thought they were more liberators than the internal people who actually suffered here.  The point I am trying to say is that people who never went to exile and suffered here should also be considered in those struggles.  

The other issues are that some medals also have been awarded in the past.  People, who fought in the Second World War and what not, you can see them parading around with those medals.  What will happen to the medals?  Will they also remain or the Bill is silent about it? Some heads of State like Amin also got some of these medals, whatever names you call them 'VCDs' whatever, what will happen to them?  Will they also be recognised or they should be abolished?  Maybe the Minister or the Committee could clarify on that.  Otherwise internal liberators should also be recognised when this Committee is recommending people.  I thank you.

MRS. MPANGA JOYCE: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I just wanted to add on what the former Member on the floor has contributed. There are a number of people like distinguished academicians whose bodies were brought into Parliament without naming exactly what honour we had given them. 

I see no suggestion of how we are to decide who is going to be buried at the heroes' yard or how we will distinguish the Awards. Normally here when people die, sometimes the State comes in to give State burial, State funeral or State what, and the things are not uniform.  I had thought that this kind of act would bring uniformity by considering the past and probably distinguish it, so that we know that whatever came before this act is not considered as part of the national honour or if it is, how does it come in?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would have waited and contributed towards the end but I am leaving shortly, there is something which ached me as I listened to the view that people should be given money.  My view is that when something is very precious, it is priceless.  In fact, there have been occasions when dowry has been commercialised and by commercialising dowry, our precious rituals have been degraded. 

MAJ. OTOA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  The former Soviet Union had honours and medals and many of them had nothing to do with money but they have unique privileges.  There is one, which is bestowed on the military officers who are given two holidays in a year and all their expenses paid by the State.  You are given a medal, which is kept by you, and when there is a national day and you put it on, you are entitled to the front seat.  These are the privileges we are talking about not money really. 

MR. NKUUHE: The Nobel price which is given for academic excellency in various disciplines, medicine, physiology and so on, actually gives a cash award of 1 million dollars in addition to all the other privileges.  So, although these guys are rich already, a bit of cash does not hurt.

PROF. NSIBAMBI: Thank you for your contribution but you see, Africa has to make a contribution.  There are man foolish mistakes, which have been made outside including condoning hormal sexuality. Are we just going to embrace things because they are done outside?  

We have a unique contribution to make to humanity and this leads me to the second point that's the questions of affordability. When you monetise these issues, then you are going to create the problem of affordability, because the moment you attach the value, it will have to be fairly meaningful and therefore, the state which is already incumbent will become more incumbent and we may eventually supply air.  May the Lord forbid!  So, my plea to you would be not to try to monetise these things, commercialisation and monetisation of precious things has a tendency of degrading them.  

Let me also inform you that when I was at Makerere University, which I served for 30 years, we were getting literally killing wages.  But the moment I was made a Professor, it is something I pleasured and I continued serving with total dedication.  It did not carry any meaning remuneration; in fact we were scavenging, as Professors and we had to do many other things in order to supplement our wages.  But by being recognised professionally, we enjoyed job satisfaction and I have always prayed that I enjoy job satisfaction in my new assignment, because since I left Makerere, I still treasure it.  I am still staying there, by the way, although I do have a third house – I am completing, I love the institution, I love what it stands for and I still have some spare time to assist colleagues who are working their work.   Such things are beyond monetisation.  I want to appeal to Colleagues that although we are finding financial hardships, let us for once keep this award precious, let us not monetise it.  I thank you and I have already requested, Mr. Speaker, I have to leave, because I have to attend to another vital matter, but there are Colleagues here to continue interfacing with you.  I thank you.

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA   (Bugweri County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  This is Kirunda Kivejinja the voice of Bugweri.  I would like to congratulate the Minister and the Government for bringing this Bill though belatedly, but it is better late than never.   First of all, there is no nation that can pride itself unless it honours those who contributed to its development and lay the foundation on which feature generations will thrive. Now because of our muddled history, we have had the culture of not bequeathing the collective wisdom and achievements of the previous generations. The result is that even those who have done really a good job have not had a very good image in the new generation. All this, is a sign of ingratitude to those who really did something.  

So, when this Bill comes up, I think we are beginning to have a clear sense of the Movement. Let us try to know that the nation is not only contributed in one way but there are so many ways that provide a foundation for the next generation.  So, I have seen the Bill, it was initiated a little longer ago and we wanted to come up with a consensus, so that it is not only those who contribute either in the political arena or in the military affairs who should always be honoured.  Now, that it has come, I think we need to consider it in the light that we are beginning a new life. 

Let us recognise everybody who has done something for this country and have the scale how it should be done instead of depending on the pressures of the day. When we hear Kirunda is dead, I am sure so many people will rush, he was a very good nationalist and what not, bring the body, drag it here, pass whatever you want and that is the end of it.  Well, he lived for so many years, he might have done very many contributions and which should have been a legacy for the young generation.  In the olden days, in developed societies, even those who have contributed, they always retire in the youth, so that they become the role models for the young to be able to see.  But because we have not had a history of our own, the question has always been to tear whatever is in front of us and every time we appear to be beginning.  That is why everybody, when he appears on the scene, either on the political scene, he is the cleverest person, the reference, he is everything and because the history has never been recorded, they even imagine that nobody has ever talked or even passed through that way.   

So, I think now, once we pass this Bill I think we should begin from the time when we got our independence. I think that was the time when we had this enclosure, to call ourselves Ugandans, and anybody who really struggled in one form or the other to ensure that the spirit of Uganda is not down trodden comes on the board and honoured. Once we give them honours, they will be respectable references in our society.  I think the mere recognition is enough satisfaction, there is no money that can paid to somebody who has genuinely contributed to this country and the greatest people are those who are never known.  So, in addition to those who may qualify for medals, we may have a monument for the unknown soldiers who have contributed to Uganda but whose names may never be known.  

So, I think to me, we are really beginning our own history and it is a very good beginning. I support the Bill and I commend Members really, to debate on it without any material considerations, but to recognise that my sister Joyce Mpanga, was one of the pioneers in the education sphere for the women.  There are many prosperous girls around here, but during that time, it was not so easy.   But if she is still current and able to argue with the young blood who have developed their brains in light of the struggles of those who suffered, she is not a person who should not be taken lightly or weighed against those who have come at this time.  Everybody needs to be given his place.  Thank you very much.

DR. NKUUHE   (Isingiro South, Mbarara): Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much and the Committee for doing a good job.  I have three points in support of this motion. First of all, the idea of money reward.  I think we live in a real world.  If you value something, you must attach some sort of value to it, no matter what you say. So for me I think even if it is a small amount, to me that attachment signifies that we have value.  And in some of the fields like the, scientific field, the source of money is actually easy to find.  Mr. Speaker, can you restrain hon. Kirunda Kivejinja?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Kirunda Kivejinja there is enough space this side can you move there? Yes, proceed hon. Nkuuhe.

DR. NKUUHE: So if we are worried about the money, there are many opportunities in this country where money can be made for the national good.  But we tend to be selfish that we think all the money that needs to be made should be made for our individual pockets.  For instance, the National Lottery is one source of money in many countries. In the past we have had a National Lottery like the Art and national theatre, to generate revenue that can support such services that are of public good. We could have a presidential foundation or Speaker’s foundation where money is donated. So, it does not have to come from the consolidated fund.

Now, the other concern I have with this Bill is that a lot of the honours are going to the Military and Political and so on, whereas at this stage of our development, those people occupy a disproportionate recognition.  You will find that as we develop there are other people who contribute to the society in different ways than the military and political leaders.  For instance you will find people who distinguish themselves in the arts, in developing our culture, and theatre. There are people who contribute to the science; for instance recently the scientists in NARO solved the problem of the water hyacinth.  And people think it was a small matter, actually it was a big matter.  They solved the problem of cassava mosaic virus which was devastating the Northern and Eastern parts of this country and actually causing a lot of food insecurity.  That problem was brought under control, but nobody bothered to recognise this.  

It hurts me when you see Mr. S.K. Mukasa the late now, died and he was buried almost incognito and this man did such wonderful work with the bean varieties that they were eating the 'K20'. He developed 'K20' under lot of pressure from colonialists who did not want any African to develop anything good that could make him independent. This man knew that this 'K20' the bean was very good, but he was not allowed by the colonial system to release these beans.  So what he did, he went quietly into people’s gardens and threw this bean with the hope that it would grow and people would spread it illegally.  And as a result it spread like wild fire. It is now the basis of these beans that we are working on in East African Region.  A man like that died, he was buried in Mukono, and there was “lube” we did not recognise him.  So, in future people like that will assume a more important position in our society. I can see the only place where they will be recognised or some equivalent is medal number five Distinguished Order of the Nile classes one to five. Whereas there are, many medals in Nalubaale and what have you, l think that to me is very restrictive because a lot of people in future will be in that class and anything do with military and politics will be somewhere else.  But in that class that is where we shall have a lot of people.  So that class will be overcrowded.  

Finally the Damu Medal.  I find that word – I think I would suggest something else, because first of all they would think it is the Damu medal which is a bad one or they will say it is a bloody medal.  Whereas it is supposed to be a medal worthy respecting because of the naming, it might sound like a dam medal; something bad when actually we want to give it the respect.  Otherwise I support this and I think it is long overdue, it is a good thing it has been brought and we should recognise people who contribute to the welfare of this country.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I think this is a convenient time to adjourn. We adjourn to Tuesday at 2.00 O’clock at that time the Minister and the chairman will wind up.  The House is adjourned.

(The House rose at 5.25 p.m. and adjourned until 30th January 2001Tuesday at 2.00 p.m.)



