

Wednesday, 27th January, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Members, as you can see, we do not form a quorum and, therefore, I adjourn the Council for 14 minutes from now.

(The Council adjourned for 15 minutes).

ADMINISTRATION OF OATH.

The Oath was administered to Mr. G. Opio. 

BILLS

SECOND READING

THE TRADE UNION LAWS MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS BILL, 1992.

MR. KAJUBI:  Mr. Chairman, thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to support the Bill. The Amendment of the Trade Union Laws is greatly welcome though it has been long overdue.  It is now good to know that membership is being stretched to cover several groups of public servants, members of the teaching profession and the personnel of Bank of Uganda. However, I would like to observe that there is a group of Public Servants, which has been left out. That is, the lecturers of Makerere University. I think they should be included because these people are not teachers. I think they are not covered in the teaching profession.  I think a University Lecturer is not covered by the Ministry of Education in this respect. So, I think this group should be well covered in the final analysis.  

I would like to put in a word for the teachers - for the teaching profession, being a veteran teacher; I am welcoming this spirit of giving them a chance to belong to a trade union.  Because, from time immemorial, teachers have been mistreated. They used to belong to Mission schools, and whenever a teacher complains about mistreatment, or about a very small stampede, which we do not call a salary but just a stampede, something to keep his body and soul together, he would be told that he should not complain because his wages are in heaven, because they are working for God; as if engineers and carpenters are working for Satan; they are all working for Good but they used to refer to him as a man of God, who should not really complain about living conditions and so on and so forth.  But this Bill will help these people to really feel that they belong to the nation. Teachers have been living in substandard houses, and they belong to boards of governor, which are too many, but some boards are good and others are not.  Primary teachers belong to management committees and some management committees are run by people who are not well grounded in education; people who cannot understand the plight of teachers, and a teacher has not been having anywhere to appeal if a board of Governor denounces them or fires them.  But if they get a trade union, it will be very good indeed.  I am not trying to make teachers rebellious, but they are Public and they taught us; they have been doing a very good job, therefore, they should also be considered.

In the early 1960s and late 1950s, the Uganda Teachers Association was put under the Ministry of Education. Before then, it was independent. So teachers would go to the Governor at Entebbe; anyway where their voices could be heard. During that time, as Governor, he formed the Uganda Teachers Association headed by a Secretary General who was paid by the Ministry of Education. Later, they became independent, but the Secretary General remained a bulldog which could not bite at all. Since then, teachers’ conditions have worsened until now. But it is good that they are now being considered just like other civil servants.  However, before I end, I would like to appeal through you, to the Minister, to clearly define the position of university lecturers and professors. Because these professionals are living in a very poor conditions, but although their salary is very small and they do not live like their counterparts with torn collars, walking on Kampala streets and riding in taxis, because a Professor at Makerere University cannot even afford to buy a small motorcycle and this brings a lot of –(Interjection)- of course and this makes the profession very unattractive to young people.  So, these people should be highly considered.  

Before I sit down, I would like to refer to the prayer that was read here.  Sometimes this prayer sounds very wicked indeed; I mean, impersonal and the reader just reads mechanically.  A prayer should be a prayer, we pray to God and if the people who are praying are not really feeling it, let us ask a Reverend to come and teach people how to pray.  Some of us can volunteer to pray, I mean, for about a week, or to teach people who just read a document like that without really feeling it.  Thank you, Sir.
  
DR. LUYOMBYA (Historical Member): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no problem with supporting the Bill because it is good, if various groups of people get organised for a common good.  But while doing so, I would like to sound a warning to the intending unions which we are trying to create.  The tendency of these unions in the past, has been to divide activities in any given enterprise, into workers and managers, to the extent that the unions have tended to be there just to agitate for pay increases and strikes, and quite often, some of those strikes have been illegal because the members of those unions are not well-educated about labour laws and how to go about strikes.  But today, the tendency in enterprises is changing.  Everybody is interested in the success of the enterprise and there is a spirit of teamwork from the highest-ranking person in that enterprise to the lowest. Employees of different cadres need to realise that each one of them is playing a different role, and some are in management brackets, while others are in the so-called enterprise.  I hope, as it was stated in the Memorandum, that these Bills will also provide for other connected matters. I hope the Minister concerned will get concerned and ensure that the unions which are going to be catered for, understand their role as spelt out in the Amendments which have been circulated. Almost everyone in the enterprises is going to be unionised except for a few.  

I also hope the Minister will educate these unions about the productive role they have to play, not only for the organisations where they are working, but also for the country as a whole.  They should be made to understand that if an enterprise does not make profit, and they have not performed to make that particular organisation productive, or to make profit, it will be very difficult for them to agitate for pay increases.  Otherwise, there will be unrest; unions can cause unnecessary unrest sometimes, through lack of popularity with the people they are intended to represent, instead of educating them.  I hope the Minister will inculcate this fact in the would-be leaders of the unions we are trying to create.  Thank you very much.

DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to thank you for giving me an opportunity to contribute to this very important Bill. 

I would like first of all, to express my concern about a group of workers in this country, especially in the Ministry of Works, Transport and Communications and in very high positions, such as Managing Directors, who seem to be sacked whenever the Minister feels they should go!  

I want to express concern about setting up Commissions of Inquiry in a manner that has been suspect, as if it is intended to cover up things. What has happened in the Uganda Airlines, Uganda Railways, and in Uganda Posts and Telecommunications, is a matter that this House cannot just neglect! In the interest of transparency, I would like to request the Minister to consider resigning so that he can give opportunity for what is happening in his Ministry, to be investigated thoroughly, instead of sacking Boards of Directors or setting up Commissions of Inquiry.  Alternatively, if he does not resign, may be the President, in the interest of fighting against corruption, may consider relieving him of his duties.  

I want to come to the Bill.  The Bill to unionise teachers and civil servants in principle, is a very good Bill, which should be supported.  But in the case of Uganda, this Bill is a mere mockery to the teachers and to the civil servants because definitely, the government cannot afford to pay them.  Government is too poor to pay for the basic requirements of a trade union.  I think, we may just be talking hot air that ends here.  We have, in this House, passed a law that has failed to be implemented.  The Leadership Code Bill became law, and we do not know what happened!  I think this one is going to be the same after we have passed it.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of information. (Inaudible)- we have passed legislation several times in this House which, if well considered, should not have been passed, because the laws were bound to fail.  For instance, there is the Law Reform Commission. It was passed, but we only embraced it.  It is a dead letter now!

DR. TIBERONDWA: I want to thank the hon. Member for that very useful information.  But just to add on that, at the moment, Government has failed to pay entitlement to the retrenched officers.  Many of them cannot go home, and they are still in Kampala. Some of the civil servants are teachers, who have not been paid their entitlement for six months.  They have no lunch and they walk several miles.  You find secretaries yawning in their offices at lunch hour and yet we are talking about unionising these people.  It is going to be a mere mockery to the civil servants.  We are going to show them what is good without being able to deliver the goods. 

Government has failed even to honour entitlements of Members of NRC; gratuity, allowances, mileage and others.  I do not know whether the Minister is going to bring a Bill to unionise the NRC -(laughter). Government has failed to pay teachers who marked last year’s examinations.  I understand Government has also failed to make arrangements at Makerere University for graduation to take place as it has always been done.  And they are now moving the graduation ceremony to the Conference Centre.  Maybe, next time we shall go to Lugogo Stadium.  

If this Bill is passed in its present form, it will simply sharpen the appetite of the civil servants and teachers, without giving them the food to quench the appetite. 

I have a few observations to make, especially in my capacity as one of the trustees of the Uganda Teachers Association.  I agree as the Minister pointed out, that civil servants in Zambia are unionised. I was there and this process took about ten years.  I was in Zambia and in Tanzania; they are unionised but the rules and regulations governing their unions are very different from the rules which govern the traditional trade unions.  Their rules have professional objectives and aims.  There is a professional theme in their regulations. It is for this reason that I want to express my concern.  The Minister was very weak on the Floor.  He did not give us enough information about this Bill.  He was just superficial.  The hon. Obwangor in his wisdom, called upon the Minister to produce one legislation which people can follow.  How many people for example, have read the 1976 Trade Union Decree, yet we are being told to amend this section?  How many people have read the Negotiating Machinery?  We are being told to amend its sections.  

Because of the implications of this Bill, I would like to propose very humbly to the Minister, to allow us to take this Bill to a Select Committee and to study it in detail. Otherwise, we shall throw this country in chaos. If he does not want to do that, he can humbly withdraw this Bill and the civil servants in his Ministry could study it and advise him correctly.  For example, in his remarks, he talked about amending an election law.  I think the 1967 Constitution.  That was long overtaken by Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, which brought the Minister here.  He has not been corrected.  I think he should go and get himself thoroughly briefed and then come here.  

I thank the hon. Minister for that information, but I would like to point out that even in his submission and even in this Bill, there is no provision, for an electoral college, how these workers will be elected to come to this House.  That is not provided for.  So, even that one, not only has he not done enough homework, but he has not even explained the point raised by the hon. Member from Kapchorwa, that if you become a Member of this House, you cease to be employed in the Public Service.  That one is a contradiction in the terms and he has not elaborated on it. The Amendments by the Minister proposed in Clause 7 of this Bill are not good enough.  In Clause 7, he included the definition of a Permanent Secretary, which is the only Amendment of the Negotiating Machinery.  In Clause 8, he is replacing group employees with public officers, these charges are very fundamental, Mr. Chairman, and I would like the Minister to do more homework on this matter.  If need be, he can be helped by a Committee set up by this house. 

MR. ATEKER EJALU: Point of clarification.  Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Member has really not understood the whole thing.  For example, where you say a public officer instead of a group employee, there was discrimination in that Act, whereby only a group employee was allowed to be unionised.  We are now removing that so that a public officer or group employees are all at par.  They can be unionised, and if I may ask, probably one should ask, why I did not provide Members with copies of all those laws. But I think the hon. Member, doing his research in the library of the NRC, ought to have seen all those various Acts and, if I may also mention that this Amendment is a Constitutional Amendment of Legal Notice No. 1.  

I would also like to avoid a situation where we get away from implementing this requirement of Legal Notice No.1 and then go on to amend other laws, specifically with the result that we could amend the laws without a Constitutional Amendment, and if I may point out, the same Legal Notice was discussed last week and we amended the part of conflicts with the definition of the youth in Legal Notice No. 1.  
So, I pray to the House that we leave it in our interest, to the purposes for which the Amendments are coming, to implement our own decisions.  Then when the law comes for the unions, you can overhaul the whole thing, because if we go on amending this one here, we will end up with a situation of very differing laws.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Sir, I would like to request you to protect me so that the Minister can bring up these points when he is winding up. Otherwise, he is going to interrupt my speech.  I want to inform him that Section 8(i) of the National Assembly Elections Act, which he referred to in his speech, was long overtaken when that part was suspended by Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986, and the Minister does not know that. 

MR. KARUHANGA:  Point of information.  Mr. chairman, I thank you.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor by way of supplementing it. In fact, I was waiting for the Attorney General to be here because I had, with my little knowledge of law, a problem with this Bill and I was afraid that we were likely to be caught up in a legal cobweb where we would end up passing laws which are so contradictory and not within the time available. The way we are working, I have realised that the rationale of this Bill was only to isolate Members of Parliament from the workers.  Because, if that is the rationale, then this House is likely to be put in a situation where we are going to pass laws, amending some, and having contradictions in others. I, therefore, have my own reservations in amending the Constitution using this, and we have not been very thorough.  I do not think it is a contradictory situation, if the Minister can accept that Members of a Select Committee are proposed by Tiberondwa, and should have a look at it a little bit more carefully so that we do not make the same mistake the Minister has pointed, out which was read in the Youth Bill.  Thank you.

MR. ATEKER EJALU: Point of information. This Bill belongs to this House.  It is not my Bill.  It is only mine as part of this House.  So, there is no particular commitment for me to make anything here first, other than as a reason.  If Members feel that they would like to have a good look at it, I would suggest a Sectoral Committee, not the Select Committee. A Sectoral Committee which encompasses my Ministry will look at it tomorrow morning and we can debate it in the afternoon if it is really necessary, because a Select Committee is in the process.

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you withdrawing it right now?

MR. ATEKER EJALU: No.

THE CHAIRMAN: Can we adjourn now?

MR. ATEKER EJALU: Yes, for the Sectoral Committee for tomorrow.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister please put your position very clear?

MR. ATEKER EJALU: What I am trying to put to the House is, if there are any serious objections which we need to look into, we can look into them through a Sectoral Committee, which is easy to convene. The composition is there. An announcement has to be made that we meet tomorrow at 10:00 or 8:00 a.m., to discuss, then in the afternoon, the Bill can be discussed here in the House.  Because setting up a Select Committee is a longer process and it will mean that the purposes of this Bill will not be achieved.  So, I really feel that the Sectoral Committee -(Interruption)- if that is not acceptable then we can call -(Interjection)- 

THE CHAIRMAN: A Sectoral Committee works on Budgets but not on Bills.

MR. BUTAGIRA:  Point of clarification.  What I want to seek from the hon. Minister on this, the Sectoral Committee he is referring to was specifically set up by this House to discuss Budgets and it is not a Standing Committee by our rules. So, for the hon. Minister for Labour to seek to refer the matter to that Committee which is merely not legally established, I think he is out of order with that one.  But having said that, Mr. Chairman, I think the best way since he is not objecting to referring this, but to only logistics, he can, I think accept the Select Committee which will do the same job as he is proposing to do.  

DR. BYARUHANGA: Point of order.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The point I am trying to raise is that the Minister has not conceded to this debated.  It is up to us as a House to vote in our usual manner on his concession. If he accepts to stop the debate, then we can stop it.  If we decide to continue, then we continue with the debate.  So, this was just a proposal below the carpet.  Thank you.

MR. ATEKER EJALU: Chairman Sir, I suggest we proceed with the debate.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I now continue, although, if the Minister had not ventured to interrupt my speech, this could not have arisen.  He has now thrown doubts in the brains of very many Members and his chances of getting this Bill through are getting very minimal.  

I would like also to point out one area which the Minister did not consider and did not bring out in his speech.  That is, that there are some unions which cross borders, and they will be in the civil service, in the Teaching Service, and in the Banks.  For example, the Clerical Workers’ Union.  That one crossed the borders.  He did not mention anything about it.  These are some of the areas which the Committee that we may set up, may want to consider or to study.  

When the Minister was trying to clarify the matter, he did not definitely accept the observation seriously; that he did not point out how Members of the NRC from the workers should be elected.  He did not talk about an Electoral College for electing NRC representatives. 

When we come to the Bill, I have already submitted to the Minister, proposals to the Amendments which will continue to the end.  The Minister has already got submissions from the Uganda Teachers Association and from the Uganda Civil Servants Association.  They have formerly raised objections and these are not reflected in the Bill.  Is the Act supposed to be against the teachers and civil servants?  Is it going to be in their interests?  If it is supposed to be in their interests, surely when these bodies raise their objections, I think they should be taken into account.  But they have been overlooked. Unions are good, and they should enable teachers and civil servants to negotiate their terms of service. But if Schedule 2 in the Bill is passed, it will divide the unified Teaching Service and it will divide the civil servants instead of uniting them, so that they can negotiate what they want.  It will divide them, thereby defeating the purpose for which the Bill has been written.  

I also object to the Clause in which the Minister of Labour on his own wants to disqualify certain categories of workers using Statutory Instruments.  That means, on his own, by a stroke of a pen, he can say, I add this group on the list or I do not add it there.  That one definitely, if he wants to make any changes, the Minister should come to this House. Objections which were raised by the teachers and civil servants refer to those people who have got the power to hire and fire.  These are the people who are called responsible officers in the Government Standing Orders.  The headmasters are mere station supervisors.  Not only are they under the Teaching Service Commission, but they are also under Boards of Governors, and these days, Boards of Governors even include teachers who are actually bosses of the headteachers.  In some colleges, students are on college councils and, therefore, students are bosses of the headteachers and heads of departments.  

So, teachers as shown under Schedule 2, are not supervisors, they are not responsible officers and, therefore, what the teachers propose is that headteachers should also be unionised because if we do not include them in the unions, we are going to split them from the teachers and the whole purpose of unionising teachers will be lost.  

Also, the proposal that you should start at the U3 Scale upwards, and exclude those officers, is unfair, because you have teachers and civil servants.  The only civil servants who are defined as responsible officers are those in under the U1 Scale, and above, and, therefore, the proposals which I intend to bring for Amendment, are those from the U1 Scale upwards, those do not unionise.  From U2 Scale downward, those can be unionised because those are not responsible officers and should be unionised. 

The teachers are even in a more complicated situation now, because we do not know who the employer of the teachers is.  At the moment, the person who pays teachers most is the parent - the PTA.  So, when they form unions, with whom are they going to negotiate?  With the PTA, with Government, with Boards of Governors, with who?  These are some of the questions which the Minister does not seem to have thought about seriously.  And, therefore, the idea - this machinery for negotiation which the Bill is referring to, should be looked at in detail and should become a supplement to this Bill so that we know how teachers are going to be unionised, how civil servants are going to be unionised as is the case in Kenya, Tanzania and Zambia.  

If we just pass this Bill as it is, we shall throw this country into chaos.  For example, how do you say that a Secretary to a Minister – the Accounts Clerks, because those are the ones who handle big cheques which go to the Minister’s office and so on.  Personal Assistants and Personal Secretaries, are mere assignments.  You are here today and tomorrow you are in another office.  So, all these personnel officers, are very junior officers and to exclude them from unions, I think is to deny them the right that they should have.  

On the whole, Mr. Chairman, I would like to conclude by re-echoing my earlier remarks to the Minister that we should submit this Bill to a Committee - whether you call it a Select Committee - to a Legal Committee instead of passing it when the work is so shoddy and most unimpressive.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. SIBO (Nominated Member): Mr. Chairman, with your permission, I wish to bring to your notice a subject which is irking the public immensely; and that is the sale of parastatal organisations in the fashion it is happening today.  As far as I know, there has been no policy decided on in this House on this subject.  It is important that we should be transparent in what we do.  I believe the sale of these public properties should be subject to a public policy and I would, therefore, request the Cabinet to consider the matter and bring it to this House for debate, so that everything is done in a transparent manner and in a more satisfactory procedure -(Interjection)- 

Turning to the Bill.  I am saying that this Bill is very dangerous.  It is likely to cause a lot of damage to the public and Government.  I believe as a responsible House, we cannot allow the Bill to pass through, as it is -(Applause).  Mr. Chairman, you will notice that you have already received lots of Amendments regarding the Bill.  This is a sign that it is unsatisfactory, and I would like to request the Minister to seriously re-consider the Bill and the Amendments together because if he does not, we shall end up passing a Bill that may land us in a very serious situation.

I would like to suggest that certain categories in the civil service be allowed to be unionised.  I want to say this and I want to speak it with authority, Mr. Chairman.  I was the President of Uganda Civil Servants Association for a long time and I know how the machinery - the negotiating machinery, was conducted throughout the Public Service. We have two laws on the Statute Book.  One is the Trade Unions Law, and the other one is the Public Service Negotiating Machinery Act.  Now, I do not know whether the Minister has actually asked himself why we should have these two Acts together in parallel.  The crux of the matter is that it was considered that a good part of public service should not be allowed to be unionised for very serious reasons.  And even then, within that negotiating machinery, we had those who can belong and others who cannot belong.  So, we had the Uganda Civil Servants Association, the Negotiating Machinery Act, the Uganda Teachers Association, and the Uganda Teachers Union.  These were different organisations that were set up for exactly the same purpose; for the negotiation of the welfare of the members.  Therefore, the existence of these organisations in parallel was for a very good reason, and I believe the Minister should address himself to the causes of the existence of these organisations.  

It is true that some of these machineries were not operating satisfactorily; like the Uganda Civil Servants Association and Uganda Teachers Association.  These associations were rendered imbecile during the 1970s under the military rule then.  They were also rendered imbecile during the 1980s, the first 80s, during which time nobody would raise any voice because he would have to be called to order, and as a result, the machinery became useless. It is now presumably the reason why they became useless since the Minister had now thought it necessary to unionise every public officer; but I think it is extremely dangerous.  Mr. Chairman, you cannot imagine, for instance, medical staff going on strike at Mulago Hospital and leaving patients dying!  This is a case that we have got to consider seriously.  Now, Mr. Chairman -(Interruption)-  

MR. OBWANGOR:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, the other day when I addressed the House, I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor of the House, I stated clearly that the Decree No.20 of 1976, which is now about 17 years old, because of a military concept, it could not be fitted in the type of economy we were administering in Uganda to suit the civil economy for peace.  The Minister had a wrong concept.  People had -(Inaudible)- we cannot see if the Secretary to the Ministry we have now is wrong, since we have all these committees here. We have got the Legislative Committee, so that people know that we are making good laws and we are intelligent.  But to take us to that, will be taking us 17 years back because the Decree 20 of 1976 is wrong in my view!  

MR. SIBO:  Thank you very much.  Mr. Chairman, I was saying that what actually the Minister should be addressing himself to, is to make these existing machineries which were enacted for very good reasons, to make them more operative.  They did not operate because of different reasons. But today, people are allowed to speak.  They are allowed to negotiate for their welfare and the Minister should consider making these machineries that exist to negotiate for their welfare, instead of unionising them, a situation which becomes very dangerous.

MR. ONGOM:  Point of information.   Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the speaker on the Floor that recently, regarding the statement that people are allowed to negotiate these days, they learnt through the Press recently that some workers, union members belonging to Nile Hotel, were sacked by the Minister because they were negotiating.  That was wrong of the Minister, because he should not have sacked them himself, since they were actually negotiating with management and the Board. 

MR. KAJUBI:  Point of information.  Those individuals were sacked to make Nile Hotel calm before the Pope comes -(Laughter).

MR. ATEKER EJALU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to assure the House that to the best of my knowledge, I do not know anybody who was sacked because he was negotiating.  I know that a Colleague of mine sacked certain workers for behaving illegally in this institution.  They had even refused to recognise their union.

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman that was not a defect law.  It was defective machinery. A strike, which is the last tool of the union, is intended to bring down the employer to his knee; to force him to negotiate with his employees.  It is not intended really to be machinery like Government.  There are two types of employers.  One type is the public employer, which is Government and the second type is the private employer.  There is a tendency for private employers to exploit employees. Hence the necessity of organising the employees into a union in order to bring the employer to his knee so that they can talk. In the case of Government, there is no necessity to bring Government to its knee to negotiate because the Government is not trying to exploit the employees.  If the Government tried to exploit employees, there is Parliament here. Parliament takes care of the interests of public employees.  Therefore, if there was such a thing, Parliament action would come into force and in my view, therefore, there should be two separate legal machineries for negotiation, public officers and other private employees.  

We must accept, of course, that the employees must have the ability to organise themselves as I said, to prevent them from being exploited, and also to negotiate for their welfare.  But as I said, I think it is not necessary to use the same machinery for public employees.  There should never be any case at all for a strike. There is, in a legal machinery, provision for arbitration.  Now, in the case of a public officer, usually, industrial court pronounces an award.  Government will take that pronouncement as given.  Therefore, there is no need to strike; there is no need to unionise public officers.  That is why I believe we should have two separate machineries.

MR. MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to hint to my hon. Colleague behind me that the situation he is talking about existed some hundred years ago, when Abraham Lincoln, was President and declared that public servants should never strike, and it was adhered to, but eventually it was eroded to the extent that Post Office employees of America frequently go on strike, although when they do, the President normally orders the Army to do what they used to do.

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, if I understood him quite well, I believe that the defect is in the application of the machinery and not in the law. I believe that we cannot allow, as I said earlier on, medical staff to go on strike - doctors, nurses, and laboratory technicians, and leave patients to die.  In the same way, we cannot allow teachers to on strike and leave innocent students stranded in classrooms.  The reason why we allow strikes, as I said, is as a final tool for an employee demand for his welfare.  Trade unionists, are full-time employees.  Their effectiveness is judged by what they can achieve for their members and how they can organise strikes effectively.  So, if a trade unionist organises a strike and becomes effective, he feels he has done very well and has achieved his aim.  But that is not what we are after.  We are worried about the effects the strikes may have on the public.  Civil Servants will be emotionally carried away by the persuasive language used by trade unionists and that is where the danger lies.

If the Bill is intended to organise and to enable members of trade unions to be elected to come to this House, I think we should look at it from that angle and provide separate machinery. But we should not sacrifice our public service at the altar of election for NRC membership - (Applause).  And it is for this reason, that I am supporting the idea of sending this Bill to a Select Committee, and I would also like to suggest that if it is not sent to a Select Committee, I think we shall have many Amendments which, Mr. Chairman, I would request you to seriously consider in order to amend this Bill to a satisfactory position.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KAWANGA JOHN (Masaka Municipality, Masaka): Mr. Chairman, there is an English saying that, ‘people who stay in glass houses should not throw stones’.  I wondered when hon. Tiberondwa started his speech, having been a Minister himself, whether he was morally qualified to make the kind of remarks he was making, because I recall, that in 1981, hon. Tiberondwa was Minister for Industry, and under him, he sacked a lot of General Managers and Managing Directors of Corporations -(Laughter).  Some of them are hon. Members of this House now.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform this august House that in 1981, hon. Tiberondwa in defence of his support for UPC, lifted what he called the most efficient General Managers, one of them, myself, another one hon. Dan Kigozi and sacrificed them for love of UPC.  He can say what he wants to say. (Laughter).

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  It is for this reason that Tiberondwa is where he is.  If it was not, he would be where he should be -(Laughter).

MR. KAWANGA:  In fact, Mr. Chairman, I am now not bothered because I understand hon. Tiberondwa is a born-again Christian.  But, Mr. Chairman, at least, I want to make reference to one recent -(Interruption)-

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor, and I have said this in another forum, two wrongs do not make right.  I have also said very clearly that people who have lead this country from Independence up to now have offended the people of Uganda and I did not think that NRM was an exception.  I said that what we should look at is, to look forward to building a better Uganda instead of concentrating on who did this or who did that in the past.  It does not help us.  We should look forward, Mr. Chairman, instead of looking backwards.

MR. KAWANGA:  In fact, Mr. Chairman, for those very reasons, I am extremely grateful for the change of heart that has now occurred in hon. Tiberondwa, and I hope it will occur in so many other hearts in this House, and in the whole of this nation.  But now, just to make one remark about the recent sacking of a Managing Director of a Corporation which has been referred to, I wish to report, but I would not have wanted this matter to be personalised, but since it has been raised, I wish t report that the decision to terminate the services of that particular officer was taken by the Board of Directors who advised the Minister to take action.  This provision was made under the particular Act which governs that Corporation.  It was done in the best interests of the Corporation and in the best interests of the individual concerned.  I hope if there is really need, the Minister concerned will come here and give you a better explanation on this particular Bill. It is yet again another example of the problem that we have.  We have had the Trade Unions Decree or Law in this country for a long time and surely, that Act requires changing to suit the circumstances under which we are operating.  But rather than look at the whole Act, we come up with a very small document to amend just little bits and pieces of that Act which at the end of the day are not going to be satisfactory.  I wish the Minister had considered amending the whole Act and bringing the whole thing to us for consideration as a whole body -(Applause).  

As things stand now, I am afraid that we have got hon. Members of this House whom you are asking to approve this Bill without knowing the Act which it is referring to.  I wish to ask honestly hon. Members, who of them has read Section 73 of Decree No. 20 of 1976?  I want to ask hon. Members how many have read Section 18 of Capt. 131?  I want to be told who has read Sections 4, 5, 7, 8, 16, 17 and 18 of Capt. 278?  In view of that, how can hon. members sit in this House now and pass this Bill? (Laughter). 

 I have just indicated to you how we can have a comedy of errors without knowing.  Who of the hon. Members has ever heard of Decree No. 20 of 1986, which appears under Article No. 4, page two of this Bill?  This is the kind of confusion that we can have.  I am asking hon. Members to be honest with themselves, and the Minister to be kind to us, if we are going to approve this Bill, to help us to know about the Acts that we are going to amend.  It is in this spirit that I ask kindly that this Bill be referred to a body which can help us analyse and then come back here and say the kind of thing we are going to do is reasonable -(Applause).  

I will just give an example of how this kind of thing can be disastrous.  If you look at page three of the Schedule - it refers to officers who may not be members of a trade union.  It states that, ‘officers of the Bank of Uganda holding the following offices’, and then it gives a list of offices.  Now, my question is why does it apply to the Bank of Uganda and it does not apply to Uganda Commercial Bank for example?  What is the reason? I want to know why, for example, under Article 3, Personnel Officers may not be members of unions?  Who are personnel officers?  Because personnel officers have got different names in various organisations.  So the term, ‘personnel officer’ may not cover the whole field that we want to cover under the Act.  In fact, I feel that more officers than those that appear here should be excluded.  For example, Managing Directors of corporations, why are they not included here?  Corporation Secretaries are officers who are normally approved by the Minister and the terms and conditions are indicated to them.  But because the Act remains silent - I know a Managing Director in one Corporation who belonged to a trade union, and when I asked why that was so, they said it was allowed in the Corporation.  The only difference was that he could not take office in the union.  I do not know what that meant.  Whenever there is a negotiation for an increment in salary, even the management is interested in the increment of salary, because they will get it automatically with the increment of all the other trade union members, and this also brings disaster to the Corporation.  

I think, I have raised sufficient reasons that warrant my fear that this Bill needs to be looked at again.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. JAMES MWANDHA (Bugweri County): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Permit me first of all to make an observation. When hon. Tiberondwa was making his contribution and when other Members were giving information, various Ministers were referred to.  They referred to the Minister of Transport and Communication and others.  As I look around on the Front Benches, these Ministers were not there.  I have a lot of sympathy for the Minister, because when a law comes to this House, it has the collective support of Cabinet and Cabinet Ministers are supposed to be here to help their Colleague to get the law through this House.  Unfortunately, we have a very unfortunate practice in this House that Cabinet Ministers are now office workers.  They are no longer Members of this House.  They do not come to this House.  I think they marginalise Parliament -(Applause).  

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, not only do they marginalise Parliament, we end up getting contradictory statements and contradictory laws.  Because, if the Leader of Government Business was here and the Attorney General was here, we would not be passing laws which contradict Proclamation No. 1 as we did last week.  We would also not proceed with this when we know it is going to be in conflict with the provisions that govern essential services like medical services that hon. Sibo was talking about.  It is for that reason that we end up in a situation of scarcity.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform my Colleague holding the Floor of the House that they do not only end up by being office workers, but they never read letters when you write to them.  Thank you.

MR. MWANDHA:  So, Mr. Chairman, we have a big problem.  I think when we come here, we must make good laws and good laws require the contribution of everybody, including Cabinet Ministers.  Some of them are Representatives of the people and I do not see why these people should keep away from this House when they are supposed to be here to represent their various counties.  

I know that, for instance, today, they are supposed to have a Cabinet meeting.  But, there are four days in a week when Parliament does not meet.  Parliament does not meet on Mondays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays.  Why can't Cabinet, for heavens sake, choose one of those days to hold their Cabinet meetings rather than meet when the House is meeting? (Applause).  Mr. Chairman, I think this is a matter of great importance and Ministers must take this House seriously.

MR. MAYENGO:  Mr. Chairman, I think we should be fair to the Cabinet.  I think the hon. Members do have a chance in their hands at the moment at least, to rectify these things once and for all by perfecting the principle of separation of powers in the coming Constitution.  Let us stop complaining about it.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to re-echo the statement- 

DR. MAGEZI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  Is it in order, for a Historical Member of the National Resistance Movement to come to this august House when he is indecently dressed? (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Kaunda suits are acceptable. (Laughter)

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to re-echo the statements made by many of my Colleagues who would like to request the Minister to be fair to this House and withdraw this Bill or take it to the Select Committee of this House -(Applause).  In addition, already advanced by various Members, in my view the Bill itself is not even timely.  At the present time, this Government is not paying a living wage to the civil servants.  The Minister comes at the same time and says okay, we are not paying you a living wage, but we want you to organise yourselves so that we can pay you a living wage.  I do not think, that the Government is prepared to begin talking about paying a living wage.  The Minister must be sincere to us.  If they are really prepared to talk about a living wage, then we can seriously consider passing this Bill. Otherwise what is likely to happen is that the whole situation will be disrupted.  I know that a strike is a last resort.  But the civil servants went far beyond the last resort.  They have not been paid for months and if they are going to be organised, the first thing that is going to happen is that shop stewards will be talking and Members will want to know what the shop stewards are doing if they are worth what they gave them.  So, they will begin knocking at the doors of Government and saying, ‘look, we want a living wage right now or else we withdraw our services’. Workers tend to go on strike at a time when you need them most. In fact, when it really hurts.  I will give you one example.  I was involved in taking a Colleague of mine; flying him out of this country for treatment overseas after he had become so critically sick, and we advised him on medical grounds, to go him out of this country.  It was drama to get an appropriate vehicle to get him to the Airport.  At that time, everything was in shortage.  You had to get an ambulance from an NGO.  After we had taken the trouble to put this man on the plane, then the pilots announced that they had gone on strike.  They had been negotiating and they found that this was the best time to go on strike.  When we appealed to the pilots, they said that we should not appeal to them but that we should go to management, and that we did not need to worry because Uganda Airlines would still get the patient to London, though they were on strike.  At the end of it all, Uganda Airlines had to charter a plane to Nairobi to connect this fellow to a flight to London in order to get him away.  Because there was no other way.  We could not get him back to Mulago Hospital because the ambulance we had borrowed had already gone and the man was so frustrated.  

So, this is an example of how bad the whole situation was. We take the services of those who work in this House for granted.  They always serve us with a smile.  But you can imagine on the day when we have State Opening of this House and after the President has arrived and perhaps taken the salute and they certainly go on strike, do you think the State Opening will take place?  It will not.  

So, we have to be serious.  If we are going to permit the civil servants to form unions, we must be capable and we must have the capacity to give them remuneration and to give them a living wage -(Applause). 

The Minister was not very clear when he was presenting the Bill, as to how the negotiations were going to take place.  There is a law that is referred to, which so many of us have no access to.  I think hon. Sibo also referred to it.  But you can imagine if every Permanent Secretary was going to negotiate with people working under him, let us say, for example, the Ministry of Health where there are very many professionals.  You have got the nurses, midwives, paramedical and doctors.  But even doctors will say, I am a surgeon, and in other countries, each one of these has a separate union.  Imagine, for instance, the amount of negotiations the Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health will have to do in that sort of situation.

MR. SIBO:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that in fact, those whom the Minister is proposing to exclude are from the union.  He has not made any provision for them.  In other words, nobody is there to cater for their welfare.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, that information is most distressing.  

MRS. KALEMA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like also to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the welfare of employees is very crucial in the trade unions.  When I was Deputy Minister of Public Service and Cabinet Affairs, I once asked the Permanent Secretary the chances of providing lunch to the civil servants.  He told me that it had been considered and that it was coming to 45 billion shillings for one financial year; to give lunch to civil servants, and for that reason, it was blocked.

MR. MWANDHA:  To prepare the Public Service for unionisation needs much more than the Minister can imagine.  Even the bureaucratic system of management used in the civil service will frustrate workers into tears and this will be a source of strike.  In fact, I have some proposals here for having successful implementation of this type of legislation.  But, I think the Minister must revisit this Bill and take it to a Select Committee so that it can be given adequate attention.  With those comments, I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. RUTARO (Bujumbura County, Rukungiri): Mr. Chairman, there have been submissions by hon. Members to try and justify why this Bill should be referred to a Select Committee.  I would like to point out that, for example, the submission of hon. Kawanga was defective because the purpose of giving us a First Reading is to give adequate time to Members of the House to go and do their research or reading.  It should not be the duty of the Minister to make sure that the Members of the House do the reading.

DR. TIBERONDWA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the floor that when this Bill was read for the First Time, I searched in the library; in the Public Library in the President’s Office, and I could not find this Bill until I had to go to the office of the Minister to get this Decree No. 20 of 1976.  I have not been able to know the Negotiating Machinery Act.  I cannot find it.  So it is not the fault of the Members.  These documents are not available -(Applause).  

MR. RUTARO:  If that position is obtainable, then the Minister should be able to answer or be able to avail those documents.  But, as I said earlier, I would like to concede on the point of Government not being in a position to negotiate the increase of salaries.  Because Government is already aware; they have already been retrenching because they want to retain a Civil Service that can be contained.  Even then, they cannot contain it yet.  So, the Bill would give us problems, because if a union is formed tomorrow, they will want to give a living wage to their members and Government, I am sure, is not in a position to do that.  

I would like, on the other hand, to request the Minister to tell us how far they can go in caring for the welfare of employees.  Is it a question of putting legislation in place and leaving everything to whom it may concern?  Here, I am concerned with the welfare of the workers and the conditions in which they work.  If you go to most of these factories, carpentry workshops, and repair garages, you will find a garage without any windows, yet they are repairing vehicles.  You go to a carpentry workshop, there are no windows and the machine is blowing off dust.  You go to several places where protective clothing would be an absolute necessity and you have none in place.  I have been to a cement factory where people are supposed to wear baffles and they have none.  Is the factory Inspectorate, working in the Ministry of Labour?  Can the Minister justify the existence of certain officers who answer for various titles in that section?  I wish to support the Minister, on the other hand, that the exclusion of many public servants had left the unions in the leadership of, I think, incompetent people.  The leadership of the union has left a lot to be desired because, by excluding well paid officers, who are definitely better educated, at least on average, leaves the union with people who would not know the law and, therefore, do not have the bargaining ability to cater for their members.  

So, the Bill, except for certain sections which I think the Minister should be in a position to accept Amendments, would really have been timely.  I would like to echo the submissions by my Colleagues who talked before me that teachers and principals of various schools are not employers.  Instead of including, for example, a Personal Assistant to a Minister, there are Registry Clerks.  These are the people who keep the files and the secrets the people were talking about.  So, I do believe that Schedule 2 should be accordingly amended so that the teachers can be included. Of course, on the assumption that the Minister is prepared to pay a living wage.  This is what he did not talk about.  If the living wage can be paid then let the teachers, headmasters, deputy headmasters, and those clerks that he talked about, will be included in the union. 

I would also like the Minister, in Schedule 2(2), instead of talking about the Governor, Deputy Governor, and General Manager, to talk about a class of employees and above.  Because tomorrow, we shall change the title.  The Board of Governors could change the title of the Bank of Uganda and he will be Chief Executive and this Act will be rendered useless.  So, maybe he should talk about Heads of Department and above, rather than talk about General Manager, because if the title goes, it ceases to apply to that particular institution.  

I wish also to add that the heads of department and institutions of higher learning be included.  What would say, a Head of Chemistry Department at Makerere University or at ITEK, have to do with negotiations with employees, because the employees working under him are employed by somebody else.  He would not very much influence the results of the negotiations on say, salaries or whatever other benefits.  As I said earlier on, if the Minister is convinced that by unionising the teachers and public servants, he will be prepared to negotiate and give them a living wage, then he should continue with the Bill with the relevant Amendments as suggested.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that, we have come to the end of today’s session.  We adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.


ADJOURNMENT

(The Council rose at 4.45 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 28th January, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.).




















