Wednesday 24th January, 2001

Parliament met at 2.41p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Ssekandi Edward, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members the only communication I have is to repeat my appeal, which I made yesterday that you make adjustment in your programme. So that we at least concentrate for the next two or three parliamentary weeks and clear some of the Bills which we have on our table. As you note from the report of the committee some of the measures proposed have to be effective by next month or early in March.  So unless we pass this law in time, we may have some complications which may not be good for the elections.  

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 1998

(General debate continued)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: As we ended yesterday the general debate, I want the Chairman to wind up and the Minister so that we can see what to do.

THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON LEGAL & PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I only have three points on which I wish to comment. The first one is on the question of nomination fee. When the committee made recommendations during the debate on the Presidential Election’s Bill, one of its recommendations was that the nomination fee suggested in the Bill of eight million was too high and that it should be reduced to two million.  That was the recommendation of the committee.  

Furthermore the committee recommended that this two million should be refundable if a candidate obtained a certain percentage of votes.  However, the House rejected those recommendations and the reasons were advanced as to why we should pass a fee of eight million.  The reasons advanced among others were that, if a person has not paid eight million shillings, he cannot be taken serious.  But if one did not pay – the eight million, his supporters would in any case contribute for him to raise the nomination fee. This is also a contribution to the revenue, so that we can conduct elections using our own money instead of relying on donors.
 
So in the process the House then laid down the principles upon which they rejected the recommendation of the committee.  Now having done so, it is only in our view, a principled stand if we do not shift to the goal posts. So having laid the principles governing why a high fee should be paid by candidates to enrol for Parliamentary elections, shifting goal posts would appear as if we are not following our own Precedent and not being principled when passing legislation. 

The only reason, which was advanced as a way of departure from this stand, was that for Presidential Candidates, some money is already advanced – fifteen million is given.  But if you look at fifteen million, which is given for nomination, and you compare with the amount of money, which a Presidential candidate or aspirant uses to canvass all the districts in Uganda looking for signatures. You will find that it goes beyond the seven million, given for facilitation.  It really cancels it out.  

The second point is on candidate’s meetings. Let me give you an example. I had the opportunity to represent the late hon. Adyebo in an election petition brought against him by Makmoti.  One of the grounds argued in that petition was that candidate’s meetings had been held in only four parishes and not nineteen and at the end of the four parishes in one of the candidates’ meetings, there was violence which led to the death of one of the voters. So the rest of the candidate meetings were cancelled.  It became an issue during the court case and in the process, the Electoral Commission was drawn in.  The officer who was in charge of the candidates meeting had to come and give evidence.  This was the point we were raising yesterday, that the Electoral Commission whose duty is to conduct elections is in this case drawn into things it should not be. At the end of the day you get Electoral Commission having to come to give evidence either in support of the late Adyebo or Makomti.  

 Now in the view of the committee it would not be fair to draw the Electoral Commission into mitigation and force it to support one side in order to defeat the petition or to have the petition succeed.  So this example illustrates and defeats several arguments, which were raised:
(1)If you have Candidates meetings, you cannot have violence 
(2)If you bring in the Electoral Commission into organising elections, you are definitely going to draw them into disputes between contending parties in court.  

So it is in my view that the major reason advanced and not assailed, was that the constitutional function of the Electoral Commission is to organise elections.  But what candidates meeting does, is to draw them from that constitutional function into organised campaigns.  That is the really reason why we should have the candidates meeting done away.  It draws a way the Electoral Commission from its duty, instead of concentrating on the work of the Electoral Commission of organising at a time when they should be doing so, they are busy traversing the whole country in campaigns and that is a burden to the taxpayer.  

The last point I want to comment on as I wind up is on qualifications.  We had proposed that all intending candidates obtain qualifications that are equivalent to A -level, but during the course of the debate it has come to transpire that there are certain qualifications, which are over A-level and they need not to be equated.  Now to require a person with a PhD to submit his papers to UNEB, I think I would agree with the arguments raised yesterday, it would not be logical.  Rather if the qualification is obviously beyond A-level, anybody challenging it, anybody saying, it is not equivalent, should be able to do so on his or her own, rather than require every body to take these qualifications to UNEB.  Mr. Speaker, those are the three points on which I wish to comment.  I thank you. I also thank the Members for their contributions to the debate and the support of the Report.  Thank you.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, thank you so much.  I am indebted to the Chairperson to what he said, but I have got a few questions I do not quite follow.  Taking the last question, is he saying that if I got a PhD I should not submit it to the Electoral Commission for them to know that I have it?  Let me just know what you meant.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: No, I am not saying that you should not submit it to the Electoral Commission.  Under the proposed law, this should be submitted to UNEB for equating whether they are equivalent.  So, there is no need for you to submit your PhD to UNEB to determine whether it is an equivalent of A-level that is what I am saying.  But of course, it must be submitted to the Electoral Commission to prove that you have got the necessary qualifications. Now, if somebody thinks that your PhD is not equivalent to A-level, it should be upon that person to challenge it.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think he is saying there are post-secondary A-level qualifications.  A man has got his Bachelor of Medicine in Surgery Makerere University, now he wants to stand.  So, are you saying you go to Nyakasura and get the headmaster’s certification that you have got A-level certificate?  I think he is talking about that situation, actually the Constitution is only talking about the minimum requirement as A-level. It is obvious this man who has got Bachelor of Medicine has got A’level certificate, So why should he really go to Nyakasura rather than Makerere?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Okay, Sir, I understand, I would support that, and probably it would save me from some problems.  Now, two million is too high or too low?  I do not know what the hon. Members wanted it to be.  But two million for a Member of Parliament, especially, young ones who want to come in it may be insufficient.  I would rather leave it at that level than increase it.  

Now, from what the hon. Member Wandera Ogalo said this seems to be drawn from one particular case in general and I think that really this will be going too far.  We have had cases for many, many years, but now really zeroing only on one case which went to Court, saying, “because of that one case, never mind statistical superiority of the other cases in the other way, we must therefore, reject the candidates’ meetings”.  I think that is really going too far.  He quoted about five or six cases of this nature to this Parliament.  I would have been inclined to working with him, because in principle, if it were this one case, the Electoral Commission would give evidence if they did supervise the candidate’s meeting. 
 
This is the only objection and so let us keeps out the Electoral Commission, but there might be other reasons to support joint meetings.  We could have somebody else actually to organise them.

I am agreeable to having Electoral Commission out for the reasons given, because the Constitution duty for them is to organise elections.  But if there are other reasons, and I think there are, for holding joint candidate’s meetings, let us then have them organised not presided over by the EEC officials or personnel, but some other way.  Now, the reason I have for this is that –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Minister, we are talking about elections, then who else can come in to organise this candidate’s meeting, unless he is an agent of the Electoral Commission?  I think that is the question.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Who can do it?  I think I agree Sir that might be a problem.  Who is considered to be impartial to organise the meetings?  I have actually known of the case where the candidates themselves find it convenient for them to have meetings held by themselves together, and normally they themselves agree on convening these meetings.  I think we should leave it as an option, as it is I think under the presidential elections.  We could leave it as an option where candidates in a constituency themselves agree to hold these elections. 

The reasons, of course, for joint candidates are so many, l can just give some of them.  Now, the separate meetings tend potentially to cause insecurity, and therefore you need the Police at different meetings to keep the peace.  You go after an order and When you have got one meeting together, that is easier for them to look after.

Secondly I have had an experience myself the separate meetings tend to encourage people say anything about other competitors and usually defamatory but when the fellow is right in front of you, it is not so easy to tell lies like that. Joint meetings would also help to educate people, they can say, “I am going to remove tax “X”, now, if the other person is there, he can say, “Alright, this candidate is saying this and that, it is not logical, it is not possible.  So when these people are there at the same time, you can actually see the importance of who has been saying what. On the whole I would advocate that we have it optional, where some of the candidates in the constituencies can decide whether to hold joint meetings or not to have joint meetings.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: You mean you want to make the Provision permissive?  

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Yes.

MR. MWANDHA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Even if we provided for a choice whether to go jointly or not jointly, the question is, suppose we choose joint candidate meetings, who is going to be in charge of those meetings?  I think this is the crucial matter.  What really the problem is, is that you cannot involve the Electoral Commission.  Now, if the Electoral Commission is not going to preside over the joint meetings of the candidates who choose to have joint meetings?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Speaker, the purpose of the Chairperson to preside over the meeting really is to ensure law and order.  He or she does not participate in the debates at all.  So, these candidates severe as they are going to be, can themselves agree on the holding of the meeting together.  The only thing they really want there, is who is going to be the empire?  That is all, and then of course, the authorities can provide that security.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon Member have you finished?

MR. NKANGI: Okay I beg to move Sir. 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker before the Minister moves, the issue of chairing a meeting is purely an administrative matter. I want to put it to him that if the Chairman gives one candidate more time than another does there is already the issue of bias.  For some of us who have taken part in candidate's meetings more than once you can see that when one candidate is talking and the presiding officer is very pleased with his presentation it shows on his face. - (Laughter) - Now I would be grateful if the Minister can see how to get the presiding officer, who is a member of the electoral commission being removed from that kind of bias.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. WAPAKABULO (Mbale Municipality, Mbale): I do not know whether I have been misunderstanding the procedure, as it should be?  As a member of the committee I support the recommendation.  My view is that the electoral commission can not be left out of these meetings but the procedure should be different.  In my view upon nomination or within a week of nomination, candidates should file their proposed programmes with the people representing the electoral commission in the area. They can have a moderated meeting where they can then synchronise and agree that, while so and so is in Gombolala so and so, the other one will be in Gombolala so and so.  The police then is informed to make sure that the day and time of so and so is protected in place so and so.  How we word this into the law I do not know.  That is my understanding.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members I am stuck here.  The Minister has moved that maybe we get a Second Reading but this is a decision now.  We have to make a decision for Second Reading but at the moment I have got only 78 Members.  So in view of this I think we suspend the proceedings - yes otherwise how do we proceed? This is because we can not go to the committee stage unless we have had the Second Reading. So the proceedings are suspended for 20 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended at 3:04 p.m)

(On resumption at 3:25 p.m, the Deputy Speaker presiding_)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The motion was that we give this bill the Second Reading. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS BILL, 1998

Clause 1

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 2

MR. OGALO: Mr. Chairman I propose that Clause 2 be deleted the justification being that the Law should come in effect on the date of publication should not be left with the exclusion of the Minister to appoint by Statutory instrument.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The motion is that you delete Clause 2. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 3

MR. OGALO: In Clause 3(3) I propose Mr. Chairman that the words "or any professional association or body beginning with" which appear towards the end of the fourth line up to the end of the sub section be deleted and be substituted with the words "and published in the gazette".  The justification is to let the standards be prescribed by UNEB only and not a multiplicity of bodies that might cause conflict.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the motion. 

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 3 as amended stand part of the Bill.
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 4

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 4 stands part of the Bill. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5

MR. OGALO: Clause 5(3), I propose the same to be deleted.  The justification being - I will read it first.  5(3) reads:"Whenever a registrar of births and deaths registers the death of a Member of Parliament, the registrar shall immediately in writing inform the Clerk to Parliament of the fact of the death of the Member." 

The justification for the deletion is that the Clerk to Parliament is normally the first official to be informed of the death of the Member, and it is the Clerk who makes other institutions aware of the death of a Member of Parliament.  The Clause is therefore misplaced and therefore serves no purpose.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 5 as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 5 as amended stand part of the Bill. 
(Question put and agreed)

Clause 6

MR. OGALO: I propose Mr. Chairman in Clause 6(4) that the same is substituted by the following resolutions and the subsequent sub sections are numbered accordingly: 
 (4) for the purposes of paragraph c and sub section 1 of this section; 
"a person shall qualify as having the equivalent of advanced level formal education only if he holds a certificate issued to him or her by the Uganda National Examination's Board notice of which has been published in the gazette." 
 (5) "The Uganda National Examination's Board shall, for the purposes of the sub section (1) of this section, after informing the Minister responsible for education, publish in the gazette from time to time notice of the list of the qualifications considered by it to be the equivalent to advanced level of formal education". 
(6) "A certificate issued by the Examination Board under any other enactment to the same effect as a certificate required to be obtained under sub section (4) of this section and notice of which is published in the Gazette, shall be sufficient for the purposes of paragraph (C) of sub section 3 of this section." 
 (7) "A certificate issued by the Examination's Board under this section shall be sufficient in respect of any election for which the same qualification is required."   
The justification is to let standards be prescribed by UNEB only and the certificate issued only to those who are having standards equivalent to advanced level formal education and that those having formal educational standards will be having their certificates to prove their formal education.   Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR.WAPAKABULO: I would like to be clarified on the wording of Clause (6), the certification by Examination Board under any other enactment to the same effect as a certificate required to be obtained under sub-section (6). Is it (6) here we are talking about or it is not sub-section (6) itself?  No, sub-section (6) of this section and yet we are in (6) Yes, we are dealing with clause (6), but if you are writing in sub-section (6) it is a certificate required to be obtained under sub-section (6) of this section, then you are referring to this very one.  May be there is some mistaken cross-referencing, this is what I am trying to find out from the Deputy Chairman

MR. MAIKUT: I would like also to seek clarification from the Deputy Chairman of the committee, on a situation where somebody might have forged papers Advanced and O-Level. In this section here, we are saying such a person his /her normal papers should not be subject to verification by the UNEB. How then are we going to avoid situations of persons who may forge papers of O-level and A-level and under this provision you are not going to subject them to anywhere?  Thank you.

MR.OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, to answer hon. Maikuit	, as we stated earlier, the onus to prove whether one has got the certificates beyond A-level is on you who is challenging it.  If you are saying this degree certificate or so is forged, then that will be for you to prove so. Otherwise the others equivalent to A-level will be certified by UNEB as being equivalent to A-level.  One UNEB says your qualifications are equivalent to A-level, then they will issue you with a certificate proving that you have A-level.  If you have forged a degree certificate or O-level, –(Interjections)- that is a matter for the courts really, it is suspect and therefore it is a matter for proof.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But you see recently, I heard that when you go to UNEB to prove your equivalent of A-level, you are asked to bring a certified copy from the issuing authority.  Do you think really that does make sense, because if I forged a certificate and said it is equivalent to A-level and you ask me to go back and have it certified by the issuing say fraudulent authority, what are you going to achieve?  Why is it that it is not UNEB itself having paid my fees for certification.  UNEB takes steps to verify, investigate and then come out with its own conclusion rather than asking me to bring evidence when I can do it because I will ask whoever issued me the document please do that, and that is the end of it.
  
MR. OGALO:  Well, Mr. Chairman, I take your guidance there, if that has been by UNEB then we possibly provide for it.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, I said I heard, I read in papers that, that is what is being done.  I think when you pay the fees, I think it is UNEB that should take its means somehow to investigate and then conclude rather than asking me to bring evidence because I can bring it.

MR. OGALO:  Yes, Mr. Chairman that is why I am saying we will take your guidance and provide for that so that UNEB takes responsibility.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes, hon. Kaggwa, but have you answered Member for Mbale municipality I think he raised something about – referring to sub-section (6) What sub-section (6) was it this sub-section or another one.

MR. OGALO:  This reads a certificate issued by the examinations board under any other enactment for the same effect as a certificate required to be obtained under sub-section (6) of this section – sub-section (4) of this section.

MR. KAGGWA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In view of your guidance, I want to move that we add another provision to the effect that it will be the responsibility of –the Uganda National Examination Board to investigate and verify any submissions of any equivalent certificate to A-level or something to that effect.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on 6(3). The current 6(3) reads: "A person elected to Parliament when he or she is a member of the local government council, or holds public office shall resign the office before assuming the office of the Member of Parliament."  My amendment is –(Interruption)
 
 MAJ. OTOA:  Sorry, Mr. Chairman, I was not aware that we have already gone through clause (6) because I have got an amendment there.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we have not.

MAJ. OTOA:  We have not?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: We have not, in fact we have not pronounced ourselves to the- (Interruption)-

MAJ. OTOA:  I think hon. Kazoora was on another subject.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: In fact we pronounced ourselves to the proposed amendments by the committee. I think I should put the question to the amendments then we can move.  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Then you can move another amendment if you have any.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  My amendment is, where it says; "he or she is a member of local government council or holds public office". I would also like to add that "or is in active military service shall resign the office before assuming the office of Member of Parliament". - (Interjections)- provided this section would not apply to the army representatives elected under article 78.4 of the constitution.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman. 

MAJ. OTOA:  Mr. Chairman I am not against the amendment but I do not support it unless it is qualified. If you are in the active service, your retirement from the army has got procedures.  Now he is talking –

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Chairman, I am a bit confused because I have not talked for my amendment.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please speak for your amendment.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  I thank you Sir.  Mr. Chairman, when you are elected in a civilian constituency, you come and spend five years completely detached from the institution of the army and you do not attend any meeting. You do not know how to express yourself in the army and your allegiance surely is to your constituents. Some of us had serious questions and problems to answer. Now that you are a military officer, how sure are we that when you are there and there is a serious war in Congo or in the Sudan, that you will not be removed from Parliament to go and fight and you cause us problems here in our constituency?  

And some people, who were not careful to answer those questions properly Mr. Chairman, are not here.  I think it would be fair that we do not subject these men and officers to the same conditions. Secondly, after five years you will have missed some courses while the comrades you left behind have done the courses.  Surely it would be very unfair for you to go back probably at the same rank or even a lesser one.  Another issue Mr. Chairman, is the kind of parliamentary discipline –(Interruption)

COL KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: With due respect to the hon. Speaker, I would like to inform him that even when you resign from the army, you do not leave the army completely.  You go to the reserve.  So once you are in the reserve and there is need for you, you are called back.  

MAJ. KAZOORA:  I have no problem with that, if it is the reserve force, I do not mind but I am talking of the army.  Mr. Chairman, can this hon. Member from Ruhinda give me peace?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now hon. Member, why do you not allow him to make his contribution?  I will give you the opportunity to respond.

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Chairman, the kind of Parliamentary discipline we go through, you meet a number of senior officers as a Member of Parliament including the commander-in-chief, appearing before the select committee on defence or any committee. This Parliamentary discipline may not be good for big people because when you go back and remember the kind of discipline you subjected them to you become uneasy, while that in the army is completely very different.
  
Therefore for fair play in this House, we know that there are army representatives under the constitution and if I offer myself for a civilian constituency, I do not see why I should keep one leg in the army, and one leg in my constituency.  I thought it would be better that I fully pledge myself to my constituency.  I therefore really appeal to you hon. Members to look at this entire scenario and support this amendment.  I thank you.

MAJ. OTOA:  Mr. Chairman, article 210 (c) of the constitution – terms and conditions of service of members of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces.  Article 210 reads: "Parliament shall make laws regulating the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces and in particular, providing for- (c) terms and conditions of service of members of the Uganda Peoples Defence Forces". 
 I would only be convinced if the hon. Member has put in place this article 210 in full.  I do not want to get out because I have been elected to represent my constituency in the civil constituency.  So it would be very unfair for a member of the armed forces who has served only for about three, or four years to resign and leave his career only to go for a couple of years and to be recalled to Parliament perhaps for some reasons.  If the hon. Member is prepared to forfeit his benefits then I think it should be left optional for a service member of the armed forces to either resign or still remain and continue with the service.  

MR. ONGOM: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  The clarification I am asking is in regard to the definition of a public office.  What does a public office constitute?  Does it exclude serving in the army, in the police, and in the prison?  Now if it does not and actually it is included now, should we as a matter of fact then say that those who are now in Parliament but who actually should have been defined under this are actually now illegally in Parliament?  Secondly, if it is clarified to me that a public office includes the army, then perhaps we should start his amendment by saying "for avoidance of doubt", then we continue so that it is clear that the army is also part of the public service. 

MR. WAPAKABULO: One thing I wanted to draw the attention of the House to Article 80 clause (3). The wording of the provision which the hon. Members seeks to amend is in the exactly the same language as a constitutional provision, which says: "A person elected to Parliament when he or she is a member of the local government council or holds a public office shall resign the office before assuming the office of Member of Parliament." 
So if we seek to amend that, we may begin to be encroaching on the Constitution –(Interjections.)-  Yes, wait, now public officer in Article 175: 
"means any person holding or acting in an office in the Public Service."  
"Public Service means service in any civil capacity of the government, the emoluments for which are payable directly from the consolidated fund or directly actual monies provided by Parliament". 
 
So, service in the armed forces does not include service in the Public Service.  But the question now is, the Constitution is saying that the following people should not be Members of Parliament, while they are holding the office of a councillor or a public servant.  Can we say, in addition to that the following?  Do we have competence to do that in view of clause 80(3)?  That is for the Attorney General to advise us, for me I am a Member of Parliament for Mbale Municipality.  Thank you very much. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The question is, can you go beyond these qualifications provided in the Constitution and add more?  Well, can you do it under a Statute or can you do it under the Constitution?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I do not think we can, actually, amend the Constitution covertly.  It must come during a specific amendment to the Constitution and we debate it. 

MAJ. KAZOORA:  Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that this is not a constitutional amendment. Iam just including a small amendment in the law, and that is all.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Member, the point is including it in this Bill that will become law. You are disqualifying a person who is elected as a Member of Parliament when he is serving in the armed forces from not being a Member of Parliament.  But when you read Article 80, which deals with qualification, this was never included. 
 
So, if you put it in the law, it will tantamount to be contrary to the provision of the Constitution – I think, that is the interpretation of the Attorney General and, therefore, we cannot do it. Now, any other amendment?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I would like to move an amendment to add sub-clause 9 to clause 6 this is after hon. Medi Kaggwa has moved an amendment which I assume was sub-clause 8, to read as follows: "For the avoidance of doubt a person with a higher qualification than Advanced Level standard shall not be subject to verification and certification by UNEB and to submit to the returning officer certificate for Ordinary and Advanced level qualifications." I beg to move. 

THE CHAIRTMAN: But where do you place this one?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, this is all part of the educational qualification. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I understand but where do you want to put it?

DR. OKULO EPAK: The committee’s amendment goes up to sub-clause 7 then hon. Medi Kaggwa added sub-clause 8, and mine will, therefore, I assume be sub-clause 9.  

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I want to seek clarification from the mover.  I was under the belief that the requirement of A Level, will be a common feature, which UNEB can apply to all, and I stress it, to all candidates standing for parliamentary or similar elections.  Now, in law, I want the hon. Mover to explain to me where it is selective that I say I have got a PhD and therefore UNEB should not certify my qualification. 
 I think, this - because I believe the standing for elections must have a benchmark, and everybody should need that benchmark. I am asking this, there is and there exist in this country somebody who served on the bench, he had all the degrees but he did not have A level equivalent, and the law for standing for elections says you must have the A level or its equivalent.  How do we square this circle?  I thank you. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: Yes, Mr. Chairman, this provision in the Constitution which is here ideally is dealing with people whose maximum qualification, according to my reading is Advanced Level. And those who, maybe, stopped some year ago in Junior Secondary three, but in the meantime have upgraded themselves and want to be equated to Advanced Level.  Or to somebody who has got a matriculation or intermediate Certificate from some other countries or Certificates by whatsoever name from some other countries, which should be verified by UNEB whether, it is equivalent to Advanced level.  This is my understanding of this provision, anybody that has gone beyond that, surely that is not a minimum qualification, but a maximum qualification.  This Law should say you should have a minimum qualification of this, beyond that it is much more than a minimum qualification.  

Secondly, the hon. Members should know that UNEB’s mandate and even capacity does not cover qualifications beyond A’ level except for a few tertiary institutions here in Uganda.  All other qualifications like Diplomas, Degrees and so on and so forth are issued by different institutions.  If you want UNEB to verify somebody’s degree then you should go to Makerere not UNEB.  So, I do not know why the hon. Member wants to credit UNEB with a duty and mandate, which it does not qualify to perform.

Finally, I think we have the opportunity for anybody who is challenging somebody’s qualifications to petition in the Courts of law and should have the onus to prove that, that person does not have the qualification and I think that is a free area for everybody.  We should not relegate that responsibility to UNEB.  I thank you.

MR. BAKKABULINDI: Thanks very much, Mr. Chairman.  I do support the amendment but I want to be clarified on one issue.  When is talking of higher qualifications and clearly they are set from recognisable institutions I would not be worried. But I want to see a situation whereby somebody comes with a paper worded a Degree, say from India or somewhere deep in a certain college that we do not know and he attended for only two weeks or three weeks. Now since you have said as long as it is bearing that title ‘above A’ level,’ ‘UNEB does not come in’ and you are subjecting that poor person to be the one to go to the courts. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I need to be clarified on how that person is going to be protected, who is going to petition to the courts and how are the courts going to come in order to verify with a particular college whether those qualifications are genuine or not?  Otherwise the idea of above the qualification of A’ level, I do agree with him but on that snag it is where I need some clarification.

MR. CHEBET MAIKUT: Mr. Chairman, I do not support the motion moved by hon. Okulo Epak for one simple reason.  The question is, ‘why are we now trying to put double standards in the law?’  We had just passed the Presidential Elections Bill and we made a very clear provision about the role of UNEB in certifying the qualifications of the candidates and naturally I would expect that the same principle should apply this time to all candidates intending to vie for Parliamentary elections.  I would like to get the experience of somewhere elsewhere the opportunity to serve in the Central Scholarship Committee.  

One thing which emerged clearly is that some of the Degree qualifications, whether first or second or PhD Degree sometimes are very difficult to be interpreted depending on the country where they are awarded. And the question is; who is the competent authority to certify a Degree for example from Cuba or from Russia, say you got a first class or distinction? How do we certify that?  It is, therefore, my submission that UNEB should be given that role, be able to interpret and certify that equivalence of A’ level results.  Thank you.

MR. WAPAKABULO: I am having a slight problem, maybe Dr. Okulo Epak or the Deputy Chairman of the Committee can clarify.  Today on Internet, you can buy a Degree.  You just have to surf and they are all there.  Now, is that a Degree for purposes of the Constitution?  Could I be clarified on that one?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I think I would like to give that clarification and it will serve the purpose of the hon. Representative of Workers as well.  First of all, who is UNEB?  What is UNEB’s mandate?  UNEB’s mandate does not include matters of degrees.  It does not, so why are you giving it a responsibility to which it has no mandate in the first instance?  So, if you are looking for somebody to verify those degrees or higher qualifications then you must specify separately. 

I have said in response to hon. Dick Nyai, that if you yourself doubt a candidate’s qualification, because the regulations provide that the Returning Officer should make these qualifications accessible to anybody who wants to scrutinise them. So if you feel that somebody has got his Degree from Internet, you should go and challenge it in the Courts of law and you should prove it.  It could be a question of evidence.  The onus is not on me to say whether I should disqualify myself or not.  It is somebody who wants to challenge that qualification to petition and prove that it is an Internet qualification or it is a qualification obtained from a fraudulent University. That is your business.  Mr. Chairman, I hope I have clarified this sufficiently.

MR. WAPAKABULO: Mr. Chairman, I will take benefit from the clarification by the Member for Oyam South that we should provide as follows: "For a person who claims to have A’ level equivalent shall obtain a certificate from UNEB, because UNEB deals with such qualification." But where a person claims a qualification higher than A’ level, he/she should obtain certification from the Higher Education Council, whatever you call it because that is the one under the law today, which determines equivalencies between Degrees. – The Council for Higher Education is the Council today in Uganda, which agrees that a Degree of such and such a place is as good as a Degree here in Uganda under the law.  We should do it that way.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean there is a Council of Higher Education in Uganda?  Let us get the information then I come to you, hon.

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, for A’ level, UNEB is the competent authority.  For higher qualifications within the new Education Act, we have provided for a Committee to review all qualifications from higher institutions of learning and that body does exist in the Council as the information has been given by the hon. Member for Mbale Municipality. We do have the name for that qualification authority, which will get the equivalencies of Degree and Diplomas from higher institutions of learning.  Therefore, I agree entirely.  If it is only for Advanced Level, it should be UNEB.  If it is for higher institutions, it should be the new body in the Council, which has been set up by the law.  Thank you.

MR. WACHA: Mr. Chairman, I do not know whether we still have in our minds what provision we are talking about.  6(1)(c) says: " A person is qualified to be a Member of Parliament if that person, (c) has completed a minimum formal education of Advanced Level standard or its equivalent." 
 On that, the amendment proposed by hon. Ogalo, is to find out ways of determining what the equivalent of A’level is. It has nothing to do with higher qualifications.  What the law is really concerned with is, what is the equivalent of A’level and that is, what is being proposed that you go to UNEB and get a certificate to indicate that whatever qualifications you might have had after ordinary level is equivalent to A’level.  

Now, I think what hon. Okulo Epak is doing and, maybe, I do not know whether it is necessary is to say that, you do not need these other certificate from UNEB if you have a degree qualification.  Now, I think his thinking is that, during the nomination for presidential elections UNEB under the guidance of the Commission decided that people should go back and produce ordinary level certificate, and advanced level certificates. And yet all they had to do is to wait for a person like Ben Wacha to be nominated as a presidential candidate and say, 
"You say you have an equivalent of A’level can we see and verify it". That is all and what the law is saying.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: You mean, for instance if one holds O'level certificate obtained at King’s College Budo he need not to go to UNEB?

MR. WACHA: You may not go, Sir, except if –(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: It seems people who had those certificates issued under the seal of UNEB had to go to UNEB again.

MR. WACHA: That is the problem and a misapplication of the law, if you have A’level and I have A’level all you have to do, is to produce it before the returning officer before am nominated.  And if you challenge my A’level certificate then, you petition court to say; I do not have O-Level certificate. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, now it is clear. I think hon. Ben Wacha is saying. if any person wants to stand as a holder of A’level certificate, you do not have to go to UNEB.You only take your certificate to the deputy chairman or the returning officer and say; "these are my qualifications I have A’level and you proceed." You do not have to pay the fees to UNEB I think that is clear.  

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I did present to a UNEB officer a certificate issued by the Lincoln’s Inn of Court, it was saying barrister at law, he said to me, "Mr. Minister can you have something maybe simpler". And my question is, are these people really in position to say, yes, this is a degree, or no this is not a degree?  So, why do we not leave UNEB itself or the body for higher education as being suggested to be able to say this is so, this is not? So rather than we involve the Electoral Commission which is not really in position to identify or distinguish these letters.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Okullo Epak, we are handling your proposed amendment and you heard a contribution from hon. Wapakabulo, do you think it helps to improve on yours or you want to stand with –

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, I was under the impression that even after hon. Wacha’s explanation the hon. Member representing Mbale Municipality looked terribly dissatisfied and in any case I had already responded to his inquiry. He appeared to have been supported of course by hon. Babu by suggesting that, there is a possibility for a vetting body separate from UNEB to deal with degrees. But we have just said our duties here is not to amend the Constitution; we are simply implementing the Constitutional requirement, which to my interpretation as a lay man does not go beyond a degree. It does not and I have explained it satisfactory that, the constitutional requirement was concentrating on somebody whose only qualifications is advanced level certificate.  For him that is what would be his maximum and somebody else whose maximum is not like our own A’level as I have already explained.  

So, it was so restrictive that the verification is required for someone claiming that his qualification is equivalent to Uganda’s advanced level. I brought this amendment seriously because of the misunderstanding, which has already been reflected here sufficiently.  The electoral Commission during the presidential elections went ahead to make regulations which were far beyond the requirements of the Constitution and this time I think we do not want them to do that.

Secondly, Mr. Chairman, how many candidates are we going to have for Parliamentary elections?  In fact, we hardly know them as we speak now and you want all those people to move with their degrees all over the country to this other council, to UNEB and so on. I think we must restrict the requirement and leave the rest to the law.  If you suspect my degree, go to the returning officer, examine it and then go to the courts of law, petition and challenge that qualification. This is much easier than subjecting everybody to this administrative fear.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Wacha, there is a question I want to ask you. What would happen if your certificate you got from King’s College Budo is not there, but you have your (LLB) degree certificate from Makerere? What would you do in such a situation?  And you cannot access Budo because there is a problem and yet you have to present yourself the following day. 

MR. WACHA:  Exactly that is what some of us did in the last elections and I am here by virtue that, I had my degree certificate and a diploma in legal practice. But I did not have my A’level because the law talks about minimum and I have what is my maximum and really it is not for you to dispute it, if you want to dispute the genuineness of the certificate you go to court.


CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, that argument did come up during the interim law when we were making the Interim Law for Parliament. We were, referred to UNEB, Curriculum development centre, Makerere University and ITEK, to advise on this and actually did advise us and gave us different groups of people who must not be subjected to these equivalencies. 
These were people who had done certain formal education recognised in this country, and if you remember in that law towards the end, we had a list of different qualifications. The very bodies we are talking about gave us the list. We however talked to UNEB about the certificates that might be lost and they assured us that they have records and if anybody doubts, they can cross check with them. All the Cambridge schools, and higher school certificates have them on record. So you pay a small fee and get a certificate indicating the qualifications.  Thank you very much.

MR. KAGGWA MED (Kawempe South, Kampala): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am indeed surprised that we want to make an exception to the general rule.  Hon. Ben has gone at length to explain.  Why should you make somebody from Kisoro who has his degree, to be forced to visit UNEB because you want to verify his A'Level certificate? I am surprised, somebody says you can get a degree in two weeks.  I do not know of any institution that would award that certificate, and if it is there, you go and take that person to court. But you cannot make somebody come from Nakapiripiti, holding a degree, a Phd, or is a practising doctor and subject his papers UNEB because he/her has no A'Level certificate.  

Now, Prof. Nsibambi I think he will be the best person to advise here.  There are people who got degrees without O'level and A'Level certificate.  Are you going to say they are not competent to be in this Parliament and yet they have a degree which is much higher than A'Level certificate?  

Mr. Chairman, I think hon. Okulo Epak's motion is intended, because of what Electoral Commission did. - I think the Electoral Commission went beyond it's mandate when it decided to cause everybody to go to UNEB and charge them seven hundred and fifty thousand shillings to bring the equivalent, when somebody is already qualified graduate

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, I put the question I think we have exhaustively dealt with this matter.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause 5 is substituted with the following:  
"A person holding a public office or a member of a local government council or a Commission established under the Constitution wishing to be a candidate, shall apply for leave of absence at least 120 days before the expiry of the term of Parliament."  
The justification for this is to include members of the local government councils and Commissions intending to be candidates and also to give those intending candidates sufficient times to consult and to prevent the use of government resources.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: This was debated yesterday.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause 7 to substitute the word "is" appearing towards the end of the first line with the words "wishes to be".  This is to make it consistent with the decision we have just taken of 120 days.  I beg to move.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, the hon. Chairman here is talking about 90 days and then he is talking about 120 days.  The other one said four months and the last one three months.  Is there a difference?

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, that was a topographical error and I read 120 days.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in sub-clause 8 to substitute the word "may" appearing in the second line with the word "shall".  This is to make it mandatory as to make enforcement possible.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 6 as amended, agreed to

MR. BAKU:  Mr. Chairman, before you put the question for the whole Clause to stand part of the Bill, I would like to seek clarification on Clause 6(5) where it says: "A person holding a public office who wishes to be a candidate shall apply for leave of absence at least fourteen days before the nomination day or days."  What about other people who may not be holding public office but have some kind of public resources or resource of institutions that is at their disposal like NGOs staff.  We have -(Interruption)  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, but hon. Member, we have dealt with this issue and a public office has been interpreted, so the language used here should comply with the language in the constitution. 

(Question on Clause 6 as amended, agreed to)

Clause 7

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that in Clause 7(1) (J) be deleted.  The justification for this is that under Article 80 of the Constitution - disqualification is provided for. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Question on Clause 7 as amended, agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 8(10) to insert immediately after the word "shall" appearing in the last line the expression "after ascertaining the circumstance of such failure or refusal".  The justification for this is that the Commissions should be given the power to investigate the reasons for failure or refusal and report the findings to The Deputy Speaker. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(Question on Clause 8 as amended and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 9 put and agreed to).

Clause 10.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 10,1(a) of that Clause we substitute the word "require" for the word "need" appearing at the end of the paragraph.
 
(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in sub-clause 2 to add at the end of the Clause the expression: "in any case not later than 3 days before the polling day." This is to ensure that ballot papers get to the electoral districts in time.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 10 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 11.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I am abandoning the first proposed amendment, which was substituted for the word "any", and going to sub-clause 5. We substituted the word "five" for the word "sixty" appearing in the third line and the word "six months" for the word "two months" appearing in the last line. The justification is that the punishment provided is to harsh for minor offences like those stated under sub-clauses 1, 2 and 3.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that we substitute the word "ten" for the word "sixty" appearing in the fifth line for the same reasons. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 11 as amended, agreed to

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to move an amendment on Clause 12. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No, we are still on 11.

PROF. MWAKA: You are still on 11?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes.

PROF. MWAKA: Sorry.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 11 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 12.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 12 sub-clause (2) to insert the word "interest" immediately after the word, "special" appearing at the end of the first line and substitute the word "five" for the words "ten" and "three" appearing in paragraphs (a) and (b) respectively.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. WANDERA OGALO: I propose Mr. Chairman, that in sub-clause (3), we delete the words "otherwise" appearing at the beginning of the sub-clause (iv).  The word is redundant and obscures the meaning of the Clause.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR.WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, in Clause 12 (3), paragraph (c), I propose that we delete starting from the words "the national", appearing at the end of the third line, and substitute the following: "The District Youth Councils within the region of presentation constituted into an Electoral College in accordance with such regulations."   The justification is to ensure that the people intended to represent vote for the candidate.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. WANDERA OGALO: I propose in sub-clause (4), that we substitute the words "district of her choice" for the words "old district"; to substitute the expression district not represented under paragraph (a) for the expression "newly created district" at the end of the paragraph and to delete (c).  The justification is to give the discretion to a member referred (a) to represent the district of her choice.  This also renders paragraph (c) redundant.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, we are going to deal with that – but I said that let us finish with the amendment, then I will give you the opportunity.  Now, what do you mean by old district when a district exists and then you sub-divide it, which is an old district then?  But what is original?   You are creating two Districts, actually; they are all new, because now, you had Mpigi, the territory was well known.  Now, if you cut out Wakiso, how can you say there is an old District?  Any way, let us proceed. Now I put the question to his amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I bringing to you notice the amendment on Clause3 (iii) (d).  I rise to oppose the amendment for the following reasons; one is that and all Members of Parliament with disabilities were not consulted. 

Then, secondly, in the last parliamentary elections the National Union of Disabled person of Uganda (NUDIPU) was mandated to use its structure for electing Members of Parliament and Councillors with disabilities. 

In this amendment, there is no mention of a structure of NUDIPU or any other structure through which we can elect these delegates.  For example, if I go to the District, do I call all persons with disabilities in the District to elect their four delegates or I go to a particular structure. In the case of the youth they go to their Council members but persons with disabilities do not have their National Disability Council in place we have been using NUDIPU. I therefore, request that this issue be referred and people with disabilities be consulted to come with something practicable.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let us hear from the Minister please!

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Mr. Chairman, I happen to know that the hon. Baba is suspecting –(Interruption) 

MAJ.KAZOORA: Mr. Chairman, a while ago the hon. Kintu Musoke whispered into the Deputy Speaker's ear and we were seriously discussing a Bill. I do not know, Mr. Chairman, if that is in order. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kintu Musoke apparently saw a coachroach, which was coming to attack me, that is what he was doing. He was in order. He was protecting me.  Yes, now can we proceed?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, I was saying that hon. Baba is suspecting that this is an amendment and she is apposing it.  But there is no amendment on the floor.  So, if she really wants to oppose it, I suggest she waits for the final amendment to be put and speak to it. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think hon. Member you have heard. There is no amendment, which has been made on that issue.  Maybe people were proposing to make one, but they have not.   So, do not worry.

PROF. MWAKA NAKIBONEKA (Woman Representative, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I want to move an amendment on Clause 12 (3).  So Clause 12 is amended in subsection (3) by substituting paragraph (a) as follows:
(a) in the case of elections of District Women Representatives- 
(i) the election shall be by an electoral college comprising;
(b) All counsellors of parish and sub-county levels within the district
    (i) All members of parish and sub-county women-councils within the district and
    (ii) All members of the District Council in a manner prescribed by Regulation made by the Minister.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Speak to the motion please.

PROF. MWAKA NAKIBONEKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have moved this motion as a matter of principle, consistency, logic and not protectionism, personal experience, self-interest or emotions. We know that tradition dies hard, since we came in Parliament on Affirmative Action, have been elected once for only five years.  And we are saying for Affirmative Action to take root, you cannot make judgement on one term within only five years.  And if we change the term for women then we should also overhaul for persons with disability, the army, the youth and the workers.  

My question is, why only the women when we are all on Affirmative Action?  So it is a principle.  But it seems most of us here especially the women are basing on our decision on personal experience, because (a) and (b) happened to me, so I do not support it.  We are not here to support our own interests.  We are here to support the woman of Uganda.  For example, Makerere University instituted the 1.5 for women to be enrolled at the university.  It has stayed for a very long time and nobody has argued for it be taken away.
  
What I am saying is what I spoke at length yesterday about the overall review on Affirmative Action after ten years.  For those ladies who feel that now they have acquired the status, let them contest for the Constituency.  That is all.
  
There are many women who came here on Constituency.  But we are saying change must be after research.  But what research has been done to show that there is a problem with the Electoral College? We need research, to know the inferences of the advantages and disadvantages of this method of election before we can scrap it.  And when scrapped by the way, it is as if we are saying that we have gained the status, we are independent and one can easily come and say; "the women no longer need Affirmative Action."  But is it that the women of Uganda who wants to remove Affirmative Action at this material time?  So, that is my most important stand.

Then secondly, as I said yesterday we women are in charge of many constituencies and many sub-counties. And therefore equating the method of election with somebody on a very small geographical area multiplying it ten times and we are claiming that we have the same status, I think really we have to think twice and revisit what we are thinking.  

Then another issue is on the resources.  When we came here, the mileage we are given, and the facilitation was the same as the men.  There is nothing in the budget to say that women carry big load they should be given special assistance, no!  So we are saying the compensation for the large area is to reduce the electoral population so that the population will be equivalent to the Constituency.  For example one of the constituencies has a less population than the Electoral College, because the Electoral College is from LC II councillors. So to be honest let women in this Parliament be honest to themselves other than being selfish.  

What is there to dilute Affirmative Action our good Movement Government and the President has given us?  Dilute it and remove it because we want to look so big than the District Chairman does at local level.  We would be equivalent to the District Chairman, but we are in Parliament.  Which means the Woman Parliamentarians would be second to none in status.  Are we given that status as women of this Parliament to be at that level?

MRS. MUKWAYA:  Thank you very much hon. Mwaka for giving way.  Listening to your argument I want to move with you.  Yesterday I stated clearly that Affirmative Action will be evaluated after ten years and I think ten years from today is 2010.  From 1995 it would be 2005.  But I think what you are talking about here is the method of election. Yes.  It appears when you mix Affirmative Action with the method of election many people may not go with you.  So what I think we should clear is that let women be elected by the Electoral College other than adult suffrage.  I think that is what she wants.  Is that what you want?  

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much Madam Minister.  Actually when you read my motion it is clear that in the case of the election of district women representatives, the election shall be by Electoral College and the Bill says that the election shall be by universal adult suffrage.  And that is what I am arguing against. I am a researcher.  The method we use in a research can give you a completely different answer.  So we are saying if we use a wrong method we are trying to get a wrong answer and to set a wrong signal. 
 
The onlooker will imagine we want to go down to the grassroots and yet you want to come in by universal suffrage, and increase the burden of expense on the women. We are saying are all women in the countryside interested to gain from affirmative action? Are they able to go and canvass a vote from LC.1, in a big constituency, which is carrying 10, 6, 7 men doing the same job cumulatively?  That is my argument.  Therefore, the method will prescribe the answer.

Some ladies here - because we have been canvassing – I mean we have been lobbing – the issue of bribing is their issue.  That means the Electoral College can easily be bribed.  My question is when we came here; did you bribe yourself through?  How do you know that they bribe? if you did not bribe? Otherwise, you must have gone through that experience that they bribe and if they bribe - is that the only reason to throw away the baby with the birth water? Why do we not look at other reasons other than our experience?  How about the experience of those women who will be coming in to contest us? 

And I am saying bribing an Electoral College is not all that easy in a big district.  You can do it in these constituencies with two sub-counties but you go where they have 38, 44, 26,or 30 sub-counties it is really impossible and I said the number of voters in some constituencies is less than the Electoral College.  So if you say, we, women will bribe, that means even the men can do the bribing because the numbers are the same.  So where is the logic?

Mr. Chairman, during the last Elections 1996, they attached a schedule, this is from "Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute, the third Schedule" and that is where I derived it and the constitution of the Electoral College.  So it is not my own fabrication and I am appealing for God’s sake let us not throw away the baby with the birth water. Let us do the research and come out with a professional paper advocating for a change in the methodology and in the whole process.  Otherwise now it is premature.  Let us not hide our heads in the sand you agree that we are self-seekers, what happened to us is what we are using to change, with due respect.  That is my own opinion.  Otherwise if we all agree that affirmative action is still important then we should not go universal. -(Interjection)- I am not loosing temper.    I am just trying to  -(Interruption)- Mr. Chairman, can you protect me from hon. Karuhanga. (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think you are sufficiently covered.

PROF. MWAKA NAKIBONEKA: Mr. Chairman, I have not –(Interruption)

MRS. BYENKYA: I wanted to raise a point of order on the language of the hon. Member. Is she in order to raise that members are in for Electoral College as job seekers?

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, in any case I have not heard those who are against so that is anticipating.  I think there is no justification.  Please wind up.

PROF. MWAKA NAKIBONEKA: Mr. Chairman, I am winding up.  I just want to give – you see, we teachers when you reach a certain pick you emphasise so that the students understand what you are saying then you summarise and I am not saying that you are students but I am talking to an audience.  So if some of us – because I do not know who is supporting me and who is not supporting me. I appeal to all of us, in the spirit of the Movement System, in the spirit of affirmative action not to hurry. - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think the point has been made let us maintain the procedure we have been following.

PROF. MWAKA NAKIBONEKA: Thank you very much. Mr. Chairman, after all, we are advocating for the return of our President and we are not talking about the time factor and so forth.  Thank very much 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now I would like to hear the contrary view but before that the Minister wants to say something. -(Interjection)- Do you want?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: We in the government Sir support that position.  The position of hon. Prof. Mwaka Nakiboneka, we have considered it. -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, what you are saying you have no objection?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Exactly.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Can we hear the contrary views?

MS.KABASHARIRA (Woman Representative, Ntungamo) Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I stand to oppose the amendment and I will give the reasons.  First of all, I want to clear the issues she raised that, we should be consistent like the youth –or all the interest groups.  If we want to be consistent then let us go back and be voted by the council as it used to be.  We should not go because we changed. We used to be voted by the district council.  If you want to help women – actually if the government wants to help women with the affirmative action then the method of voting should be by a few people.  

I want to assure Members that I am talking with experience.  I have gone through the colleges and I got the highest mark, I think amongst all the women in this Parliament, but I know that I was working as if I was going to be voted by everyone.  Then I said why not be voted by each and everyone in the village?     All Members, who came to the House, know how people take us.  You are like government; produce a road, a school, and do a, b, c.  Members of Parliament, for example myself, we have done work for each and everyone.  So why should a few people vote me? Why not be voted by those people whom I have worked for or whom I have represented? -(Hear, hear)- 

If you are talking of affirmative action I am not going to stand with a man.  I am going to stand with a fellow woman.  So by all means it will be either 53 women here or 45 as it has been.  So that does not come. Mr. Chairman this thing did not come in the Bill by accident.  It is because we women talked to the Minister, talked to so many people that we went through a terrible experience; we want to be voted universally. In fact, I am surprised that the Minister is changing his position.  This is –(Interruption)

MR. TOSKIN: I Thank the Member for giving way.  I just want to get one clarification from the Members on the Floor.  When you say we went to the Minister, who are you? Did you include the women who are not in Parliament or it was only Members of women in Parliament?  I just want to get that clarification.

MS. KABASHARIRA: I did not even consult women only, I consulted even my Constituency Ntungamo District.  In fact am talking with confidence that, – I was there yesterday everyone was asking thinking that we have already made the Law.  They are asking me if we could allow all of them to vote for me, they will be very satisfied.  Why do we deny people their rights for voting us?  Why should we deny them?  They want to choose the leader that they want.  

What the government has done for us, is for us to stand alone as women.  If I do not come back, another woman will come back.  If it is self-seeking, then I think those people who are seeking for colleges must be the ones, who are more self-seekers.  Yes, because why should you be voted by a few people?  Everyone should vote us. I have heard from other circles that, if many people in the district vote us, how will you be rated to your colleagues in parliament? This is how it is– even now, as we are in parliament, we represent a big area than the small constituencies.  But there has been no difference! What is important is to have a good representation of women so that those women can also come up. 

So if people talk of funding, that will be very expensive. I want to tell you it is more expensive to look for votes from one person - in an area. Imagine you move in a parish but looking for votes and you must go to their homes, I am tired of being a hostage to a few people.  I want to go to an area and talk to everyone whom I have represented.  Even that person who is looking for votes should talk to the people whom she wants represent in Parliament. 

So I want members really to understand, it is we asking for it and even our colleagues must have seen it before because we have gone through those elections together with you.  So you know what we are talking about.  We are asking that if the government wants to assist us as women, let us be voted everyone in the constituency. She talked of manipulation that someone could buy them.  Did we buy voters when we were coming?  No we did not but may be we have seen that manipulation problem that is why we want this to be removed. 

By the way I want to assure you that, since our elections were characterised by commercialisation We should not imagine that these are few people and think that you have you thirty million and your voters are about say fifteen thousand, in some small districts you can just buy them.  People know today that giving you a vote you are going to fall into things. So they are saying you must give us something and we eat it before you go. They want money.  So it can be very easy for people to get a wrong representative because of money.  So why don't we leave people to decide for them? I thank you. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I think I should put a question? (Interjection)-

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs stood up and in a very brief word said,"the amendment is the government position”.  
Now, this Bill was published in 1998 by government.  This proposal which is in the Bill was not an amendment by the committee.  It was a government position and some of us took time to go to our constituencies with this Bill in 1999 and talk about it.  Now the Minister comes here and in a few minutes says this is the government position. He never said that before the committee.  I am just wondering whether just one night is enough to change the Minister’s mind?   I am really surprised for the Minister to stand up and say it is the government position after all these years!  -(Interjection)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Omara Atubo, I think you have said it. Currently we have the position as in the Bill but then there is a motion to amend that Bill.  Forget about what the Minister has said.  What we have is the text and there is a motion on the Floor to amend it.  So either you buy the motion or you do not.  So I was going to put the question but it seems there are still people who want to contribute.  What I am going to do is this, I will give two people for and against and then decide. 

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you Mr. Chairman. The formulation in sub-clause (3) says: 
"the following provisions are applied to District Women Representatives". I am seeking for clarification, which I think, is difficult to appreciate.  Does Women Representatives mean representatives of women or representatives who are women? 

It is important to clarify this because very often the representative who are women assume that they represent women interests only and when they go to their constituencies they are often calling women and addressing women issues only.  They are not special interest group.  They represent the entire district, male, female, youth and so on.   But this point has to be clarified otherwise these people are actually representing the interest of only of their people whom they represent in Parliament.  I thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, I think the District Woman is representing a district rather than women in the district.  And I think this is the agreed position.  I do not know.  

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs. Janat Mukwaya): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman. The concept why we should have interest groups in Parliament is the fact that women, youth, workers and people with disabilities are marginalised nationally when discussing national issues.  So in order to focus on these issues, we need those interest group to come to this House and look at the various laws that we make and how they impact them. 

There are women MPs equal to men MPs here but we want to uplift the women’s voice and concern with those who feel for them. – I will give you an example.  Suppose we are discussing the distribution of money on Cancer, a woman would be in position to give the statistics about breast-cancer patients than any other cancer. -(Laughter)-.  So if the Minister of Health is actually distributing resources for that illness, one should put in the Gender question for that particular division by statistics.  

But it is also important to note that it is a way of promoting women when they are represented because it encourages the girl-child to read heard and become the Vice President or Member of Parliament. But it is also important that it is capacity building.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think really to answer the point of clarification, which the Member raised, it is necessary to read Clause 78(1) of the Constitution: 
(1)"Parliament shall consist of- 
(a) Members directly elected to represent constituencies;
    (a) One Woman Representative for every district;
    (b) Such numbers of representatives of the army, youth, Workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine;"
Now, mark the difference from the following:"Such numbers of representatives of the Army, Youths, Workers, Persons with Disability and other groups as Parliament may determine;" – 
You see that the formulation in (b) and (c) are different.  For (c), these are representing the Army, Youths and Workers but in (b), one Woman representative for every district.  The representation of a woman is for a district as the Minister has said; she is representing you at the district.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I first of all want to thank you for allowing more time on this debate. It is very important; you can see how our females who are representing districts are extremely concerned about it.  I just wanted to highlight some few important matters, which you have also just highlighted.

Clause78 (a) says: “Parliament shall consist of Members directly elected to represent constituencies”; "One Woman Representative for every district".
The Constitution does not say, directly elected. It says, "One Woman Representative for every district."  Then Clause78 (4) says: “Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives referred to in Paragraph (b), and(c) of clause (1) of this article." 
This means that it is our duty to determine whether to promote one Women representative for every district, to directly elect representatives, or maintain the status quo. Now it is only the women who will be standing for this position at the district.  To that extent, the Constitution is to promote the disadvantaged groups into active politics at parliamentary level namely, the women and other disadvantaged groups.

The question now is. In the mind of Parliament, do you think that the women candidates and the voters have graduated to a level where they can send a woman to Parliament in more democratic way, which is directly elected by universal adult suffrage?  Or, do you think that we should still use colleges as before?  To answer this question and to be fair you must study the report of the previous elections, the weaknesses associated with that system and how we have developed our democracy.

Remember some of us who are here were elected first time through an Electoral College.  In 1989, people lining behind my back elected me in Nyabushozi but that was not everybody in Nyabushozi.  It was elected officials who constituted an Electoral College and I was elected on the basis of Electoral College. That system had a lot of weaknesses. We improved on it in the NRC and in the process we have become universally accepted and Members of the Commonwealth Parliamentary family. Now although we maintain the Movement system, is it going to be easy for a voter to find the MP for the Constituent and the District whom she or he will favour and vote? Is it easier for them to be elected by this group of people?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Karuhanga, do you think the problem is with the voters or the problem is with the candidates?  I think the candidates are going to find it – a problem because the voters will not be able to identify a favourable candidate for the district and the constituency. It is women candidates who will find it difficult to campaign throughout the district.  So, do not talk and think about voters because as far as the voters are concerned, they will be given definitely two ballots – one for the women and the other one is for the general.  So, I think their case is that they will not be able to traverse a district to campaign.

MR. KARUHANGA: The point that I was raising is that their interests must be addressed.  You cannot just simply look at the interest of the candidates only; you must look at the interests of democracy and the voter.  This is as far as I am concerned, -(Interruption)

MS. KABASHARIRA: Thank you, hon. Karuhanga for giving way and thank you, hon. Chairman.  I want to inform hon. Karuhanga that our voters have gone far in as far as democracy is concerned.  In the last elections of Local Council they voted the Chairman of the district and the Councillors for the districts on the same day. So, they will do it. (Applause)

MR. KARUHANGA: In fact I am grateful for that information, because I was going to say that Women Councillors at the districts were voted on the same day as the District Chairman and the Councillors. I would like to be informed, if there was a direct election for the Women Councillors or it was by electoral polling at the district?  -(Interjection)- my Colleague from Mukono has informed me it was by direct universal adult suffrage at the district.   If that was the case as I am informed by my Neighbour, then it would look a bit ridiculous if we just simply ignore.  My own pain Mr. Chairman, is that we are coming to debate on this when the special interested group have not sat down as Colleagues to debate it and give us a reason, - (Interruption)- now it is our duty - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Yes hon. Minister.

THE Minister of Gender, Labour & Social Development (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): I want to inform the whole House and hon. Karuhanga, that the National Women Council organised three meetings. If I remember the women MPs discussed this very subject and in my judgement, it was fifty for adult suffrage, and fifty for the Electoral College. 
 
In the Ministry, we thought now that we are going to have a constitution review commission, we should send this matter to the committee for the reasons; One, some districts are becoming smaller and smaller, for example Yumbe and Kayunga, while other districts like Mbarara and Mukono are bigger. So, we should submit our requests to have smaller constituencies within a district, rather than a woman representative traversing the whole district? So that is a substantive proposal, which we can put to Government, in order to rationalise the surface area of that woman.  - But now, if we come here and fail to agree then the women may decide, If I am not quoting them wrongly let the house help us resolve this matter which is very unfortunate (Interruption) 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman let me complete this - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Do you think you need more time?

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman we must decide this.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.  Proceed but wind up please.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, in this Parliament and the C.A, Ugandans were ready to empower women and bring them in the realms of democracy. And this House has that view and the mandate to decide what should be done.  What is very important now, is to discuss the interests and the problems that woman candidate face at the district. When you think about the campaigns at the district, especially for the large districts like my district, it is a nightmare.  However, I - (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Can we join it with facilitation of the women candidates? You see the problem is traversing the districts without any assistance. Can we then consider this particular provision and also make provision to facilitate them? I mean that could be a remedy. 

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, what I know is that I have been taking a lot of interest in my district about the woman candidate and it is a pity that our MP hon. Matembe is not in the House.  The Colleagues from my district will have to understand that my colleagues there have taken interest in knowing which woman is going to represent them in the Parliament. We have gone out of our way to give these ladies a lot of support, but it is a mammoth task for the ladies to overcome financial constraints and other constraints expected.  But be as it may, it is a problem we can not address otherwise.  I think the Electoral Commission in the first place should review and see what type of assistance it can give to some of these candidates  - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: No we put it in the law

MR. KARUHANGA: Yes we may not - (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Let him wind.  Please wind up.

MR. KARUHANGA: My view is come the year 2005, Parliament will be obligated to review this representative of special interest groups ten years from 1995. Secondly, as the hon. Minister says, there is a review supposed to take place - (Interruption) - however my view is that the interests of democracy must be paramount and I think the woman should be elected by universal adult suffrage.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karuhanga, please switch off.

MRS. ZZIWA (Woman Representative, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman, and I want to thank the House for becoming very supportive on this very issue. I want to say that, l support the amendment presented by hon. Prof. Mwaka. I had the privilege to be in the Constituent Assembly and when we were in the Constituent Assembly we looked at many scenarios. For instance we looked at the representation in Parliament or maybe I should quote the situation of the presidency; there was the condition of looking at both the presidential system and the parliamentary system or the Westminster system as it is at times quoted. It was decided that since Uganda is still young in its democracy and lacks resources, we might not be able to have two houses of legislations. It was in that very vain that when we were talking about electing a President, we thought about electing a President who should not have a runner's up as the vice president. 

In the same circumstances when we were considering the elections of the women Members of Parliament, it was suggested that the best system would be to put them at the same level as the Senators are elected.  It was opted as a more viable alternative, to be able to appear in the House and at the same time get adequate amount of representation from the district. I know many people have accepted that the geographical area is really very huge.  Others have argued that even if it is with the Electoral College you will have to reach every area.  But there I think I have had the opportunity, when you are meeting the Electoral College you meet a cross section of people whom you have the opportunity to discuss with issues. This can be cheaper to reach in terms of resources - even if it means to transport them, it is cheaper than transporting the whole village or otherwise. I have 940 LC1 and 100 LC IIs, which are parishes.  It is easier for me to work with these people than looking for votes among us the 500,000 voters in Kampala district.  

Secondly I want to say that as we are arguing on the right now, the aspect of saying that a woman elected in the electoral college may not be legitimate as one elected by adult suffrage! It is not really a viable argument basing on the fact that the senators in America are not elected by adult suffrage. It is only the representatives in the House of Commons, who are elected by the adult suffrage and these senators have the legitimacy. -(Interruption) 

DR. NKUUHE: I would like to give information, to the speaker holding the Floor and I thank her for giving way. The senators in each state has got two senators, they are all elected at the same time but whoever is due for election is elected by adult suffrage. 

MRS. ZZIWA: I will take the education. I think I will not go into -(Interruption)

MR. WAMBEDE: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much. The issue is between a woman and a district representative.  She represents everybody including me.  Now, is it in order for hon. Zziwa to suggest methods of voting that defrenchises people of 18 years and above?  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Zziwa is in order because she is saying, those people forming the Electoral College will be expressing your views. So they will be indirectly representing you.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Chairman, the guidance I am seeking from you is that not so long ago hon. Maj. Kazoora attempted to move a motion of amendment.  That motion of amendment was running into a wall, a very legal wall raised by a constitutional wall, the then chairman of the constitutional Assembly and now National Political Commissar and Members of Parliament for Mbale municipality. 
 Now, Mr. Chairman, the point I want is this, if the article 78 (1) Says: 
"Parliament shall consists of- 
(a) Members directly elected to represent constituencies; 
(b)One woman representative for every district; 
(c)Such Members of representatives of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine"  
Those are special interest places.  What I want from you is a very simple argument.  What I am saying is that are woman representatives to be treated in the same manner, as directly elected Members of Parliament without amending this constitution?

THE DEPUTTY SPEAKER: No, you see hon. Member, the constitution was silent about that but at the same time it left the duty of deciding the method of electing these people to this House.  So, this House may decide indirect election and there will be no contradiction.

COL. KAHINDA OTAFIIRE: I seek guidance Mr. Chairman.  This constitution provides equal treatment of men and women.  If you say that women shall represent districts and not men representing districts.  Are we not introducing a new –(Interjections)- so if it is affirmative action it should be affirmative action No, no, no.  If we are going to have affirmative action, and then it had better be affirmative action by those sections of the population -(Interjections)- protect me, Mr. Chairman, from this hon. Members of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, there is a point of order.

MS. KABAKUMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Is it in order for a hon. Member of Parliament to come to this House dressed like a cow boy- from Ruhinda?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think the Chair has already ruled on the manner of dressing by hon. Member you are referring to and we said because of his association I think that is the dress and therefore it is okay -(Laughter). 

COL. KAHINDA:  Mr. Chairman, thank you.  Nevertheless, --(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you are saying this provision will create discrimination.  But fortunately this discrimination is in the constitution. So there is no way you will say a provision that is in the constitution is unconstitutional.  It might be a bad provision but there it is, it is there.  

MR. KINTU MUSOKE: Mr. Chairman, I want a clarification!  The constitution talks about people who will be elected by constituencies to form this Parliament.  May I know what is a constituency?   In my simple English that is an area represented by a Member in Parliament. I am sure if a woman is representing a district that is her constituency.  So how do you differentiate between the constituency, which is mentioned in the constitution, and a constituency that is represented by a woman?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, it is agreed that a constituency in a way has a representative. But the constitution itself did not describe it in the same way as it did in the first one, so there is a difference.  The difference is that, as far as the category of a constituency is concerned a representative must be directly elected.  It has been left open for you to decide indirect or direct and that is what we are trying to do now.

COL. KAHINDA: I still seek guidance, Mr. Chairman,-(Interjections)-  it is the duty of the Speaker to rule me out of order. When this discrimination was decided on, we were targeting the spirit of the constitution, a certain section of the society and that section of the society is predominantly women.  So when we are determining the method of election of the woman representative, I think the vote for the woman representative should be weighed more in order to give the women better representation. That is the spirit of the constitution.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now let us hear from hon. Zziwa and then we proceed on the matter, because really we are repeating ourselves.  

MS ZZIWA: Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.  I wanted to add on the arguments of affirmative action, which basically has led to the prescription of the method to be used.  First and foremost, it is known world wide that women are under resourced.  They are not as resourced or they are not as rich as the men.  It is documented, it is known. It is also known that the women are less experienced particularly in public affairs.  It is documented that anybody who has any argument should go to the department of women studies and really look at that.  

Our societies particularly those in the less developed countries, like Uganda are still dominated by a culture of man-domination where by –(Interruptions)- Mr. Chairman, protect me.  In most cases the men feel that they should decide or they should give direction or opinion to every issue in an area.  In fact in that particular respect you find that the women candidates will have to append themselves to male candidates in order to get support of being elected and yet the spirit of the constitution –(Interruptions)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please, listen to her contribution.

MS ZZIWA: The spirit of the movement at the moment is still individual merit.  I hate a situation where I have to go and append myself to another candidate who may decide to take on me or reject me in favour of another woman candidate.  I want to present my manifesto, my ability and capability and be elected on that basis. The directly elected Members sub-divide the constituency with over one hundred and forty thousand people we evens went ahead to sub-divide it.  What would be the justification to make the woman MP go to 500,000 voters?  So I feel that that arrangement does not fit.   The best-prescribed method would be that the representatives of the people at LC 1 and LC 11 would be the very ones to represent them in electing their candidates.
  
Let me finish maybe by supporting what the hon. Minister said.  When we sat as woman Members of Parliament, I do not remember whether we had the opportunity to be invited to the committee.  We did not have the opportunity.  But individually we had the opportunity to talk to the chairperson and we expressed our views.  But we had the opportunity to meet in the Members lounge upstairs and we ably put our case across.  Any woman Member of Parliament who feels like going to adult suffrage can join the constituency. 

I want also to draw the experience of some of the NRC Members who felt that they had become strong, and had the resources. In that House when they left, they decided to go and contest with the men and most of them lost in the CA.  They did not return to Parliament.  I want them to bear that testimony on this Floor.  If they want let them bring some of the reasons why they lost and then we can be able to compare.  So I wish to leave the Floor by appealing to the House that they should leave the status quo as it has been by going with the amendment by hon. Prof. Mwaka.  Thank you.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.  The motion by hon. Member for Luwero and Nakasongola is that we delete the provision in the bill and put a provision to the effect that the election shall be by electoral college and by persons she has mentioned in her contribution.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to)

(Clause 12 as amended, agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in clause 13, sub-clause 3 –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Please sit down! We go to clause 13. 

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in clause 13, (3) to substitute the expression "9 O clock in the morning and 5 O clock in the evening" for the expression "10 O clock in the forenoon to 4 O clock in the afternoon."  This is to give more time for nominations to take place. I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13 as amended agreed to.

Clause 14. 

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in clause 14 (1), to insert between the words "voters and tendering’appearing in the second line and the words "appearing in person", in sub-clause (2)- to substitute "one hundred" for ten appearing in the second line.  

MR BAKU: Mr. Chairman, yesterday when I made my contribution I opposed the recommendation by the committee that the fee payable should be raised from ten currency points to 100, and I would like to repeat my opposition to this amendment.  First of all there is no justification –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Now, what is your position?

MR BAKU: I thought we are talking about clause 14.  I want the figure, which is proposed by the Minister in the Bill. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay now we have an amendment, so we start with an amendment.

MR. BAKU:  Yes, I am against the amendment. You see what I am saying is that the committee has not given any justification for this particular proposal.  In sub-clause (2) they said "substitute 100 for ten" which appears in the second line.  There is no justification, no explanation and, it is inconsistent with some of the comments the committee made earlier in the report that you do not need money to show how serious you are in contesting elections.  

Secondly, I have noted that in our Constitution under the directive principles of state policy we are promoting democracy. And – on page 2 of the Constitution under democratic principles, sub-clause (11) it says: "All the people of Uganda shall have access to leadership positions at all levels, subject to the Constitution" 
This Constitution has given us guidelines on what qualifications is required for a person to be elected as a Member of Parliament. 
 Under Clause 80 2(d) it is provided that: "A person is not qualified for election as a Member of Parliament if that person has been adjudged or otherwise declared bankrupt under any law in force in Uganda and has not been discharged".  
This is the proper qualification which I would like our Parliament to focus on, if we are not adjudged bankrupt – or even if we are adjudged bankrupt, we can be discharged from that bankrupt by the Constitution, and qualify to contest as a Member of Parliament. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But hon. Member, I think, you are repeating exactly the submission you made yesterday.  I think you wind up and we pronounce ourselves on the matter. 

MR. BAKU: Okay, I think this is a very important limitation, because if we prescribe beyond this, we shall be introducing something, which is extraneous to the limitation within the Constitution.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Just to clarify on that, I think, even section 103 for Presidential Elections there is no requirement for nomination fee, but the House went ahead and put it!

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment by the committee. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14 as amended agreed to.

Clause 15

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 15 (1), the same is substituted as follows:  "A nomination paper shall be signed by persons who are qualified voters in the constituency, and if any person who is not a qualified voter signs the same, the nomination paper shall be invalid."

The justification is that a person who is not a voter should not participate in the nomination of a candidate and it is incumbent upon the candidate to ascertain this fact. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause15 (2) is substituted as follows:  "A returning officer shall refuse to accept any nomination paper - 
(a) by reason of an  an alleged ineligibility of the candidate sought to be nominated, unless the ground made for the ineligibility appears on the nomination paper;or  
b) Solely an account of any minor variation between the name of any person as it appears on nomination paper and as it appears on the voters'role, if the returning officer is reasonably satisfied that the variation is due to an error; or 
(c) On account of any other imperfection in the nomination paper if the returning officer is satisfied that there has been substantial compliance with this Act" 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15 as amended agreed to.

Clause 16.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose a new addition – leave out 16.1 and come to 16.2 add a new paragraph (e) as follows:  "If the person has not complied with the provisions of section 6."
 
(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16 as amended agreed to.

Clause 17 agreed to.

Clause 18 agreed to

Clause19.

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that clause 19(1)(b) substitute the expression “within seven days from the date of rejection and the Commission” for the word “which” appearing in the second line of the paragraph. And add at the end of the paragraph the following expression: “within seven days from the receipt of the complaint.” The justification for this is that a time frame within which to lodge and make a decision on a complaint should be given to enable the affected candidate participate if his or her paper has been wrongly rejected.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 19 as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 19 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 19 as amended agreed to.

Clause 20 agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

Clause 22.

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 22, the following sub-clauses be deleted: (2), (3), (4), (6), (7), (8), (9), (11), (12), (14), (15), (18) and (19).  The justification is that each candidate should organise his or her own meeting.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the marginal note be substituted to "campaign programmes" and substitute the expression "campaign meetings” for the expression “candidates’ meetings” wherever it occurs.   The Justification consequential from above.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause 5 is substituted as follows:“Each candidate shall give his or her campaign programme to the Returning Officer and the Returning Officer shall ensure that campaign meetings by different candidates do not coincide in one parish.”  This is to ensure that campaign meetings do not coincide as to cause instability.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause 13 is substituted as follows: 
“Campaign meetings shall not commence until the expiry of nomination days.”  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (16) and (17), we substitute the expression “campaign meetings” for the expression “candidates’ meetings.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment. 

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22 as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 22 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22 as amended agreed to.

Clause 23 agreed to.

Clause 24 agreed to.

Clause 25.

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman. I propose that we insert a new sub-clause (2) as follows: “Notwithstanding sub-section (1), the use of any political party, colour or symbol or political party affiliations may be used as a basis for a person’s candidature for election or support during a period when a multiparty political system is in operation.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25 as amended
.
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 25 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25 as amended agreed to.

Clause 26.

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that we substitute the word “thirty” for the word “sixty” appearing in the second line from the bottom of the clause and substitute the word “one” for the word “two” appearing in the beginning of the last line of the clause.  This is because the punishment provided for is too harsh.  I beg to move.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26 as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 26 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 26 as amended agreed to.

Clause 27.

MR WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause (1), insert the words "or public" between the words "Government and resources” appearing at the end of the second line.  The justification is that other public resources should not be used either.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in sub-clause 3, we substitute the words "shall by” for the words "may in" appearing in the second line.  This is to make it mandatory to avoid abuse.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose in sub-clause (4) that the same be substituted as follows: "(4) this section applies with the necessary modifications to an employee of a statutory corporation or company in which the Government owns a controlling interest and a member of a Commission or a Committee established by the Constitution as it applies to a public officer.”  The justification, Mr. Chairman, is that all persons having access to Government or public resources should be covered.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27 as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 27 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 27 as amended agreed to.

Clause 28 agreed to.

Clause 29.

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose in clause 29 that we substitute the word "any" for the word "the" appearing at the beginning of paragraph (c).  This is just for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29 as amended.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that clause 29 as amended stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 29 as amended agreed to.

Clause 30 agreed to.

Clause 31 agreed to.

Clause 32. 

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, I propose that in clause 32 (5)(b)(i) insert the words "or in the picture” after the word “picture” appearing in the third line and substitute the word "mark" for the word "tick". This is to cater for the intention of the voter and also making sure that by marking in the picture, it does not render the ballot paper invalid.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: But, hon. Chairperson, you are using a tick or a thumb mark.  How about a person – because you see when you are given a ballot, it is clean, there is no mark but a voter, maybe because he uses a ‘cross’ against a candidate of his or her choice, would that become invalid?

MR. WANDERA: No, Mr. Chairman, that is why I said that we substitute the word "tick"and use the word "mark."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I see.  So, I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Is it clear?  So, it is no longer a tick but a mark!  Clarify.

MR. WANDERA: Mr. Chairman, clause 32(5)(b)(i), (b) reads: “Subject to sub-section (7) at every polling station there shall be positioned- 
(b)a second table positioned at least fifteen metres from the first with an inkpad, two pens, each pen being attached to a table with a string measuring about one metre in length, where every voter shall- 
(i) fix a tick with a pen or mark with a thumb print in the space provided in the box against the picture of the candidate of his or her choice."  So, the position we are moving to is first to remove this "fix a tick" and use "fix a mark" so that if it is not a tick you do not render that vote invalid.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The ballot itself is clean, so if you cross the name are you not really signifying that it is the person you want or if you put a cross are you going to be told; Oh! You did not make a tick therefore your vote is not valid?   Suppose it is an old man, maybe he cannot make it a tick but he has crossed out now what do you do to that ballot vote?

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: I do not know, because you see, normally we are going to confuse the returning officer and the other people.  You see, we know you do not want those things but now you are saying put everything there to provide some marks, so I think it is going to be a bit confusing.

MR. MWANDHA:  Mr. Chairman, I think I am glad this matter is coming up, because some people will put a cross instead of a tick in a box. When the Minister says they put a cross, it means they do not like that person. Are you saying that he does not like that person but he likes these others?  I think the intention of the voter will be very clear once a mark is put in the box of the person of his choice and I think we better clarify this otherwise we have lost a lot of votes because of this matter.

MR. WAPAKABULO:  I would urge that we amend it to say "fix a mark with a pen or with a thumb print". I know in 1994, at a polling station army people came to vote for me and they chose to put the mark on the head. The returning officer declared the votes invalid, we had to go to court to seek an order that they were actually valid.  And if we insist on a tick we may get into problems like this lady in Britain who hated communism so much, that she went and crossed the communist.  But in Britain when you cross actually you are voting for the person, so she was telling people at home I made sure I crossed that communist and then some one said actually you voted for him and she fainted.  So, what I am saying is let us simply say; a mark with a pen or with a thumb prints so that it is flexible. Some people may cross other may tick others may use a thumb

MRS.KABAKUMBA MASIKO: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we should be very specific if we say any mark including a cross, it may be tricky. I hope the cross will be left out because as the hon. Wapakabulo has said, some people may vote him by putting across. It is okay for me but may not be okay for my opponent. It may even work the other way round by the way like it is in my constituency, many people do not like my opponent so if they put a cross on my opponent in effect they are voting for him and I may end up losing.  So, I would like to appeal to the Chairman of the Committee and the Chairperson of this House that we exclude a cross in the marks and indicate our people. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: The issue is this, when you are given that ballot paper, you are not supposed to mark it, you are not supposed to say I approve him by tick or I disapprove him, it is only one mark.  So, whether you use X or a tick what is the problem? The voters will be told that on the paper you only tick one name, so if really he crosses using a pen, putting a tick or he puts a cross what is the problem?

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: The problem is, Mr. Chairman, that that one mark which is a cross may go on my opponent’s face in effect they will be voting for my opponent when actually they are my supporters.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: If the cross can go on your opponent even a tick can go.

MRS. KABAKUMBA MASIKO: No, Mr. Chairman, a cross means some detest, we do not like you so let me just cross, but if you want me you will put a tick but we only want one sign which should really be a tick. 

MR. TOSKIN:  Mr. Chairman, mine is a worry about the people we are dealing with, our constituents are mainly with people who are not educated over time we have been teaching people to learn how to vote. I am worried about the message the people may get if we are going to say just put a mark, the message may not be understood. These are people whom we have just trained to do one thing and they have done it over time. Why do you not allow them to continue the way they have been doing because they have already learnt it?  This will enable us get the electorate which is conversant with what to do. It has been the general thing if you change now you may cause a lot of confusion and the message being sent will completely fail the electoral process.

MRS. BABA DIRI: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I support the idea of a tick and the thumb because if we decide to put signs somebody can just put a small dot there or a signature or something, which cannot be identified. It is better to have something very clear that you can see rather than any sign because you are likely to mislead the electorate. 
I also have a suggestion, which I do not know if the House will buy; all of us have thumbs except some disabled people who do not have maybe, the thumb. I am sure there is a provision for any part of the body to be dipped with the ink so that you can sign, I hope that provision is there.  But otherwise I was suggesting that to have a universal sign we could use the thumb so that it can be used for finger print in case of any argument.  So, that is my suggestion if you like it, thank you.

MR ACHILE MANOAH: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I have no problem with the signs, the tick, the cross and the thumb print, but the problem is with the Colleague who spoke before me. Traditionally it is known that a cross is rejecting something so that may cause a problem. Why do we not go by tick and thumb print?  

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, you see, we are addressing what has been going on but we are not looking at the votes which have been counted as spoilt, yet the person has intended to vote for someone.  We are not looking at the cross alone but also the mark.  It can be a tick, a cross, or any mark so that the intention of the voter is ascertained.  This is really to protect votes being invalidated when actually the person has come, there are four photographs and he has put a cross in one of the box. What is that person actually saying?

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 32 as amended put and agreed to).

Clause 33.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in sub-clause 2 to substitute the word "shall" for the word "may" appearing at the end of the second line.  The justification being that the inspection should be mandatory.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-clause (30) be deleted because attempting to vote twice is an offence.

MR.MAYANJA NKANGI: I am not very comfortable Sir, with the justification because when I refuse to show my hands for inspection that does not mean that l have voted twice.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay.  You have abandoned it?

MR. OGALO:  I will abandon it.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 34 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 35 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 36 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 37 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 38 put and agreed to)

(Question on Clause 39 put and agreed to)
Clause 40

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose to insert at the end of the Clause the following: "Provided that any area provided for voting for members of Uganda Peoples Defence Forces shall be outside any barracks."  The justification being that voting in barracks makes it difficult for civilians agents to monitor the exercise because the barracks is a restricted area.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Question on Clause 40 as amended put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 41 put and agreed to).

Clause 42.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, if I request that this Clause be stood over, I do not seem to -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, stood over.

(Question on Clause 43 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 44 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 45 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 46 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 47 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 48 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 49 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 50 put and agreed to).

Clause 51

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose to add at the end of Clause 51(2) the following words:"and candidates agents".  The justification is to ensure transparency -(Interruption)

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 51 as amended put and agreed to).

(Question on clause 52 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 53 put and agreed to).

(Question on clause 54 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 55 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 56 put and agreed to).

Clause 57

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 57(1(b) to substitute the word "twenty" appearing at the end of the paragraph with the word "fifty", twenty votes being too few.  I beg to move. 

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, to me, the possibility of error in the counting is much more likely when the margin is narrow.  Hence justifying the recount than when the margin is wide as many votes as 50.  So, I think we should keep 20 for a need to recount than making it 50.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on clause 57 as amended and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 58 put and agreed to).

(Question on clause 59 put and agreed to)

Clause 60.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 60 to delete the word "reasonable" appearing towards the end of the second line.  The justification, Mr. Chairman, is that whether the cause is reasonable or unreasonable, it should be acted upon.  The cause of the Interruption does not matter.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 60 as amended put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 61 put and agreed to).

Clause 62.

MR. OGALO:  I propose, Mr. Chairman, that in Clause 62(2) at the end of the sub-section to add the following: "and submit it to the Minister who shall in turn present it before Parliament."  The justification is that the public should know the report.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 62 as amended put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 63 put and agreed to)

(Question on Clause 64 put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 65 put and agreed to).

Clause 66.

MR. OGALO:  Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 66(8) to substitute the expression: "the Director of Public Prosecutions considered to be relevant and appropriate" appearing at the end of the sub-section with expression "the court may consider relevant and appropriate for the Director of Public Prosecution". This is what we did in the presidential elections, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 66 as amended agreed to.

Clause 67.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: I propose, Mr. Chairman, that in Clause 67 we substitute the word "ninety" appearing at the end of the 6th line with the word "twenty" and substitute the word "years" appearing at the end of the 7th line with the word "months". This is to provide for punishment as provided for in the Presidential Elections Act for similar offences.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 67 as amended agreed to.

Clause 68, agreed to.

Clause 69, agreed to.

Clause 70, agreed to.

Clause 71, agreed to.

Clause 72, agreed to.

Clause 73, agreed to
.
Clause 74, agreed to.

Clause 75.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 75 to substitute the punishment therein with "twenty currency points or imprisonment not exceeding six months or both" as we did in the Presidential elections.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 75 as amended agreed to.

Clause 76.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose Clause 76 to substitute the punishment as in Clause75 for the same reason.  

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 76, as amended agreed to.

Clause 77.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 77 sub-clause (1) to substitute the expression "candidates meeting" appearing in the first line with the expression "campaign meeting" It is consequential.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment. 
 
(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Mr. Chairman, I propose that sub-section (iii) and (iv) be deleted.  Again, this is consequential.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, here, we are talking about some one who has been chased off in an area where his campaign is taking place.  Does it matter to have, two candidates or more candidates meeting or a single candidate’s meeting?  I think we still apply to single candidate’s meeting.  Then what do you want to be deleted?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, clause 77 refers to candidates meetings, unless the Minister is suggesting that we change it to campaign meetings.  Otherwise, that is the very reason why we had the consequential amendment and then removed (3) and (4) because they will not be candidates meetings. 

MR.  WAPAKABULO: Can I get clarification?  I think even Clause 2 the chairperson of a meeting where this section applies, is keeping Clause (2). What I was thinking is that is that the Electoral Commission would tell the police programme. So how do we bring in the authorities to ensure that meetings are protected?  I think that is what should be done.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman that is valid, but once we have done away with that concept, then the question of a chairperson of a meeting does not arise.  What possibly the member for Municipality would assist is to make a inform the relevant authorities, -(Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: So, you are deleting it?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Yes, Mr. Chairman.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question that 77 (ii) be deleted.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the original amendment.

Clause 77 as amended, agreed.

Clause 78, agreed to.

Clause 79, agreed to.

Clause 80, agreed to.

Clause 81, agreed to.

Clause 82, agreed to.

Clause 83, agreed to.

Clause 84, agreed to.

Clause 85, agreed to.

Clause 86, agreed to.

Clause 87.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose to substitute the word "thirty" for the word sixty appearing in the third line and the word "one" for the word "two" appearing in the forth line.   Mr. Chairman, the prescribed sentence is harsh and- (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question those in favour of the amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 87 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 88.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 88 we insert a new sub-clause as follows:"(3) If no consent is obtained under sub-section (1) within three months from the date of arrest or charge, the person charged shall be discharged. "The justification is that there is need to put a time limit on these offences which are of a political nature.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 88 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 89, agreed to.

Clause 90, agreed to.

Clause 91, agreed to.

Clause 92, agreed to.

Clause 93.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that 93 (2) be deleted because the Minister will be undoing what Parliament has done.

MR. MAYANJA NKANGI: Sir, again the reason here is a bit not clear, – you see, he is saying, first of all, let me read 93 (2): "The Minister may, by Statutory Instrument, declare that the provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to anything specified in the instrument." Now, the chairman is saying he does not want this because he will be acting against parliamentary decision.  What I am saying is that Parliament knows about 93(1) but also wants 93(2). In other words, Parliament is allowing in advance certain action to be taken.  So there is no question of saying, the Minister will be going against Parliament.  The Parliament itself is authorising the Minister to behave in a certain way.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, reading 93(1) Parliament would have prescribed what would happen for example if something happens on a public holiday or on a Saturday.  It has said it goes on a next day. That is what Parliament is saying by passing 93(1). Now 93(2) is saying actually, after Parliament has said that the thing will fall on the next day after a public holiday, the Minister may actually vary that.  That is my reading of this.  So, you will actually be changing what Parliament has passed in (1). 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 93 as amended agreed to.

Clause 94 agreed to.

Clause 95.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in 95 to delete the word "a" appearing between the words “he comes and vacant” appearing in the third line just for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 95 as amended agreed to.

Clause 96.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman I propose in Clause 96(1) the last main Clause including sub paragraph (1) and (2) to be substituted as follows: “The seat of that Member shall not become vacant until the expiry of the time within an appeal may be lodged. And where an appeal is lodged until the appeal is fully disposed off or withdrawn.”

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 96 as amended agreed to.

Clause 97.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose in Clause 97 to delete the word (b) appearing in the fifth line maybe just for clarity.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 97 as amended agreed to.

Clause 98 agreed to.

Clause 99 agreed to.

Clause 100 agreed to.

Clause 101.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman I propose in Clause 101 (2) to substitute paragraph (3) as follows:“(e) providing for the procedure for obtaining two thirds for recalling the Member of Parliament under Article 84 of the Constitution;  
(ii) Sub clause (3) substitute the word "thirty" for the words "hundred and fifty" appearing in the fourth line and "one year" for "five.”  
The justification being that regulation is made under the Act. They should not impose sentences higher than those provided in the Act.  In any case offences in the regulations are minor in nature. 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 101 as amended agreed to.

Clause 102 agreed to.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Well, there is a Clause, which we stood over, what happened?

MR. WANDERA OGALO: It was Mr. Chairman, Clause 42. I have cross checked and found that this was eventually deleted when we were considering the Presidential Elections Bill.  So it is just for that same reason that we are –(Interruption).

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. MWANDHA:  Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I wish to move an amendment to Clause 12(3)(c). This amendment was to be moved by hon. Kaggwa, but he asked me to move it on his behalf.  It reads as follows: delete Clause 12(3)(c) and substitute as follows: "3(c)(1) “the representatives of persons with disabilities shall be elected by representative of the districts within the region of representation constituted into an electoral college in a manner prescribed by the Minister under section 101 of this Bill." 
”(2) The representative of women with disabilities shall be elected by an Electoral College of representatives of such persons from each district in a manner prescribed by the Minister under section 101 of this Bill.”  Mr. Chairman –(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Excuse me. I have here one problem. We had already pronounced ourselves on that Clause 12 as amended.  But honestly you have an amendment and you want to re-open a debate in consideration of that particular provision.  According to our rules there will be a Report to the House and then before we proceed to the Third Reading, this particular provision will be re-committed and we shall consider it and if it is allowed, then we shall come back and deal with the subject.  Now, we move to the Schedule.  No, in the same way if you have something it must be related with this. I think we follow the procedure, we shall deal with that later.

First Schedule agreed to.

The Second Schedule.

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the Second Schedule substitute form (e) as follows: "I … being appointed to exercise the function of an election officer, swear in the name of the Almighty God affirm that I will discharge my duties as election officer to the best of my abilities without fear or favour. Dated this day… and then signed…."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

First Schedule agreed to.

The Second schedule

MR. WANDERA OGALO: Mr. Chairman, I propose that the Second Schedule substitute form (e) as follow: "I… being appointed to exercise the function of an Election Officer swear in the name of the Almighty God affirm that I will discharge my duties as Election Officer to the best of my abilities without fear or favour dated this day….and name signed."

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. WANDERA OGALO: I have just one matter on the past page, Form ID, delete the expression: "or work in gainful employment" appearing in the brackets of Item 3.  The justification being that this was deleted when we passed the Electoral Commission amendment Act.
 
THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN: Okay, I put the question to the proposed amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Second Schedule agreed to.

The Title agreed to

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the House does resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Deputy Speaker presiding)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF JUSTICE AND CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Mayanja Nkangi) Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Committee of the whole House considered the Bill entitled "The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998." and passed it with several amendments.

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, hon. Members, since the motion will be moved to the House, and obviously, as I look now I do not have the necessary quorum for the House to make any decision, I think this is a convenient time to adjourn the House. But before I do so maybe, I want to get your views; can we meet in the morning so that we dispose of this matter – (Interjection)- Okay, the House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow. Thank you.

(The House rose at 7.00 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 25 January 2001 tomorrow)









 

   










  

