Thursday, 21st January, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala

P R A Y E R S

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oath was administered to:


Mr. George William Kisembo Amooti Mureju.

BILLS

SECOND READING

TRADE UNION LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL, 1992.

MINISTER FOR LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Ateker Ejalu): Mr. Chairman, I stand to move that the Trade Union Laws (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill, 1992 be read the Second Time. Allow me, being the first speaker after this ceremony, to congratulate George William Kisembo and also to congratulate the Member who was sworn in yesterday, hon. Omutte.  I think it is testimony that democracy in the NRM system is really working.  Mr. Chairman, turning to the Bill in front of us.  This Bill looks simple, it is short but it is significant.  One thing I would like to ask straight away is that, why so many Amendments about the Unions? After we have gone through comprehensive legislation dealing with women and the youth, Members might be wondering, is there any comprehensive legislation dealing with the Trade Union Movement? Because, since we are organising every sector, you would want to know, is there really a law governing that sector? In this regard, I would like to refer Members to the Trade Union Decree, 1976.  This is the comprehensive law.  These Amendments in front of us are intended to achieve limited but far reaching consequences.  The first thing is to implement the decision of this House, the enabling law for this legislation before you is this one here - Legal Notice No.1 of 1986, Amendment Statute of 1989, when this hon. House decided to expand its composition.  Since it was a Constitutional Amendment, in this, there is Article 1 Sub-section (k) where you decide to include three Workers’ representatives elected by an organised workers’ Organisation representing all workers in Uganda. So, really this is to implement a decision already made by this House.  Secondly, it is also to implement a decision of the founders of NRM, to restore democracy in this country. 

There are certain areas of legislation, which took democratic rights from sectors of workers in this country.  So, this legislation is also an implementation of the Ten Point Programme. Perhaps, less obviously, the legislation before you also narrows the gap created in colonial days according to the class structure. In the colonial days, a worker is supposed to be poorly paid, he is supposed to be wearing an overall, and he is supposed to be the one to be organised. But the so-called white-collar workers were not supposed to be workers; they were out of the Trade Union legislation.  However, in our system today, in fact the trend of world is towards democracy from top to bottom.  So, why has it taken long for us to bring this legislation since the Legal Notice No.1 Amendment? First of all we have to consult very widely indeed. In order to bring all workers together or as near as possible, into the umbrella of this legislation, we have to consult the Ministries of Public Service and Cabinet Affairs, as it was then known; Education, and Finance; Solicitor General’s Office; the NRM Secretariat; the Uganda Civil Servants’ Association; The Public Service Commission; Makerere University; and The Institute of Teachers’ Education, to give broadcast representation of views on the subject.  We formed a task force and this task force went through all the legislation and came up with a minimum list of those who should be excluded from joining the unions. I would refer you to the Bill in Section four.  Section four, page two, outlines the Officials or Officers who are considered. 

The second reason why there was a delay in bringing the Bill here is, as you know, there is a National Organisation of Trade Unions (NOTU).  This is the umbrella Organisation of all Union Movements here and to it are affiliated 15 other Unions.  Now, NOTU is doing a commendable job, I think.  However, through the 15 members, the total membership of workers left out significant categories of other workers.  For example, the entire Union membership, affiliated to NOTU, comes to about 52,900 people.  But this left out a big group of organised workers; about 244,100 workers consisting of civil servants and teachers who, by and large form the biggest single group of workers in the country, but are not unionised due to legal restrictions.  As you can see, that is about four times the present membership of the workers.  So, if you were to rush and say that it is already organised, they should be the electing body, we would have locked out of the exercise a significant number of workers in this country.  Also, in the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation, of which Uganda is a very dedicated partner, it is clearly stated that ‘universal and lasting peace can be established only if it is based upon social justice.’ Therefore, we had also to consult with ILO to know that what we are trying to do was consistent with International standards.  As such, the intended Amendments, I will go through them one by one with you, are as follows; The first one is on Trade Union Decree No.20 of 1976 Section 72(b), which exclude employees of the Bank of Uganda from joining a Trade Union.  The government has been under constant pressure from the International Labour Organisation to explain why the Bank of Uganda employees were excluded form joining any Trade Union.  Quite frankly, we did not have a convincing answer.  Now, if I may refer you to Section 2 of the Amendment Bill. This one seeks now to admit the workers of the Bank of Uganda into being unionised.  So, that is the first Amendment.  
The second Amendment I am proposing is to the Public Service Act 18 of 1969.  This Act restricts civil servants and teachers from joining trade unions.  

So, the impact of the Amendment is actually to admit civil servants and teachers to join trade unions; and that one, you can refer to Section 5 on page three - that is where the effective provision for the Amendment is.  The next one is to amend the Public Service Negotiating Machinery Act, Chapter 278.  Under this one, civil servants and teachers on permanent and pensionable terms are barred from joining trade unions.  This law has its origin from Article 18(2) of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda which spells out instances when a law maybe passed to curtail freedom of association.  You may wish to refer to this Constitution because this is the same Section which we discussed when we were trying to curtail the activities of political parties and the Amendment there is in Section 7 for ease of reference.  

The next one is the Electoral Law. Section 18 of the National Assembly Elections Act, which disqualifies a candidate who holds or is acting in a public office.  So, we are also removing this one as referred to in Section 6 of the Bill, so that a Public Officer can be unionised.  

But before going very far, I want us to go back to page two, and look at the list of those still excluded from being union members.  They range from Permanent Secretary, Heads of Department and so on.  You can see that list; then from the Bank of Uganda on page three; then other officers on the same page three because it is important for hon. Members to know who is being excluded in case there are some objections here and there which we can discuss.  

Hon. Members, it should also be appreciated that democracy does not end at representation on a National Forum like this one.  The workers should also be included in the decision affecting them and in as far as their terms and conditions of work are concerned.  What Uganda is doing today in extending these democratic rights to the affected groups is not abnormal.  It is being practised in some of our neighbouring countries such as United Republic of Tanzania.  In Zambia, the level of unionisation in the civil service extends up to Under Secretary.  I am sure Members are mindful of the provisions of Article 104 of the Constitution of Uganda.  This Article provides that the Executive appointing body is His Excellency the President and that a Public Officer serves an Appointment, and is dismissed at the pleasure of the President.  

So, in order not to leave that unexplained, while it is clear that Appointment of a Public Officer is by the President of the Republic of Uganda or through a delegated authority, it is not the President himself who sets out their terms and conditions of service.  

In order to clear every doubt, I consulted the Attorney General - he is not here - and he conceded that our usual application is correct, and by amending this law, the way we are proposing, we are not violating that part of the Constitution.  I think it is only fair to read to the Members what the office of the Attorney General sent up.  Section 104 is an enabling section to the President to appoint and dismiss arbitrarily.  However, should he do it outside the laws, then the Trade Unions’ Act is coming in as redemption or as a protection for members of trade unions so that their rights are as stipulated in their terms and conditions of service.  Therefore, the Trade Unions’ Bill is coming in as a check and balance of the Executive powers provided under Article 104. 

So, in case some Members thought that we are violating the Article, the Attorney General has cleared that -(Interruption)

DR. MATEKE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I am happy to learn that the President does not dismiss Public Servants arbitrarily, but recently, just last year, a number of Senior Servants were arbitrarily dismissed; I think they were 100 of them and up to now we do not know the reasons surrounding their dismissal.

MR. ATEKER: Can I correct the wrong impression the hon. Member is giving?

THE CHAIRMAN: Right.

MR. ATEKER: Mr. Chairman, the hon. Member is not accurate in giving that information.  I happened to have been a member of the Cabinet Committee which discussed the matter which you are referring to.  The civil servants who were either retired or dismissed, it was after the Public Accounts Committee reports were processed through this House.  They were processed by the Cabinet Committee chaired by hon. Kanyeihamba.  They were digested before the President could perform his Constitutional duty; the entire government machinery had been involved in vetting and counter-checking the cases against them.  So, it was not arbitrary at all.  

Now, Mr. Chairman, the question may also arise as to what kind of negotiating machinery will be in place?  Now that the civil servants, teachers and workers of the Bank of Uganda are going to be unionised.  This is a question of them working out machinery together with government, and that is not very difficult.  It is an implementation measure, which the Bill spells out.  What it proposes should be regarded as management in the context of a trade union and that is the Section I told you that from now on, if the hon. House passes it, that is the sector which should be regarded as management in the context of government.  Anybody else outside that sector will be unionised or, if he chooses to be unionised, it is not a force. But there are also categories of people wooed by their scale of pay and conditions of service qualifying for unionisation. But because of the nature of the work they are doing, they are also excluded. For example, Industrial Relations Officers.  I mean, the Industrial Relations Officer is a conciliator between the workers and management.  Now, if he is unionised also, then who will conciliate if he is involved in disputes? 

I would also like to inform Members that since 1976, Uganda has adopted industrially based unions and has had relatively harmonious relations. What I mean by ‘industrially based’ is that workers working in a textile mill should be regarded as an industry as opposed to a craft based organisation.  If you take a craft organisation, you could find yourself that in the same factory you need a boilers’ union for the man working around the boiler; then indeed maybe a tailors’ union for somebody who is tailoring there; then you will need a sweepers’ union, and in the same institution you will have a myriad of unions that you would need to spend every minute of the year doing negotiations on them.  So, the industrial basis has shown us quite good results.  I also wish to inform hon. Members that we as a Ministry are reviewing all labour laws and we have got a multi-sectoral and Inter-Ministerial Committee reviewing these laws, and quite soon, we shall be bringing these laws to the House for consideration. But we felt that we must bring this as quickly as possible in order to realise the objectives set by this very House.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question proposed).

MR. NYAKATURA W. (Bunyangabo County, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I rise to support the Bill.  I think the Bill has been long overdue.  The reason being that the workers have been so far denied their rights and freedom of association, rights of expression, rights to negotiate the price for their labour and the right to be consulted on matters of policy affecting their welfare.  They have also been denied the right to live a decent life and the right to be represented.  Accordingly, those people who had been denied these rights have suffered for a long time, labouring without being rewarded in a corresponding manner for the services rendered. Instead, most of the time, they have been castigated for being corrupt, for being lazy and for being embezzlers.  You know, the abuse that has been unleashed at them, but without realising that in fact they have not been receiving the right attention that they expect.  No due consideration for the hardships they have been undergoing.  So, I believe that this Bill will now confer on these people their rights to be able to also argue their cases in the right form, to be represented and to be able to negotiate the prices for the services they are rendering.  

Some time back, I think many people were scared that if these people joined trade unions, they were going all the time to be unreasonable, keep striking and perhaps disobey the authorities.  This is not necessarily the case, particularly when trade unions get more and more enlightened.  In fact, we should praise our trade unions today and particularly NOTU, which launched a scheme for workers’ education, the purpose of which was not only to educate them in the manner of negotiating their terms, but also in the manner of co-operating with the employers, so that industrial relations are improve, and I think for our economy to be able to take off.  We need these relationships to be streamlined so that we do not have strikes unnecessarily, or slow-downs, but efficient at work.  So that the employer reciprocates the inputs of the worker and the worker appreciates the payment for his contribution.  

Therefore, I feel that the aim of this Bill is not only to be of advantage to the worker, but also to be of advantage to our economy in as far as improving industrial relations and productivity are concerned. However, I am not satisfied with the manner in which the Ministry of Labour has delayed the amendment of some laws, particularly those that affect the welfare of the workers.  I am particularly concerned about the Workman’s Compensation.  For years now, this has been promised; at every Labour Day, government promises the workers that it will review this law so that the compensation paid is commensurate to the loss sustained by the worker. At the moment, I think the maximum compensation is only shs.20, 000/= even if the worker died.  That is the compensation today and I think this is criminal -(Interjection)- I will take it, Mr. Chairman.	

REV. ONGORA TWAI: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member that this compensation was not criminal at the time he was the Deputy Minister of Labour. (Laughter)

MR. NYAKATURA: Mr. Chairman, I very much thank the hon. Member for his observation but I must say that it is now three years since I left the Ministry and I wish he had taken trouble to find out how enthusiastically I was trying to get these laws out. (Laughter)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, order.

MR. NYAKATURA: Mr. Chairman, however, I am now in a different position, representing the work force existing in Bunyangabo County and Uganda as a whole, and my previous position does not deter me from talking about whatever is wrong.

I believe that in the same spirit of introducing this Bill, these other laws will be amended so as to benefit the worker and appreciate the contribution the worker has made so far with a lot of difficulties, and I believe that more observance of required amendments shall be made in appreciating the views of the workers with regard to remunerating them for the work they are providing.  

I also hope that the inclusion of these other types of employees will give them an opportunity to be covered by the National Social Security Fund.  Social security for a worker has also been inadequate in this country to the extent that people retire and actually go almost to the dogs because they fail to get a reasonable living.  In other countries, for instance, in Zambia, even the President is covered by the National Social Security Fund. But here, so far, only those who are unionised are being covered by the fund which does not even offer much although recently they reviewed it with the two zeros that were added onto the amount one was supposed to get.  I, personally, was claiming about Shs.7, 000, but I forgot it because it was reduced to Shs.70 and I did not have to claim it. But even with the reinstatement of the two zeros the amount continues to be too small. However, I am glad that if this Bill is put into practice, more of these categories of workers who have been included in this Bill will be covered by the Social Security Fund.  I am sure they will benefit more because I am glad to have observed that the National Social Security Fund these days is investing the money and I think they have now a capacity to generate a lot of money out of the savings.  So this will help our people, our workers, when they retire, to have something to live on.

I beg to support the Motion.  My main concern was to indicate particularly the delay in bringing up amendments to these laws, whereby even those who will be included in the unionised group will benefit adequately. Otherwise they would remain without any benefit.  Thank you very much.  

MR. BWANIKA BBALE (Katikamu County, Luwero): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, to for giving me this opportunity to contribute on this Amendment Bill. 

I would like to support the Bill.  I would like to thank the Minister for bringing this Bill to the House, although somehow very late, because our workers have been waiting to join us here and there was no reason why arrangements were not made to bring them.   I think this Bill as soon as it goes through we shall see our colleagues joining us in the House.

	I am happy with the Bill because it covers a big number of employees including the civil servants.  I am very happy about the civil servants because they are now included, and because I am a product of civil service and the civil servant has very little to bargain in way of remuneration, for the days of leave.  So, in fact, he is almost condemned to a very pathetic situation.  If they now form an association, I think there will be a very good machinery to negotiate the terms, and the idea of blaming the civil servants for not performing, being corrupt, and being labelled in so many ways, I think will be neutralised in the association.  There will now be able to discuss with the employer their situation and may be with a view of improving them.

I am not happy with some of the trade unionists who have misbehaved.  Quite a number of them have misbehaved; we know the incidence in the National Insurance Corporation where they locked up the management. But I think that is not the best way of handling trade union matters.  There should be a provision whereby they should sit with the management, with the employers and negotiate amicably.  I am aware that there is the Industrial Court, but the Industrial Court is under resource and on several occasions, the President of the Industrial Court has been heard saying that he cannot conduct the court because there is no money.  Therefore, the employer or the employee’s guaranteed is not his security and cannot have anywhere to negotiate properly.

I think this is also the opportunity for us to remind the Minister about the African Labour College which was closed sometime back, and the buildings have been given to the Law Development Centre. Now that we are expanding the group which is going to be covered, I think there will be need for training and I, therefore, appeal to the Minister not to spare any moment in getting the African Labour College restored.  The buildings are there and it is a matter of telling the LDC to move elsewhere, or to go somewhere else.

NOTU has been assisting a number of trade unionists a lot, and I am very happy with their operations. However, their funds have been provided by well wishers and other countries and NGOs, and I would like to thank these NGOs which have assisted, because they have been trying to improve upon the quality of leaders in trade unions.  In fact, the negotiating machinery and approach have been improved.  

I would like to inform the House that some NGOs do not want their employees to join trade unions.  I think this is not proper.  I would like the Minister to look at the laws and see whether they can also cover the employees of these NGOs. Some of them are employing so many people, but once they hear that somebody is negotiating a step to form a trade union that person is instantly dismissed. Therefore, the Minister should look at the law and see whether he can include this.

I would like now to turn to the Schedule in the Act and this is on Page 3 of the Amendment Bill, paragraph (3).  Other officers and employees, whether or not in the Public Service and holding the offices of Personnel Officers, Labour Officers, Industrial Relations Officers and Chiefs are there.  Who are these chiefs? Are they county chiefs, parish chiefs, or miluka chiefs?  I think the Minister should clearly define what ‘chief’ he is actually referring to because a Permanent Secretary is also a civil servant but he is removed.  

So, may be the county chief may not be allowed to become a trade unionist because his level in the hierarchy of chiefs is as Permanent Secretary of the chiefs.  So, I think the Minister should clarify this one because I would like to see the chiefs well defined in this Bill. Another category is the title of Personal Assistants and Secretaries to Ministers.  As far as I know, there is no established office for Personal Assistants.  These people are only assigned and these are labels, which are given to these people who have been assigned.  There is nowhere in the structure where somebody is appointed as Personal Assistant.  In fact, the Minister can select anybody to be his Personal Assistant or he can request and somebody can be assigned.  So, this inclusion of Personal Assistants and Secretaries to Ministers, I think is irrelevant but may not actually rhyme very well in the law because they do not exist.

I would like to thank you very much and to say that I support the Bill.  Thank you very much.

DR. YEKO KISSA (Kween County, Kapchorwa): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. While I agree with some of the objectives of the Amendment Bill I, however, find it very difficult to support it on one aspect.  Well, as the Minister has said, that one of the objectives of this Bill is to represent workers in the NRC, when the time comes for these workers to contest for these NRC seats, be they teachers, health workers, agriculturalists, or any other worker working in a parastatal, if he so succeeds, you will recall that sometime early last year, this present NRC under Legal Notice No. 1986 Amendment No.1/1992, we did pass a law which prevents public officers from holding two or more public offices where they earn a salary.  So, of course, in NRC we earn a salary and in the Public Service they also earn a salary.  So, the public officer or that worker must opt for one of the two.  Well, I was one of those who were affected by that law and I had to opt for one. Therefore, if that worker succeeds and comes to the NRC he will also be forced to resign one of the two, either the NRC or the workers’ seat and if he so retains the NRC seat, then when he is elected as an NRC Member, he will represent the workers. That will mean he will automatically no longer be representing those workers because he has opted to be an NRC Member.  So, no true worker or a public officer will ever represent the workers in this Parliament or in this NRC unless the law is re-amended because it will either mean you are a worker who is not working or you are a worker who is not earning a salary from where you have been working before.  So, I find it very difficult, unless I am convinced, to support this Bill on this issue and in summary, unless those laws we passed are re-amended, there is no representative of the workers who will be in the NRC, because he is supposed to have resigned the former office he was working.  With those remarks, Mr. Chairman, I end there. (Laughter)

MR. RWABIITA (Ibanda County, Mbarara): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  I do agree with the Amendment of this Trade Union Law, but I have observed in Section 8, where they say that “Section 4, 5, 7, 8, 16 and 18, of the Public Service (Negotiating Machinery) Act are amended by replacing all references to ‘group employees’ with ‘public officers’. 

My question is what benefit are we getting from this change of terminology? I am concerned about the plight of the group employees in our administration.  As you know, these are the people who are supporting the ministries and other government organs. We have office messengers, tea girls, drivers, guards, and typists, but the way they are treated as secondary in the administration system and as such, they do not have anywhere to fall, where they can put their demands because they do not fall under the public service terms of employment and they are there subject to hire and fire at any time, and when you come to giving them services or remuneration, they are considered as second rate. I have this experience and I find that this group needs to be protected, it needs to be protected so that they are also recognised for their contribution  to the performance of any Ministry or any government institution.

When you talk of civil servants getting their remuneration, and their terms of employment like leave, allowances and what have you, when there is little money, this money goes to the people who have been employed by the public service and these group employees are forgotten.  Yet, how can you run an office without an office messenger or a typist? So, that is why I say that the Minister of Labour and the trade unions should look for ways of putting some laws to protect this group of our employees.

Another issue I want to talk about concerning the workers is the need to effect laws or reinforce those which are already there concerning protection of workers in industries, to give them safeguards such as protective gear and those who work in chemical industries should be given masks because chemical fumes and reactions have affected many people for long. Even the workers at the farms - you find that a farmer has got a dip, a ranch, and a dairy farm, but these workers go with the acaricide, and mix it with their bare hands, and when washing their feet. One day may not affect them, but over time, these people are liable to be affected by the chemical changes in their body. However, as the situation stands now the owner of the farm, or the owner of the factory, just looks on as long as he gets what he wants.  So, definitely, the Minister of Labour and the trade union leaders should protect their workers by insisting on the minimal safe gadgets and requirements for the workers in these industries. As you know, today we have got the AIDS scourge. Yet, in some of the hospitals and dispensaries, our midwives do not have protective gloves.  It is true they use their bare hands to deliver kids.  Now, what is the danger there? This good-hearted lady will work day and night, but over a period she may get a problem out of this negligence of our government bodies and institutions.

I am saying that we must enforce the minimum standards required to safeguard the lives of our workers.

hon. Nyakatura talked about the Workman’s Compensation and I want to stress on the Social Security Fund. With the increase in inflation in our economy, the money that a worker would have got ten or twenty years back, and as a saving in his social security fund, has been eaten away by inflation.  Something must be done to review the rates of this Social Security Fund that are kept with the National Social Security Fund because it is unfair to write a cheque for a man from Moyo, Kotido or Kisoro of Shs.900/= to come and collect it from Kampala yet he will need Shs.20, 000 to come to Kampala.  This makes no sense at all.  

So, unless the rates are increased, many ex-workers have given up on this money and one even wonders where it has gone. With that, I would propose that since a lot of these small cheques are not being collected, let this money be invested in the National Social Security Fund building below the National Insurance Corporation because if this building is built, it will realise some income so that after sometime, the management of NSSF can sit down and look at the list of the ex-workers and give them some remuneration from this investment. I know the National Social Security Fund has done some investment by purchasing houses in Ntinda, but I think this is not enough and I think the money could be utilised in putting up that building - I think it is supposed to be, is it fourteen storeys or one I do not remember very well - that building I think will be a must for the workers and they will be proud of having a building in Kampala despite having failed to get the shs.100 or shs.900.  Mr. Chairman, with this I support the Amendment.

MRS. MPANGA J. (Women Representative, Mubende: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I was afraid my name was being taken away by a man. (Laughter)

We welcome this Bill because, at long last civil servants and teachers are now included among the workers who can form a union.  The teachers and civil servants I have talked to do support this move. (Hear, hear) Because unions would enable civil servants and teachers to be mobilised and organised and this will improve their efficiency, and it will also help us to curb corruption because the unions will exercise self-discipline and self-criticism on its members.  The unions too will help them to become part of a category that is going to be considered as special to be represented in NRC.  It would enable teachers and the civil servants to negotiate collectively for better terms or for sale of their own labour.  They will be able to collectively negotiate the conditions of their work which they could not do very well before.  We also hope that it will facilitate better working relationship with the managers.  

I have had the chance to talk to leaders in the Civil Servants Association and to those in the Uganda Teachers Association and, although they do not oppose this Bill, they have quite a number of reservations and, I would like to air them to the Minister through you.  The details that appear, they think, are intended or calculated to divide a unified teaching service or a unified civil service, and they think it is not going to be to their advantage - why?  Because when you look at Section 4(1) (b), it excludes Divisions and Section Heads, but Divisions and Section Heads are junior officers within the salary of U7 and U5 with no power whatsoever, to hire or fire anybody.  Besides, they do not sit on the senior management committees within the ministries.  All that they do are just additional and supervisory roles, supervising their own colleagues.  When you go to Section 4 (c), (d) and (e), on Head Teachers, Directors Principals and their Deputies, these are leaders with their own equals and with mere supervisory roles. They have no power whatsoever to hire or fire, and denying them a right to join the unions would isolate them from their colleagues and, therefore, it will adversely hurt the day to day running of the institutions they lead because they will be isolated as employers, which they are not.  These people are employed through the Teaching Service Commission or through the Public Service Commission, and when you go up-country, you normally find that the Head Teachers and Directors are the people who give professional guidance to the rest of the professions.  The officers in salary scale U.1 who are appointed, promoted, disciplined or removed from their positions by H.E. the President from the Service as in Legal Notice No.2 which the Minister referred to. All the other officers below that scale are dealt with by the Public Service Commission or Teaching Service Commission and they are not managers.  They help in management in that they supervise, but they are not really managers.  In the same vein, if you take the Personnel Officers in the lower scales, although they supervise other people, they are also workers who would like to benefit from the union, and apart from the Principal Labour Officers and Principal Industrial Relations Officers, all the others below have no full powers of arbitration in the Industrial Court.  

In concert with the Trade Union Laws, that is Amendment Bill No., there is the Public Service Negotiating Machinery and in that Chapter 278, it provided for mandatory negotiating machinery for public officers, while the trade unions in the public sector negotiate under the Trade Unions Decree No.20 of 1976.  They use their own collective agreement with the employer, which the other two services cannot.  By the Public Service Negotiating Machinery, Chapter 278 and Act No.24 of 1968, public officers are not allowed either to appeal to the Industrial Court for independent, impartial arbitration or to resort to industrial action, that is strike.  Therefore, the civil servants and teachers strongly feel and recommend that all workers organisations should be governed by the same Trade Unions Decree No. 20 of 1976.  This is so because they will also be able, if they become a union, they should be able to take advantage of taking recourse to an independent tribunal or to strike and withdraw their services if their employer does not listen. 

What we are appealing for - we are not against becoming a trade union as teachers, I say ‘I’ because I am also their trustee, I am still a trustee to UTA; we are not opposed to being a trade union, but we are opposed to being a trade union without taking full advantage of what the Trade Union Laws give to all workers and, secondly, we are also opposed to dividing our profession in such a way that we shall act as independent sects to the extent that those who are only supervisors, who if the supervisory role is removed tomorrow, will go back to classroom teaching or they will go back and work as clerical workers elsewhere. They will be denied the right to become full members of the union and, therefore, you are taking out the best because when you are choosing a supervisor you chose the best to become a supervisor.  In other words, you are saying whoever is good should not belong to the trade union of teachers or to the civil servants union.  We would like to have a unified civil service and a unified teaching service.  Thank you very much.

MR. KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County, Bundibugyo): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for giving me this opportunity, I want to support the Bill but I will first give a few comments about it.  

First of all, I would like to thank the hon. Minister of Labour and Social Affairs for at long last tabling this Bill, which we have waited for, for long.  It is unfortunate that it is coming in and with it, if passed, we shall soon be having representatives of workers in this House. Unfortunately, they will be coming in as we almost walk out.  So, they will stay here for a very short time although they have been awaited in this Chamber for very many years.

Sometime last week, someone here said that she was happy that someone was able to hatch the eggs that she had laid, and I am also being persuaded to almost say the same thing, that I am happy that the work in which I made quite a lot of input has at long last come to this hon. House, and I congratulate you hon. Minister.

It is also unfortunate that this Bill comes here; and at one time we shall be having representatives of workers in this House. It is unfortunate because the umbrella organisation of workers, NOTU, is at the moment torn between wrangles.  Almost every other day in the newspapers we read NOTU members fighting amongst themselves for leadership.  Those who were elected are fighting against those who were removed or voted out, and some of us have got the impression that the leadership of NOTU does not respect democracy because if people have been elected into office duly by a legal and well established membership of that body, then I do not see how some other members who have been voted out stand up to challenge and say it was not fair.  

So, the Minister may have a lot of work to do before these workers’ representatives come here. It is also unfortunate that we are giving more weight to NOTU now by allowing civil servants and teachers to join the trade unions at this time when NOTU itself is not so well organised in leadership -(Interjection)

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that when workers or a body of people get institutions imposed on them, the tendency is that those wrangles that you are talking about will be there.  If the workers had voluntarily set up their own institution and it was not established in the law as NOTU is, we would have a different situation. 

MR. KARUSOKE: I do not know whether that information really holds much. Mr. Chairman, I am a bit disturbed and I sent a note to the hon. Minister here, but I did not get a reply, to the fact that there is what is known as the Bank of Uganda Act No.5 of 1966, which bars the staff of the Bank of Uganda from joining a trade union, and among the list of legislatures to be amended here, this piece of legislation does not appear and if it is left unamended, I wonder how the staff of the Bank of Uganda are going to be free to join the trade unions.  So, I do not know whether it was an omission or it is me who is wrong, but I would like to attract the attention of the Minister to this omission.

The Amendments Bill is mainly aimed at enabling as many workers as possible to join the trade union, and to become free members of the Workers’ Organisation. But at the same time, it is the intention of these amendments that workers elect their representatives to this House.  Unfortunately, when I read through all this I did not see any provision in these amendments where an electoral college will be in place, through which the workers will elect their own representatives to the National Resistance Council.  So, I do not know whether we are going to have another piece of legislation providing the Electoral College for the workers to get their representatives into the NRC, but as far as these amendments are concerned this is missing.

Looking at the Sections, Section - the Schedule rather - Schedule one, (1) (b) or (c), School Headmasters and Deputy Headmasters are not free to join trade unions but, a law is a law and it can always be exploited if it is left with some loopholes.  When we say school headmasters and we do not include school headmistresses, the law may be exploited.  I would like to suggest, therefore, that instead of calling them school headmasters and school headmistresses, we just call them heads of schools and deputy heads of schools so that it covers both.

Again in Schedule One (2) after (c), General Manager of the Bank of Uganda - you have the Governor, then the Deputy Governor and then the General Manager and Heads of Departments.  I wonder whether the Secretary to the Bank of Uganda is a Head of Department or is above these departments. He may not be provided for in this hierarchy.  So, I would like to suggest that the Secretary to the Bank of Uganda be provided for here because he is above the Heads of Departments.

One other thing that someone touched was the issue of chiefs.  These local chiefs down in the villages, right from the county to the sub-parish, I would not like to argue that these become unionised because right down in the village, although we have the RC system, government is represented by a sub-parish chief in a village - that is a government worker, and in any case, if a worker and an employer are disputing, this chief will come in to arbitrate.  So, if you are going to ask him to unionise, then we shall have no government representative down at the grassroots.  So, he represents government at that level and he is, therefore, government and we should not allow him to unionise much as we are not able to allow policemen, soldiers and others to unionise because tomorrow if their salaries delay they are going to get whips and begin whipping us.  So, chiefs should also not be allowed to unionise because of those reasons. 

One hon. Member touched on something to do with a Labour College. I am one of those who hold the school of thought that we should leave workers free rather than couponing them by creating pieces of legislation. If you want them to produce, and to produce willingly and maximally, you should give them as much freedom as possible to interact, to discuss and to negotiate with their masters and employers.  At the same time, I am one of those convinced that if workers are going to understand and realise their role in society and in the economy, we must give them as many facilities as possible, for education and for information.  This can only be possible if we have a Labour College.  Uganda is one of those very unique countries where a Labour College is totally absent.  We are moving in to grant freedom for unionisation, but we are not taking precautions.  These people are going to come in with all sorts of ideas.  Some of these ideas are going to be very ambitious; they are expecting too much; they are going to hit against walls and we need to give them education; to give them the incite and this must be done periodically and systematically.  

So, I strongly advocate for an establishment of a Labour College in Uganda.  I differ a bit from the other Member, who said that the Labour College buildings are there and they can be returned to the Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare.  To the best of my knowledge, when the Obote I regime suspended Trade Unionism in Uganda in 1968, the regime went ahead and closed the Labour College.  That Labour College was closed and after it had been closed, the Trade Union of that day was compensated.  Government paid money, I do not know how much, to the trade union of the day, so that the buildings now seized belong to the trade union and it became a government property, and then government decided to accommodate there the Law Development Centre.  So, we cannot go back to claim these buildings when government paid for them. All we can agitate for now is for government to provide other facilities for a Labour College, but not that one. 

Finally, I would like to say that these laws are very difficult in enforcing.  Much as we may blame the Minister and Ministry of Labour for delaying to bring up this legislation, the problem mainly does not lie with the ministry; it lies with the machinery.  One is that after proposals like these ones have been made, they are not supposed to be brought here before they go to the Office of the Solicitor General.  The Office of the Solicitor General, has a lot of problems.  We are told whenever we do this, that there is only the Parliamentary Counsel who has no staff, and he does all the work alone, and he does the work according to his own priority.  

So, things delay there and this is one of the reasons why the workers are getting their representatives here as we are almost walking home for fresh elections.  I would like, therefore, to suggest to government that in order to facilitate the process of legislation, as quickly and as expeditiously as possible, the Office of the Solicitor General be equipped with able and adequate staff so that work can run as per schedule.  I support the Bill, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE (Rukiga County, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill and I wish to make one or two observations not on this Bill. I wish to congratulate the government of NRM for recognising that labour is a commodity saleable in the market, and people have a right to negotiate for the commodity they are selling, and that the greatest number of employees in this country were being employed without being allowed to negotiate for their own labour.  Labour is a vital commodity and it is a very crucial commodity for the development of a country, and I am sure and hope that the workers so leased will be able to negotiate with it efficiently and effectively, but without disruption.  Mr. Chairman, I wish to make an observation to find out why, when we are looking at negotiations, we should distinguish workers from management, and I think anybody who is not part of management should be part of the workers and should be allowed to negotiate - it is in principle.  I, therefore, find it difficult to understand why a Personal Assistant to the Minister or a Secretary is not allowed to negotiate.  Why?  Because  -(Interruption.)

MR. KARUSOKE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information that the reason why Personal Secretaries to Ministers and Personal Assistants are not supposed to unionise, is because they have accessibility to all confidential information in that Office and if they were allowed to belong to the other side of the workers, they would be tempted to sympathise with their fellow workers to divulge a lot of secrets to the other side.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I appreciate that information but it has left out something else.  One, a Personal Secretary is not a designation; it is not something that is designated to him/her, she can be a Personal Secretary to the Minister today and a Personal Secretary to the Permanent Secretary tomorrow. Will she be changing from union to Union?  That is one. Two, who has more confidential information?  The Secretary to the Permanent Secretary or the Secretary to the Minister of both?  So, how do you distinguish when one has access to confidential information?  I think we should not hide behind this word ‘confidential,’ Mr. Chairman.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Point of information.  In fact, the lower grade officers like Group Employees who carry the files have also access to information of similar nature.  They take the files - some of them marked ‘Secret’ and they are being allowed to join the trade unions.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you hon. Kanyomozi for that information because actually the Filing Clerk has more access to confidential information than the Minister does himself. (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, I therefore, do not see the actual logic of excluding these secretaries from being unionised.  I also do not seem to see very well the reason why head teachers should be left out.  I want to appreciate that they are heads of schools and I also want to say that I was once a teacher; the headmaster is not an employer.  He does not employ.  The teachers are employees of the Ministry.  He is also part of the employees of the Ministry.  He does not even have the powers to dismiss or to hire unless it is a private school. (Interruption)

MR. KARUSOKE: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that although the headmaster does not hire and fire teachers, he has group employees in the school - drivers, grass-cutters, cooks and other workers whom he hires and fires.

MRS. J. MPANGA: Point of information.  I want to inform the hon. speaker that the group employees are workers of the Board of Governors, not the head teachers.

MR. MANZI: I thank hon. Mpanga for answering that.  Group Employees are not employees of the headmaster, they are employees of the Board of Governors and some of them are employees of the PTA (Parents, Teachers’ Association). So, the headmaster does not even have the powers to fire them nor can he employ any of them unless he consults.  So, I think the headmaster is being unfairly treated by being excluded from negotiating for his services, and his labour input.  So, I hope we shall have time to actually put in these Amendments. 

I also wish to find out - I hope the Minister will answer this one - This law or this Amendment says that he is also amending Amendment of Section 18 of Capital 131. I understand that one is as part of the laws of Uganda, then he is also amending the Public Service Negotiating Machinery Act.  Is this Amendment the supreme law of the land that when we pass it, it will supersede all other laws?  That all other laws will, therefore, be amended.  I hope the hon. Minister will tell us whether - as hon. Karusoke was saying, if we pass this the Bank of Uganda Act of 1966, the Public Service Act will all be amended automatically by this.  Or should we not have amended those in order for these ones to operate; or are we gong to amend those later so that these ones can operate. Otherwise there can be a conflict in the operation of these laws because there are different custodians who are gong to say; ‘our law was not amended and therefore, the other one cannot be applied.’ 

Finally, teachers are very many and Public Servants are very many too; and as you all know, they are also under-paid, and some of their salaries do not come until after two or three months. But this law allows them to sit down and negotiate with their employer, and their employer is government.  Is government ready or prepared to be able to negotiate, or are we going to run a risk of violating other laws in the conditions; because, I think a contract for a man working for somebody is that when I give you my services, at the end of a certain number of days you must pay for those services; if you do not pay for them, I down my tools.  Is the government ready and able; has it accumulated the capacity to be able not to delay the payment, and to create a situation where people are going to down their tools and rightly do so as per law established.  

Mr. Chairman, I beg to support but I hope these will be taken into account. Otherwise we may create a situation, or we may actually release an elephant into a China show.   Thank you.

CPT. BABU (Kampala Central Division, Kampala): Thank you very much Mr. Chairman.  It is the first time to have a chance to speak. I would like to wish all of you a very prosperous New Year.  It is going to be quite a good one and I hope and wish all of you many happy returns.  It is also going to be a year of compromise because I can see a lot of people are already compromising. 

I would like to ask you permission to allow me to say something.  Since our civil servants were retrenched, I, in my Division and many other places are having a lot of problems with these civil servants.  Their association, which is now being affiliated to NOTU, has tried very hard to negotiate with government, in many different aspects, unfortunately in vain.  As I speak now, a number of civil servants whose dues have not been paid, have been thrown out of houses.  Recently, you might have seen in the newspapers, a number of civil servants whose things were thrown out on the verandahs.  These civil servants happened to be in my Division. Not only those who were retrenched, but some of them are still active civil servants; but the Ministry that is concerned has not negotiated with the new owners of these houses to allow civil servants a reasonable notice or be given alternative accommodation.  This is throughout the city -(Interruption)

MR. SEBAGEREKA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I have some information to give to the hon. Member.  First of all, the delay in paying retrenchment packages was not due to the Ministry, but the actual departments in the Local Government offices where the calculations were being made, or were to be made.  We are chasing this stratum nearly everyday, reminding them and then as we go along we pay them as quickly as possible.  So, I ask the hon. Member to be patient.  It has not been the fault of the Ministry.  

On the question of houses, particularly with reference to the people whose property was thrown out - the matter is more complicated.  These houses were returned to the owners about a year ago. The civil servants or most of them entered private contracts with the landlord himself.  So, they are not our responsibility, I want to emphasise this - they entered into a contact on a particular rent but the fellow who owned the property was clever enough maybe, to tell that they were going to ask them that they should pay only about 20,000/= a month.  So, they were happy.  After a year, he raised the rent to 200,000/=.  It was not a contract between the Ministry and the Landlord. It was a contract between the Ministry and the tenants.  If there were some cases - one or two which were not properly handled, I would like to have them.  I sincerely hope that the Member will examine this thing properly.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CAPT. BABU:  Mr. Chairman, I have examined that particular issue of Bombo road thoroughly. Not only have I been thorough. These Members who are supposed to be civil servants under Public Service, we should put them back temporarily while we look for a solution so that these people are not found on the street when the Pope comes here next month. When they are thrown out of these houses, it is the RC and leaders who get the problems, and the problem is not ours.  The ministries concerned - we would like to ask them kindly to, please, negotiate with these people.  A few months ago the Minister of State in charge of Custodian Board, told us that they were going to give civil servants 24 months’ notice.  Others who were commercial were to be given six months. Unfortunately, this was not adhered to and our people are permanently being thrown out. I, would, therefore, like to ask the ministries concerned to look into this matter.  That is all I am asking.  

Now, to go to the Bill, I am very happy that the trade unions are eventually going to join us, Mr. Chairman.

MR. RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I think at this stage, I would like to bring it to the attention of this House that the Ministry of Public Service does not seem to pay sufficient attention to the welfare of some civil servants who have been residing in National Housing Construction houses, which have been sold and those civil servants have been thrown on the streets.  One of the Civil Servants thrown out on the street is serving in this august House.  (Laughter)

MR. SSEBAGEREKA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I appreciate hon. Rwakakooko’s plea but I am one of those people who take care and who really get worried when civil servants are thrown about. But the hon. Member, who is also the Chairman of the Economic Committee, should know very well what the situation is.  We have a stock of only 5,000 houses to house 60,000 traditional civil servants, and on top of that, we have 120,000 teachers.  However, much as we would like to look after them - and we are caring very much - we cannot manage to comfortably accommodate those people hon. Rwakakooko is talking about.  I would like his advice on how you can divide the 5,000 houses to over 189,000 civil servants.  I know we have been renting houses from the Custodian Board, but these are being returned to the owners.  This is a question not just directed to the Minister but it is a national problem, including the committee which hon. Rwakakooko heads.

CAPT. BABU: I would like to thank the hon. Members for the information.  The other day I was reading in the newspapers. It was reported that the government position is that rent is going to be floated and salaries will be frozen.  Now, I do not know what this means, but to those who call themselves economists, I would have liked to know if rent can be floated and salaries be frozen. Who is going to stay in those houses?  Mr. Chairman, this is -(Interruption.)

MR. OBWANGOR: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor of the House that we are in a mess in this respect of civil servants because first of all, we do not understand the principle of the civil service; its essence.  It is the partnership, which is the government, that is to say the politicians, like the hon. Minister for Public Affairs there he must be as his partner - must be given proper conditions for them to implement the government policy properly. When they are properly looked after, they feed themselves. But he cannot serve anywhere, whether at home, in civil service, or in public life if his tummy is empty all the time.  (Laughter)

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Member for that information. Let me now quickly go to the Bill.  We have a problem. Somebody has already said that within the trade unions we have problems; the problem of wrangles, organisation, and of interference. While we have NOTU, there are a number of people who are interfering in the Organisation of Trade Unions.  Yesterday there was a better word which was used ‘manipulate the Trade Unions.’ 

Although they say it is only the youth you can easily manipulate, I do not believe manipulation is only used on the youth.  You can use manipulation depending who is manipulating who and in this particular case, we would like to ask those who are interfering in unions to please desist because the problems of trade unions are being caused by outsiders, not insiders.  While I would like to support these Amendments very strongly, the question I would pose to the Minister is, ‘Are the trade unions organised well; are they organised?  I do not know, maybe the Minister can help us better and tell us whether he is satisfied with the organisation of the unions. One question I would like to find out is, are the members of these trade unions paying their dues?  Are they paying their dues and, therefore, paying the associated membership to NOTU?  This would probably be the basis to check whether the unions are doing well.  

Trade unions are freedom of association.  This is a constitutional right.  Somebody a few minutes ago was saying that government should not get involved in trade unions, but within the Articles of the Declaration of Human Right, the government must give every citizen work and it does not, it is actually abrogating their human rights.   Therefore, trade unions - government must have an interest in making sure that the trade unions of the country are well organised, although they are a freedom of association, because if they are not well organised, a problem will be created, and with time, with urbanisation and industries, we are going to have bigger unions and the economy of this country is going to depend on them. (Interruption)

MR. MUTEBI MULWANIRA: Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member, that since he is using the word organised, he should differentiate the meaning of being organised and the people within the organisation are abusing the system. 

CAPT. BABU: Mr. Chairman, I am not going into the debate for that, but I will accept the information. I am not going into debate  because I think it is very easy to throw stones when you are living in a glass house.  I do not think union members are people who do not abide, but they do have problems and these are created. This paying of dues is creating a lot of problems in trade unions, and I suggest that the Ministry of Labour check if this is true. 

Coming to the Bill, the Bill states that ‘an employer who shall be an employee’. I would like us to draw a line between an employer and an employee? Already, one hon. Member has looked at the sections that are concerned. I am sorry I did not agree with the point given by one of the hon. Members, that the headmaster does not have powers to fire and he is the manager of a school. He is in charge of the administration and of passing reports about the other teachers. Therefore, he is in charge of the school, although our civil service rules, the teacher service rules, do not give him the power to fire there and then. But eventually, if he suspends and recommends the chances are that the teacher will be fired. Therefore, he cannot be included among those who are ordinary workers.  

I would like to look at the sections as already proposed by one Member, and I will be putting in the Amendments, I hope others might too.  The House of Departments, Divisions and Sections, and the U7 and U5 salary scales. These salary scales are a good basis. The argument is that the man on U3 salary scale does not have powers to hire and fire. He should be included among those who can be union manager. Personal Managers have been talked about, but I do not have much time to waste on those. 

Lastly, I would like to implore those people who are in charge of these unions to give them their dues, especially the civil servants who have been restricted up to now.  Already, civil servants have got an association, but they have been restricted. They cannot come out to negotiate with the Government on equal basis like other unions; they never had this power.  So, if you are going to allow them to join these other people, I suggest they be also given the same powers like all other unions who are members of NOTU.  Mr. Chairman, I support.

MR. ONGOM (Omoro County, Gulu): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill, Mr. Chairman.  I am one of those who wished that the Bill should have been brought earlier. However, it is better late than never. I have a few comments to make about the Bill.  First, is that, in this Bill the Amendment caters only principally for civil servants and those parastatals that are very closely related to the government like Makerere University, Bank of Uganda, ITEK and so forth, and it leaves out very important sectors such as the private sector.   The Minister told us that part of the delay was caused by consultation with various ministries, officials and offices. I think the Minister could have also taken time to negotiate and discuss with the private sector, people like the Federation of Uganda Employers and the trade unions themselves in the private sector. I am saying this because, there is a big section of employees in the private sector that are not allowed these days under the present laws, as the law stands, to be members of a trade union.  It is a very big sector indeed. These are categories which are referred to variously sometimes as Junior Managers or Supervisors and so forth.  I know that this is a contentious issue. We have various arguments. Some people say once you are a manager or in the rank of management, you should not be a member of a trade union because of the reasons already given by one Member about confidentiality and secrecy and so forth. But you have these sections, particularly that of the Junior Managers, who have nowhere to live. They cannot go with the general workers, nor can they go with the top management; they have nobody to negotiate for them.  It is a very big sector, which I think the Minister could have included in the Amendment.  Afterall, much of the Trade Union Act or the Decree deals with those employed in the private sector, and there is no reason why this particular sector should have been left out completely intentionally. I think this is an area which the Minister could look at now, if we cannot do any thing about it, or at least in the near future. 

I am one of those who are not very pro-monoculture. You know, we have got this problem in NOTU simply because of that, where there are people who think that NOTU is not being properly organised. They could have left it for themselves, or they could have easily organised themselves, and still be represented, or still represent the interests of their workers. But they cannot do so because their hands are tied by the law.  I think it is time we liberalise the Trade Union Act so that workers are allowed to organise themselves in as many trade unions as they want. Afterall, there is freedom. I will subscribe to this. Right now, we are releasing to the rank of a lot of other employees, a big number of civil servants who are going to belong to trade unions, and they are all going to join NOTU, and for sure we are going to have more problems.  Why can we not allow them to organise themselves in other trade unions like in some other countries? I do not see any problem with this.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that not allowing trade unions to form into different branches of their own choice has contributed a lot to disorganisation of the economy of our country.  I will give an example, the house which was to be built up from the small savings by trade unions has been bogged down and the economy has, therefore, also become stagnant to some extent in some sectors.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ONGOM: Thank you for the information.  Mr. Chairman, I am glad that the Minister told us that he is in the process of reviewing the Labour Law.  I think this is long overdue. There is a lot that needs to be done with the Labour Law. An example has already been given by one Member about certain industries neglecting, to even obey the simple Law that exists now, about protecting the workers. There is actually a law about this, but it is not being supervised properly by the Government.  I think the sooner the Labour Law is reviewed, the better.  There is a lot that needs to be reviewed in the Labour Law. One of them of course is the Industry Safety of Factory Act. We need to look at it, because it is completely out of date, and is not in keeping anymore with our time. I think the Minister has got to look at that and do something about it, and the sooner he does it the better.  We are attracting investments; we have passed laws here to attract more investments and it is likely that we are going to have a lot of industries set-up, and unless we have a strict law in place to protect the employees, I am afraid the situation is going to worsen, even when we were persuaded to allow very second-hand old machinery to be imported into the country; these very second hand old machinery are likely to be industrial hazards and we need to look at this very carefully.  I think the Minister should look at that.  

I also agree, that maybe the Minister should look at this conflict that is likely to arise as a result of the law that we passed recently here, barring civil servants particularly from sitting in this House as long as they still work in the civil service.

I wonder what is going to happen when the civil servants join trade unions and they are elected to sit here. Once they are elected to sit here do they now become none members of the union, because they have to resign from their work? And when they resign, do they still remain members of the union, and whom will they be representing now, because they will have left the work force that they will be representing?  I think this should also be looked at, so that these two laws are harmonised.  With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I would like to support the Bill.

MR. OBWANGOR (Soroti Municipality, Soroti): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We, in this House, we debate and attend to other duties because our economic position is good, so that we are happy and in a right posture.  Now, in economic development, the most important thing in production as a factor of production is labour.  Labour in this country for the last 17 years; that is to say, when Decree 20 of 1976 was made, it was made under military circumstances and had nothing to do with a peaceful economy or a civil government. In 1976, Amin was riding the ship of power in this country, and as a matter of fact, it is in the law brought by the hon. Mover.  So, we should not again as a House, try to make proper laws as we are now moving into a civil government.  When I say civil government, I mean that it is a civil government not a military government.  So as, the Government of the NRM, of which the hon. Mover is a Minister, he allows rotten laws for this hon. House to endorse rubbish of 1976 which was dictate by war situation.  We should have new law as we had the Investment Statute recently and will be more in a position to make Ugandans productive in the sense of the law.  Now, he brings only various Amendment in various laws scattered in the Statute book -(interjection)- Mr. Chairman, for example, here a law ought to be clear; now what type, only the Amended Schedule 2, that we can go and talk and tell that the Government has done all these, only for the Section of Civil Service.   Now, the bulk of workers in this country are rural.  I come from a rural area, and that is why we the Movers know exactly why we have produced potatoes by digging. We use a natural hoe, and we had to do it recently. You have not been there because the Minister does not go there. He just stays in Kampala almost every time.  Yes, it is a fact, and we could not. The little that goes we got from the so-called NGOs. NGOs, are not a salvation in this country; it is our own efforts.  Yes, it is our own efforts how we tell people.  We the 278 people here, should go to the village and talk to the people dealing with food production.  We have in Kaberamaido, for example, a silo which we did in 1956, we built there in Soroti, it is there, it is not fully finished, my colleague the hon. Mover knows this thoroughly, and it is in his constituency where the silo is and it is empty. 

It is generally known that in economic production, four categories of the factors of production, that is the enterpriser.  The consumer of this country is the Minister for Transport, and Minister for Commerce, Industry and Energy. They think that the economy can run on its own, or the economy can put or stabilise itself, without much use of political power and so that the law will be clear; you know exactly what to produce. But to take for granted that because there exists in the Statute both of Uganda, the Decree 20 of 1976, 17 years back, His Excellence the President told this country on the 26th of January, 1986, that we were going for total change -(interjection)- no, no, totally change; it is the same. I know English - but why are we going backwards, why?  We are looking backwards? The laws that were made by people who did not want the revolution to go ahead, to feed the nation better for productivity and progress! Why? This is a shame. These are the people who are going to London and then come here and tell us that we are the only people.  We do not understand one of the revolutionaries why? Because we have got to go ahead, and because we are politicians and we pay taxes, we really feel for some of us who pay taxes, we feel high uselessly, man is thrown in -(inaudible)- not productive.  

So, it is in this respect, that this Bill of Trade Union Laws, that we must ask; for as long as I am in this House, I must ask the hon. Mover as a Minister for the time being there, please -(inaudible)- produce the Trade Union Laws because these are about 8 or 9 laws expressly forced for example by government, which the Minister of Labour in the first instance, should think about because these laws are made today and that he brings them in this House for us to make a new laws, particularly, the Trade Union Act of 1969 to date, leave alone other laws for Public Service and Parastatals, particularly. You must look at Chapter 199, Volume 6, page 3513 of the loss of Uganda. You will find several laws there. What we need is that - I pray for example, I am not a lawyer, but I have got common sense, how can you tolerate - I challenge, Mr. Chairman and the hon. House, how can you tolerate all these quotations, the Minister brings to this House, here and there, what do you know, this is all madingise, simateeka, 

So, in this respect we know what we want, particularly because we have lawyers here who should not just bluff us about what we know about the law.  Let them look at the law, bad or good, practical that all these laws in that Chapter, Chapter 6 of the laws of Uganda, page 199, let the Minister just be challenged to make all those laws in respect of labour, children, women not to be employed; bring them up to date, so that we can know, we can tell people what to be productive, not old, old what shall I say? Things are like this.  I am saying so because of the fundamental problems. Production requires that the State must put labour properly it is important. Labour properly, that is why for example, even when I say labour at the moment, labour officers in Soroti where the hon. Mover comes from, I did not think that they work with the labour unions there, so as to make them productive and responsible, and even the teaching of these people, they only say, for example in Arabia, we have this executive Institute for training.  We built it for training on most of these people. The Committee Development Units will be very scattered in gombololas in the country. These are to be used for production - training in Leadership and then production -(inaudible)- but Ministers are here already in Kampala.  

So, at the moment, I would advice the hon. Mover that we are missing the best opportunity as His Excellency the President told us that there was a fundamental change. We are missing it, and we can only do this. In fact, anyone who may be a Master of Economics has got eleven common senses. Therefore, when we come to this House to make laws concerning labour, for example, now when you talk about rehabilitation and reconstruction, you will have to support the Minister for Finance and Economic Development because he too is a lawyer. But what do they do? They produce for us macro-economics, and we call it part one and part two. Then they brought us red books last week; But there was no supporting law, these ought to be national cover of national rehabilitation Construction by which all of us will be responsible.  At the moment we come to this House as if we are going to Owino market each to shop his own ratio, yet we were sent by the electorate to come here and produce, and make Uganda productive and progressive, and not to just sit here with big tie.  

So, it is in this respect that we make the law, to be consulted in this matter, since we are moving now to civil government and the peace economy is to make a proper law for economic government, moreso on the law of rationalisation. What is the law for liberalisation?  They just talk about liberalisation, nothing along the rules here, where they talk about decentralisation for Local Government, as a thorough man in that thing, because when I was still in Nairobi, 10 years ago, and when in Soroti, before I was elected to this House in 1962, as a Minister, I was already a Chairman of Teso District Administration and we built a lot. The hon. Mover knows this. Currently, there are 37 dams, 13 dispensaries, and 48 schools in every Gombolola, and when you go to Soroti, although the war has spoiled everything Gombolola chiefs had a thatched house.  This is what we want in order to be productive.  So, a mere announcement will not help us. Let us be serious in this House, particularly we the leaders. When we came here in May, on the 3rd of May 1989, when I came here, I said that let us be truthful.  Most of you did not appreciate that. But unless we are truthful and tell the government what ought to be done, we shall have achieved less and less and, in 1994, when you go home, you will have produced nothing but donkeys.  So, this is the time for us to organise ourselves, and of course, the Ministry must do it through law. We want a law legally enacted which will support us to help teach the young generation to be productive, so that with proper laws which are clear, trade union laws, we will advance.  Now, teaching labour leaders - we cannot, progress with the blind worm - we cannot progress.  I challenge the hon. Mover if he does not teach the trade union leaders their responsibility through the economics of labour unionism - the hon. Mover frequently goes to London and he should understand that; we must teach these labour union people - our products from the secondary schools of the age of 18 up to 30, so that these are the people to put them in the means of production and as they lead the people they will be responsible and they will fight for their thinking.  

Now, as I say, the government of course, is the largest employer but it is also the greatest sinner in this respect - (Laughter)- Why? Because all of us know that the government does not put its employees on time.  You go to your areas, teachers are complaining; thief, the RCs are all claiming and they think that most of us, the 280 Members of Parliament are, maybe, the only people with money.  So, when you go there, everybody rushes to you to say “Mwattu mpa sente” ­ -(Laughter)-  as if we are the only people with money yet we also have no money.  I guess for some four months or more, Members of this House have not got any money and some of us managed to come here because we were businessmen or businesswomen. Before we came here - we were not living on government stories.  

So, it is very important to teach these people the economics of trade unionism for productivity and responsibility, so that our economy can be properly channelled and harnessed for production through the trade unions, and to rapidly move and when you talk about this plan of production, I urge the Minister of Economic Planning and Development to have a plan - I will give you a copy or a suggestion.  You look at “The Work for Progress of 1966”; the way we labelled what each Ministry ought to do at a different time not just a Minister to talk or just to come to Parliament and say that I have got this Development Account, 18 billion shillings have been passed on through the Ministry of Local Government.  I challenge you nothing has been done in the districts - nothing.  So, it is in this respect that you make the law - plan a law.  You can make pleas to your colleague in Parliament and in Cabinet, to produce a workable economic plan and tell your planners to reach such areas like Mubende, Kisoro, Amudat and everywhere, but not just Kampala, or just give a few members in this House,  that is the Economic Committee of this House, who have nothing to do, they do not come to Soroti, Kisoro or Amudat because they say they have no money.  We should charge the Minister to produce the right conditions for our labour which are clearly laid out.  

Finally, for labour to work well, we need peace, organisation and the right environment for development and production for our people - it is better to send people and the people to school through the work of labour; that is why we are crying that our children are not being paid because these people in Kampala do not go to visit them.

ADJOURNMENT

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we have come to the end of today’s Session.  We adjourn until Wednesday, 27th January,1993 at 2.30 p.m.

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned till 2.30 p.m. on Wednesday, 27th January, 1993.)
 

