Thursday, 28th January, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Vice Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair).

The Council was called to order.

THE CHAIRMAN: We adjourn for a quorum.  Therefore, we adjourn for ten minutes only.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATH.

The Oath was administered to.

Mr. Peter Okwera.


BILLS

SECOND READING

THE TRADE UNION LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL, 1992.

(Debate continued from 27th January, 1993).


MR. E. RWAKAKOOKO (Ruhama County, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation for the efforts of the Minister to introduce the principle of the expansion of the membership of the Trade Union Movement. I would also like to take this opportunity and say, unlike what appeared to be emphatically said yesterday, that members of the Trade Union Movement are very responsible people.  They are not people who would like to wreck havoc on the operational systems in this country. 

I am not speaking as a member of any trade union.  For very many years, I have been engaged on the opposite side with the Trade Union Movement.  However, when the Trade Union Movement members noticed that the other side of negotiators have temptations to play monkey tricks, I think they know that they can pull the trigger and on many occasions that has happened.  

So, I would like to correct the impression that if we had all the trade unionists in one movement, this country would be paralysed.  I do not personally believe so and I think the evidence which was provided by my hon. Colleague, hon. Mayengo is valid.  That today, you do not need to segregate so many classes of workers into hundreds of different unions.  I think, what is important is to work out a Bill which recognises the operational nature of each category of workers and consequently, provide a way in which you can diffuse situations where essential services would otherwise be disrupted.  

I have, been in the Civil Service and I have been a member of the Civil Servants Association. The people in the private trade unions are no less responsible than those in the Civil Service.  So, I think it is not fair to deny the civil servants equal bargaining positions with those in the private sector. It is not also fair to suggest that in the private sector is where you find managements, which are bent all the time on cheating the workers’ rights.  I do not think that is true.  So, the fact that Parliament here is a point of resource for people employed in the Public Service, does not remove the responsibility of Members of Parliament from taking up issues affecting workers in the private sector. My argument, therefore, is that the Minister of Labour, after he has probably had another Bill presented for the purpose of complying with the decision of this House, that is, the election of the three Members of NRC, I think he should come out with a comprehensive Bill which takes care of all the categories of workers.  I heard the Minister mention that the unions, that is organisations, are going to be institutionally based.  In other words, you do not need to have a clerk in Kisoro belonging to the same union with a clerk in Kotido or in Moyo.  What you need to do is to have those members in those industries subscribing to the membership of a union.  Each kind of industry has got its own problems and has got its own characteristics.  So, there is no need for clerks in banks to belong to the same union as clerks in the Civil Service.  Their employment conditions, their nature of activity and all the other aspects of employment are totally different.  Therefore, I do not subscribe to the need for employees to cross lines, to go and belong to unions in other areas, particularly where the nature of the industry is not the same.

I think I would like to have a look at this Bill, whether it has gone through the Select Committee or any other Committee.  I think the agricultural workers in this country have not been given due attention.  This is particularly in areas of safety and in areas of training, so that they can improve their lot.  For this reason, therefore, I would like to suggest to the Minister that when he comes here with a comprehensive Bill, that comprehensive Bill should include a provision for establishing an industrial levy for the purpose of enhancing the training of workers. To deal with an organised Trade Union in management is a very lucky situation when you are negotiating.  Because unions know the limits, they can interpret the results, and they understand the country better, because it is a country under which the economy of their employment is situated.  So, you cannot say that these workers should just simply negotiate irrespective of other extraneous circumstances.  

I accept theoretically that for civil servants, if they were allowed to negotiate freely, there would be a problem. Because, if after the passing of the Finance Bill here and, therefore, the expenditure for the nation, if the following day the negotiations called for heavy increases, the effect would mean that we are going to pay outside the sums approved under the consolidated funds.  But I think this can be dealt with through designing a suitable machinery of negotiations.  

So, I do support the principle, but I think I would like to repeat what I said here on the 21st October last year.  On that day, I complained that the Government brings Bills here which are not well researched, where co-ordination is lacking, where there has not been consultation.  I would like to sound a warning as the Chairman of the Economic Committee, that we are going to start computing the time lost by Ministers in presenting Bills here so that when the budget time comes we set off that amount from the Minister’s Vote. (Applause)  

So, I think there is need for sufficient research to be done by those concerned, before Bills come to this House.  Because you can see how much time we take in passing Bills, which are so small like this one.  In fact, on that day, we were also debating a miscellaneous Bill.

I would like to thank you very much for giving me this opportunity and to say that I support the idea that a Committee looks into this Bill and comes up with something which is well worked out.  Thank you very much.
MR. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Thank you. Most of us at least agree that trade unions and workers should be organised, and that we should have an attitude of allowing most people to associate.  I would like to assure the hon. Minister that in our criticism - we are not expressing the criticism on the concept of what he is trying to do.  I think the main worry, is on how it is being done and the manner in which it is being done and the hurry in which we are trying to do this thing.  

We knew from 1989, even before most of us came to this House, that Proclamation No. 1, as amended, was in place, allowing workers’ representation - youth and women.  Now, in 1993, we are just beginning to remember what we should have done.  It is that which leaves us in a bit of problem.  Why did it take so long - nearly five years for us to realise that we need these people; and why the hurry now?  If we had all that time, why did we not do a thorough research and come up with a comprehensive law or amendment that the Minister is talking about bringing?  I think that is the main problem that we are facing.

Having said that, let me turn now to some of the issues.  It is good that the Minister says we are going to have industry-based unions.  I think I support that, because it helps in control and organisation.  By him doing so, we should give latitude to those who are organising - the shop stewards, the branches at the unions in each of these industries have a free hand to organise themselves, so that we can select people at shop steward level or at the floor level, up to the branch, then we can have an organisation which is national and which we think will be the one from which to send the delegation to this House.  

I have a problem though, at the moment, in this Amendment which we are debating. There is no provision as to how the electoral body which is going to elect these three people for whom we have wasted a whole week now, is going to be done.  There should have been a provision in this one, to show us how these people are going to come.  At least, for the women and the youth it was shown.  But in this one, there is nothing.  How are the Members going to come here?  Is there any provision in the Bill?  There is none, I do not see it anyway.  We need to know that.  Then there is a problem which we are going to face.  What happens to a Member of Parliament who is elected by the union?  When he comes here, does he resign his union membership?  And when is asked to go on strike or to demonstrate his freedom, what happens?  Will he also go or will he be denied that right?  That contradiction, needs to be resolved.  If he is going to strike here, you can see the problem we are going to face.  So, the Minister needs to address that issue.  

There is also another issue.  It would seem that our purpose in debating this is just elections.  I am wondering, whether that is the real concern of the workers of this country.  What are the real concerns of the workers?  They are concerned with the living wage, fringe benefits; housing, and they are also concerned with being able to see their children go to school, and their wives going to good hospitals.  These are the real concerns.  Have we addressed ourselves to these problems?  In fact, I would like to develop this issue further.  Here we are selling all our assets, including industries where these workers are supposed to be working.  Have we asked them for input in what should go or what should not go?  Is it more important to have three representatives or to sell a corporation where you throw 200 people out?  Worse still, how about if Cheeye and his friends are right, when we are the ones including the workers’ pay.  

I think it would be proper for the Minister and Government to address itself to those issues - the issues of pay and of ownership.  Because, we have examples. We handed over Imperial Hotel.  All the man did was just to close it. And it is not only this Government.  We should also look back.  At one time, we handed over Uganda Bati.  What happened?  The man used the resources that were there and closed it up and went away.  Have we, since we are concerned with the welfare of the workers, besides representation, addressed ourselves to these issues? 

I am raising these questions because it makes a mockery of our time and your time for us to sit here for two weeks debating, only to rush a Bill through in order to get there three representatives in this House.  I think what we have been asking for in the committees, in all the committees that we have set up here like the Economy Committee which I used to belong to, and the Parastatal Committee, is for Government to come up with a position paper on how we are going to sell our assets. It has not come, and I think that is more of a concern to the workers than having three representatives who, when they get here will have to resign their positions at the other end.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I think the hon. Member is raising an important issue and I think that in the Select Committee or whatever Committee looks into this Bill, it is very important to empower the workers to participate in the decisions that affect the organisations where they work, especially in the fight against corruption. (Applause) 

It is unrealistic to organise, and for us to pass this law for civil servants who see things happening in the ministries and they do not say anything except negotiating for their own salaries.  We have to look into this Bill as a provision that the people who work and in whatever department they work in have an interest in it and must fight the corruption therein. (Applause)

MR. KANYOMOZI:  Mr. Chairman, you can see what the interests of the real workers are.  The interests are not merely of the three representatives. 

I want now to turn to the Bill itself.  Let us look at whom we are bringing in.  We are bringing in teachers, doctors and other people in essential services.  Where are the provisions in this Bill to cater for them so that things are not disrupted?  I think that should have been incorporated to make this Bill meaningful. However, I would not like to send a message that we should not pass this Bill because if we do, people will go on strike.  What message are we sending to them?  It would be a wrong message to say that if they get unionised, they will strike.  They will strike for what reason?  Because their salaries are not being paid.  We should not argue that way.  We should look at the principle involved.  They will be striking because they have not been paid since September.  I think under normal circumstances that would be justifiable.  They can strike even if they are not unionised.  You remember, we got hostile teachers marching into this House.  I think Members will recall we were taken aback when they marched here.  So, it will not stop them from doing that.  But let us now address ourselves to what we should incorporate in the Bill so as to cater for those eventualities.  What do we have in here?  Do we have any provision for essential services?  We do not have.  What provisions do we have for paramedical staff after not being paid for three months, if they said we are downing our tools?  Do we have any provision in this Bill?  No.  Do we have any for the civil servants?  No.

I would like the Minister to turn his mind off the feeling of 3 (6) and concentrate more on the real issues - workers’ interests, protection of their services and provision of incentives, so that our assets which are being sold to the workers have a stake in that claim.  I think those are more crucial than the three representatives are.  Given that, what do we do?  What are we asking the hon. Minister to do?  We are saying, if time allows us, and I think it will, that we go back and consider this Bill, bring that thing he said will be coming all at once so that the issue is settled once and for all.  I am sure my Colleague, the hon. Minister, will accept these proposals from the Floor.  He will accept them in order to have an orderly system that allows Government function.  He will also accept them for good democracy.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WANENDEYA (Budadiri County, Mbale): Mr. Chairman, I stand here to say that I support Labour Unions and their cause, and the sooner we can all realise this as an important aspect of the economic development of our country, the better.  It is in this spirit, that I have nothing against the Minister, but rather that the Government has been thinking of revising our laws and it is in this respect that the Minister should kindly withdraw the Bill in a very honest manner -(Applause)- and come up with a comprehensive Bill which will entail everything that should be done for the workers. Here we are saying that we are revising part of the law, but at the same time, we are talking of rents floating whereas the workers’ salaries are fixed.  How is that ever going to be possible unless we are not being realistic in making sure that workers get a better deal? Capital and labour go hand in hand, especially in those so-called developed countries.  It is in that respect that the workers’ interests are best catered for, as well as capital, and the two go hand in hand without each one going on its own. 

It is in that spirit that the Minister should seriously wind up this Bill and come up with a good one after say four weeks and that is where we will say, we give him all the maximum support after we have known that this is going to benefit our workers. There are resources to be mobilised and some of these resources - as an example, you find that the worker’s house is standing still and yet five shillings from each worker - if you had a million workers in this country, that could go towards economic infrastructure which would assist our country in our development. In agriculture, if we are to mobilise as an example, the agricultural enterprises company instead of selling it to foreigners, we would make sure that those workers have got shares in that company, especially in the tea plantations, and then they will work hard and, therefore, earn the foreign exchange we need.  They could contribute a lot.  Whereas if we sell the agricultural enterprises to foreigners, they will first and foremost ensure that they get capital out of this country.  

A lot of capital has been flowing out of our country.  Some time back, when I talked of forex bureaux, some people thought I was joking.  But some of these characters have come here not to build Uganda’s economy. Nobody owes us a living.  They are there just to suck the money and take it out, believe it or not, and it is in this respect that I am calling upon the Immigration Board instead of issuing work permits to some of the people to work in shops, those work permits should be withdrawn, if the Minister for Internal Affairs and also of Labour are really serious about developing our country.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to clear an issue being raised by the hon. Member.  When we sit to consider granting the work permits, there are some conditions which are set clear.  For example, we have a situation at times where we are caught up because of the Clause.  Recently, we allowed the Asians to repossess their property.  So, when they come and apply for work permits, because we allow them to repossess their property, we consequently allow them. When they are allowed, we find it a bit of a problem when we are being criticised that we are allowing foreigners in the country when the laws are there.  We have allowed the Asians to repossess their property.  

Secondly, there are cases where we do not allow foreigners, for example, in employment where some people apply to get work permits in order to be employed in Uganda.  Where in such employment we get a Ugandan, we always say, let that person try a Ugandan, not a foreigner.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. WANENDEYA:  Mr. Chairman, may I say that those people who repossess their property are not the ones who are selling as duka wallahs?  They are not, I repeat that.  If we are to be honest with ourselves let a census of foreigners who work as duka wallahs be taken and you will find that they have the idea of only draining our forex.  I would very much want to see how buildings are being put up by some of these duka wallahs rather than competing with our people selling ‘mandazi’ and the rest of it.  Hon. Members see them in these shops.  Therefore, it will need a policy that will take in immigration.  In fact, we even need to get a sort of document which will take care of workers and clerks altogether.  With those few comments, Mr. Chairman, I beg not to support the Bill.  

MR. SSEKITOLEKO (Bugangaizi county, Hoima): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I make my contribution, may I request you to say a few things concerning the marketing of our tobacco in Bugangaizi. (laughter) For the whole of last year, we were involved in the growing of tobacco.  After growing it, we were told by the only buyers - the BAT, that there was no market for it.  The farmers today are suffering with their tobacco.  Unlike cotton, cotton at least can be used for a mattress, but we have very little use for tobacco.

After having said that, may I now turn to the Bill. I support the Bill.  The most important aspect of this Bill, I believe, is to lay strategy of proper representation.  Soon the workers of this country will be participating in choosing their leaders to represent them and I think this is very important.  It is very important to see that they make proper representation and that all workers are represented.  When I was looking at the figures of NOTU, I found that they were only 50,000 members.  When I computed the teachers, people working in the Bank of Uganda, there were nearly a quarter of a million people left out of this Bill.  So, I was able to realise that if we were to allow only representation of the people to come from NOTU, that would not be a proper representation of the total workers.  I believe it is important that the teachers, the people in Bank of Uganda and elsewhere who are workers, are properly represented.  It is then that the representatives of these workers will find that they really represent the workers.  You cannot leave out a section of people and say that you represent workers.  There is a lot that has been said about these trade unions, for instance, that this Bill does not include compensation and employment.  There are so many Acts in the Labour Movement.  We have the Workman’s Compensation Act, the Employment Act and the Dispute and Settlement Act.  All these are covered elsewhere.  

My last contribution on this one is on the statement made that organisations like that one of teachers are badly organised. Teachers are not well paid and their terms of condition are not well met.  Yes, it is true that is why these people should have spokesman.  It is a sick person that needs a doctor and not a healthy person that seeks a doctor.  We know that the teachers are sick and have some problems.  They should be represented and this is the representation we now need.  Mr. Chairman, I support the Bill.  

THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS (Mr. Ateker Ejalu):  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  First of all, I would like to deal with the broad points that have been made by Members.  One of them is that there is no machinery for implementation of the elections of workers provided in this Bill.  I think this is because I assumed that Members were well read on the labour laws.  If I may sayn this is not to be compared with the Youth Bill, and you cannot compare it with the Women’s Council Bill.  It is not being brought to the Government machinery for organisation.  You would rather compare the situation of NOTU and these other councils with a situation of a private company in a public corporation.  If we are legislating for Uganda Railways, we shall provide in bigger details how, for example, the Board of Directors should be composed.  Because we are legislating for something which is part of Government.  But when you are legislating for a private company, you provide a legal framework and rules and then that company sets up its Articles of Association, which become in the conduct of its affairs internally, within the framework of the law. Consequently, this Bill is an enabling  Bill, enabling NOTU; it has got an Act of Parliament - this Decree we have been talking about.  That is the legal framework.  That Act of Parliament gives NOTU the parameters within which Government allows it to perform.  Out of the Act of Parliament, they also make a Constitution.  The Constitution is supporting certain guidelines which Government has made them to do.  So, from the Act the implementing machinery, for example, the Electoral College, where is it?  Obviously, the Electoral College will be the general meeting of NOTU.  Now how will they elect Representatives? 

DR. KANYEIHAMBA: I would like to inform the hon. Minister now holding the Floor that, the election of the people we are talking about is a Constitutional matter and cannot be left to be internal rules of unions.  It must be dealt with my Constitutional Instrument.  I thank you, Sir.

MR. ATEKER EJALU: With due respect to the former Attorney General, I do not accept his information as accurate.  There is a process before you come to the actual election of NRC Members.  I am referring to the beginning of the Electoral College.  The Annual General Meeting is the Electoral College composed by law. How do they come about?  According to the Constitution of NOTU, each union will send a specific number of people to the Electoral College.  Once they have composed themselves as an Electoral College, they must follow the Electoral Law as provided.  The procedure of voting must go according to the Electoral Law, that is the Constitution we are talking about.  So, the machinery is there.  It is just that it is not in this document.  

The other thing I would like to explain, is that this document is small, because it is addressing a specific thing.  Maybe, I could invite Members to look at the labour laws which are now being reviewed and are coming here.  The first one is the employment Bill which deals with general employment conditions.  This is coming here very soon.  The Cabinet has considered it and it is now being processed for the NRC.  The second one is the Workers’ Compensation Bill.  The Cabinet has considered it and it is now being recommended for your consideration.  The third one to come here is the Trade Union Decree, the one we are discussing now.  That really is the time when all these valid points which have been made could be made to amend that law substantively in order to confirm with the situation today.  The fourth one to come here will be the Trade Disputes Arbitration and Settlement Act.  Under that one, you will find the case which has been raised of how to deal with people who are handling sensitive and specialised tasks.  Are they free to go on strike or not?  There is a whole set of laws giving a procedure of how such sensitive people would ask for rights.  It is a lot more difficult and the procedure is more difficult, and in some cases, they cannot obtain it.  The law is there.  The next will be the Factories Act, and the fifth one deals with the safety of the factories, the equipment and so on.  The next one will be the Occupation Health Act.  This one deals with the welfare, the safety of workers in the place of work and the safety of the public as a result of emissions from factories and so on. The seventh will be the Industrial Training Decree which deals with vocational training in the country.  And the eigth will be the National Social Security Act, 1985.  The ninth and last, is the Minimum Wages Advisory Board and Councils.  

So, the issues hon. Members have raised are valid.  But I think because of lack of complete information or lack of presentation before by me, at the beginning, has given Members a different view.  However, we are not seeking to bypass these other important aspects they have brought forward.  We are seeking only to address this specific issue, to get it out of the way and give these people democratic rights. The other issue was the question of negotiating machinery.  A question was put here, how will the civil servants negotiate?  This, as hon. Sibo will confirm, has got a complete Act, the Civil Service Negotiating Machinery Act.  It sets out all the rules.  All we are doing is making these people unionised.  But the machinery for negotiation is still there and we will use it, and Members should not make a mistake of thinking that if we pass this Bill today, tomorrow these people will be in the union.  There are procedures we have to follow. So, the machinery for negotiations is also in place.  

The other thing I would like to mention in general is that becoming a union member is voluntary.  If we allow the civil servants to become unionised, it does not mean that they will be compelled.  They have a right to stay out.  So, one should not think that because they are unionisable - even in the private sector, at the moment there are some people who have refused to join a union, and civil servants, teaches, and Bank of Uganda staff, are responsible and reasonable people.  To say that they should not be given their democratic right, which has been denied them since colonial days, because they may strike, I think is not a sound reason at all.  Because that is to say that the British could have said before 1962, that these people cannot run the country properly.  They might begin killing each other.  Idi Amin might come to power, so they should not get independence.  So, that is really not a good reason.  Because my experience with unionised workers is that they know the inside of the organisation.  They also measure their demands within the context of the organisation.  They do not want, for example, to kill a hen which lays golden eggs.  They will not demand to be paid a salary which will exhaust the resources of the organisation within one month and then they become jobless. 

I may not be able to go into detail of what every hon. Member said.  But I will try to answer just a few general points and I would like to give notice to Members that Government will incorporate all reasonable Amendments.  This Bill was brought here so that we negotiate good terms for the people we want to serve.  So, we are not just simply going to say that we are not going to have this Amendment.  There are certain amendments that we definitely concede.  A query was made about the Workman’s Compensation Act not being here.  Hon. Wapakabulo answered that.  But I want to point out to Members of this House, to remember that Cabinet considered two Acts – the Employment and Workmans’ Acts, and decided that a certain section of Members of this House, that is the hon. Ladies, should participate and give an input before the Act is brought here, on a specific aspect concerning women working underground, and on the question of maternity leave.  We held a National Conference at the Conference Centre on these two issues.  The report of that Conference has been made by part of this House.  I think that is quite clear, I remember.  Now, I could not agree more about training of workers.  I would like to inform you that the Ministry behaves in a very tripartite manner.  Everything we do, we do it with the workers and the employers.  We have a tripartite consultative factor in everything.  Even every board of directors in my Ministry workers, are represented and the employers are represented.  Even in a delegation, for example to the ILO,  both workers and employers are represented. This Bill was proposed by a task force consisting of NOTU, the Federation of Uganda Employers, the Public Service Ministry, the Ministry of Education, Makerere University, and ITEK - Kyambogo, and they all support it.  

If you look at what the teachers are asking for, they are only asking for recognition as a separate entity; so that they can form a union of their own, and so that they are not affiliated to the existing union.  This really is not a question of legislation, but there is a machinery for that. They will come and make their case, and it will be discussed. Consultations will be made and when we agree we will give them the status they want.  That is not a question for legislating here.

A question was also asked about the National Social Security Fund, the question of interest paid to contributions.  The interest of the National Social Security used to be very low.  It stands now at five per cent but it is not that low because the point at which the present National Social Security started was virtually zero.  The money was irresponsibly kept in some correct accounts and it was wiped off by the currency reform.  Through the hard work of the Board of Directors headed by the hon. Elly Karuhanga here and the management there, they have now invested, because the interest must come from investments, there is no other way you can get interest without investing the money.  They have now started investing in purchasing real property, in fact, they are very much supporting the fight against inflation by buying Treasury Bills and so on. So, we think that by the next financial year, which begins in July, the situation will be reviewed and considering what will be in the kitty, we shall definitely increase the interest for the workers.  Also, the reason why we do not pay immediately is that the money we recovered from the government was used to restore the two zeros that the workers suffered during the currency reform.

Now, there is also the question of the workers’ House.  This house, the Board of Directors had passed that efforts be made to try and get somebody who can accept even to build it floor by floor.  Something is being done about that and I believe that this house will really be on. The Social Security Fund is sufficiently liquid now to start the building of this house.  Hon. Mpanga had wanted an amendment for the teachers but I have explained that it can be done administratively.  

The other thing I would like to say is that the questions which we have raised about other ministries, and about the economy, are too broad for me to respond to.  The questions should be raised for the people concerned and I will only be in a position to assist.  Hon. Obwangor made a useful contribution, which is broad and I think we leave it at that -(laughter).   

Now, on the question of lecturers and the professors, they are included. It is only when they are heads of departments or something like that. Otherwise, they are included and they can be unionised.  On the question of teachers, I would really like to appeal to the House, a headmaster is the manager of the school - (Interjection)- I will accept the information.

MR. OBWANGOR:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Mover of the Bill - I raised it consistently and intellectually and for the benefit of this House as a matter of trust, when he says that, we do not say in respect of the Trust of Decree No. 20 of 1979 - I raised the important case that Decree No. 20 of 1976 was made by Amin in connection with the military fall of our economy, and I made a plea that now that we are liberalising our economy, we need a new regulation to meet the present situation. 

MR. ATEKER EJALU: I thank you for that information hon. Obwangor, but I thought that in one of the first points I made, I said that the Decree will be coming here for a comprehensive review, but you know, not everything done during Amin’s time was particularly bad.  Hon. Obwangor might remember that during his last year’s performance in Obote I, he ended up in prison, it was Amin who released him.  I hope that was okay. (Laughter).  Now, the point raised by hon. Sibo, is a different point altogether.  What hon. Sibo is saying is what I answered earlier that these people are too delicate. We do not want them to go on strike, because if they go on strike we shall not manage. Let us treat them without democratic rights, and I think I mentioned earlier that it would really not be a revolutionary NRM for us to try and deny people their democratic rights. 

The sum total of this Amendment is to address specific issues, and the other thing is that it is not several amendments in several directions, but it is to bring those people who have been left out.  Those Acts we are amending are the ones which had cut those people off from being unionised.  When we pass these who are unionisable, they will come to one book, and they will now become unionisable and governable under the Decree which I have just mentioned. With those few words, Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

DR. TIBERONDWA (Igara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, Sir, I want to ask your permission to invoke Rule No. 30(f) of the Rules of Procedure at this stage so that I can move a Motion that, “under Rule 72, this Council appoints a committee nominated by you, to which the Trade Unions Laws (Miscellaneous) (Amendment) Bill 1992, should be referred, Mr. Chairman”.  I beg to move.

I had thought that in winding up the debate, the Minister would be able to convince me that this Bill should pass.  With the number of amendments that we have suggested, if we include them, it will be a different Bill altogether.  Therefore, in order to help the Minister who does not, in any case, appear to have comprehended the observations maybe by hon. Members, I wish to move that this Bill be sent to a Select Committee of the NRC appointed under Rule 7 of the Rules of Procedure, for refinement.  I think this is better than defeating the Bill.  The Bill is very good in principle but it should be refined by a Select Committee and returned to this House.

Mr. Chairman, NOTU itself has submitted to Members its reservations about this Bill.  Teachers and civil servants have submitted their reservations about this Bill.  Yesterday it was pointed out that the Bill contains many inconsistencies and some of the complications needed to be studied very carefully.  For example, the negotiating machinery for professional unions should not be the same as for other ordinary unions.  
I would like to thank hon. George Kanyeihambe, the former Attorney General, for very timely advice to the Minister, but unfortunately, the Minister just refused to take the advice.  The rules for elections of NRC representatives were not made by women’s organisations, and the rules for electing the youth were not made by the Youth Organisations.  This must be provided for in the Constitution. The Minister is not aware of this necessity; that the laws for electing Members of Parliament are made by Parliament.  

There are certain laws in the Statute books which need to be re-examined so that the old laws do not conflict with the new ones.  There is need to reconsider university professors and lecturers and the Minister is not aware that the university lecturers and professors are not covered as being under the Ministry of Education.  They have got their own condition under the University Act. The rules as set before us in this Bill only refer to institutions like Kyambogo, Nakawa and so on.  The University is not included here because University workers have got their own conditions of service and the Minister is not aware of this. A Select Committee could help in refining this Bill and also in educating the Minister a bit more.  

There are unions as pointed out, such as the Clerical Union which crosses borders from professional to non professional organisations, and the Minister said this can be done afterwards.  If you do not spell this one out, if you do not streamline this one now, it will be very complicated.  
The Committee, if selected would also be able to study the ability  of the Government to pay because there is no need having a law that is not going to be implemented after we have spent so much time on it.

The Select Committee should also be able to appreciate certain complicated matters involving, for example, as it has been pointed out, teachers going out on strike during examinations, or doctors going on strike when there are patients in the theatre, and all these things need to be examined very carefully.  We read an attachment or a schedule to this law that will cater for these special people as it is done in Tanzania, Zambia and Kenya. We need to make references to the laws from other countries which are ahead of us in dealing with professional unions.  

A very important point has also been raised by hon. Karuhanga.  The role of workers in matters which affect this country.  They seem to be concerned about their salaries only.  For example, the workers in the Lake Victoria Bottling Company are being told that their company is being sold and they do not know where to go. They are protected but they need to be involved in deciding whether to sell their company or not.  

So, a lot of things are going on in the Ministry. You find a Minister or an NRC Member being accused for doing something, and the workers have no voice.  All these things need to be examined.

The question of an Electoral College to the NRC has been raised.  How will the workers’ representatives be elected to NRC?  The Minister says that the law for electing them can be enacted by the unions themselves.  I do not really know whether the unions can make laws that affect this country. Reference should also be made to similar laws, or related laws that are in the ministries.  For example, a lot of consultations need to go on with the Ministries of and of Public Service, and with all these other bodies.

It is for this reason and other reasons which have been advanced in the course of this debate that I move that the Trade Union Laws (Miscellaneous Amendment) Bill, 1992, be referred to a Select Committee where it can be polished and returned to this House for debate and final passing.  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

MR. KARUHANGA (Nyabushozi county, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to second the Motion presented by the hon. Member from Igara, but I would like first of all, to disassociate myself from the kind of remarks and imputations, and the rude remarks that he was making towards the Minister because I do not think that the Minister really deserves that type of treatment. But I send the Motion he has moved in principle for the betterment of the transaction of business of this House -(Applause). 

 It is very important to realise that most Members really recommended the Select Committee.  It would be grotesque to say the least, if Members did not, during the time when it comes to considering the Bill, did not support the same Committee which they have recommended.  It might be the case like what happened in one Bill when we were discussing the vote on the Purchasing Corporation, and I do not think we deserve that kind of treatment again. 

It also goes that the Minister actually provided another chance to hear the views of the Members, because this is the first chance to hear the views of the Members, and you know when it comes to matters of labour, we should sympathise with the Minister because handling labour is not really easy. He is going to benefit more by having our extra input in the affairs of labour which are very expensive.

Secondly, looking at the law, as I said yesterday, the absence of the Attorney General in the House, the fact that our Uganda Laws which used to be here in the House on the Table are no longer there so that we can even quickly consult, means that Members have been handicapped. None of these Members is likely - this is serious - to debate this law into a Bill when he is not very sure about all the doubts which are lingering in our minds.  So, it is absolutely necessary that the Minister really concedes that a Select Committee be formed, afterall, it is to ease his work.  Thank you.  

THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND SOCIAL WELFARE (Mr. Ateker Ejalu): Mr. Chairman, as I said, the government will concede to any possible amendments, if this is to be the first expression to have the consolidated interest of this House. On behalf of the Government, I accept provided that we do it expeditiously -(Applause).  

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, I put the question.  Those in favour of the Motion moved by hon. Tiberondwa say ‘Aye’ and on the contrary ‘No’.

(Question put and agreed to).

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, in accordance with Rule 72 and 73 of the Rules of Procedure, I now nominate the following Members to constitute the Select Committee on the Bill.

	1.	Hon. Ongom will be the Chairman of the Committee.

	2.	Hon. John Kawanga

	3.	Hon. Mrs. Rhoda Kalema

	4.	Hon. Mwandha

	5.	Hon. Karusoke

	6.	Hon. Esther Opoti

	7.	Hon. Okurut.

The Committee is requested to report back to the House on Tuesday, 23rd February, 1993, without fail.  So, I now adjourn the Council until Tuesday 16th February, 1993 at 2.30 p.m.


(The Council rose at 4.30 p.m. and adjourned till Tuesday 16th, February 1993, at 2.30 p.m). 

