Tuesday 23rd January, 2001

Parliament met at 3.00pm at the Parliament House, Kampala

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Speaker, Mr. Edward Ssekandi  in the Chair)

(The House was called to order).

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members of Parliament it is my pleasure to welcome you to Parliament after ending the past year and I wish you a very happy and prosperous New Year. It is great sadness to announce the death of our colleague hon. Pascal Mukasa, who passed away during the Christmas recess time; it is being set in the near future for you to pay tribute to our friend. 
Members the Chair is aware that this is time for very serious presidential campaigns where most of you are involved. But we should appreciate that we have a lot of work which is pending that has to be completed before March. So I appeal to you, to reschedule your program so that at least you give in three weeks from today and then after that you will probably be released to go and participate in the campaigns. We have the Parliamentary Election Bill and the Political Organisation Bill that we did half way. We have the Local Government amendment Bill and a number of reports that we have to debate before Parliament is prorogued. So, please, adjust your programs.

LAYING OF PAPERS.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF PRESIDENCY (Dr. Ruhakana Rugunda):- Mr. Speaker, I wish to lay before Parliament the facilities attached and used by His Excellency the President as required by the Presidential Act no. 17 of the year 2000.  I thank you Sir.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Perhaps, since this is laying it before Parliament the Public may want to know it. Please read it out.

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr. Speaker, clause 21(3) of Act N0. 17 required Government to do precisely what I have done and for purposes of reminding colleagues I will read it.  And it says: "for the purposes of sub-section 2, the Minister in charge of Public Service shall lay before Parliament those Government facilities which are attached to and utilised by the President"  This is in line with Presidential Elections Act, so that consistency with transparent method of work and democratisation process everything is above board. 
And well know that Government is performing its duty of ensuring that, it is part of the requirements to have a presidential elections indeed fulfilled. I thank you, Sir.

MR. WACHA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am a Member of the Legal and Parliamentary Committee. When we were dealing with that particular section of the Presidential Elections Act, we made a statement in our report to the effect that the Minister should clearly state the facilities attached to the office of a President.
The way the Minister has read, nobody would ever understand and appreciate the facilities which are normally attached to the Office of the President or to the office of an incumbent President.  This is what the Minister now says;-
    1. Full facilitated state house and state lodges
2The usual transport facilities provided to the president.
    2. The usual security detail facilities provided to the president.
    3. The usual personal staff and their facilities attached to the President.
    4.  The usual information and communication facilities attached to the president.
    5. 
What dose this mean? , What is usual?  The Minister is trying to assume that we all know these things which are attached to the President, he is actually telling us nothing.  What the law wants you to do, Mr. Minister is to tell us in detail what facilities are attached to the presidency.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker, I would think that the Presidential elections Bill Act says that, the president while campaigning does not carry the full facilities of every presidential thing as a president. In otherwords, if there were three presidential helicopters and is using one then people would understand but to say the usual this, the usual that, the usual or the other, then if the President is found on a boda boda is that the unusual?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Now let me say, you want to know for instance the number of the Presidential Protection Unit; Is it that you want to know the person working for the President? I think you expound on your point of clarification so that the Minister can respond.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. speaker, in that line what I was aiming at, was proper guidance of how much money the citizens of Uganda are putting into one candidate. We should know whether his security detail during the election period is fifty or the whole army.  This is necessary for the presidential elections to be taken above board. And equally, I think there can be details of whether his personal staff carries five cooks every night and everywhere! These are matters, Mr. Speaker, the people of Uganda are entitled to know.

MR. OKELLO OKELLO: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to know from the hon. Minister whether the word ‘personnel’ attached to the President include the RDCs and District Security Officers. Because out there, there are RDC’s and DSO who are going round openly campaigning for the President. Are they part of this usual "personnel"? 
 Thank you.

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, I think every law is made for a purpose. And I think the mischief which the law was addressing here, was to try to ensure that a President holding the office - whether now or in future does not unduly use the office of the incumbency to out way his colleagues that was the fear being addressed by the law. So when it is put here before the House of Parliament, the public would like to know exactly; -if it is lightly a difficult situation to differentiate between what the President would be entitled too as a presidential candidate and what he would use while in that office. 

For example, I am aware that all presidential candidates have their offices around Kampala or even upcountry. And I think presidential candidate Lt. Gen. Kaguta Museveni has an office in Kampala, but I am not aware whether he has attended any meeting in that office. What I know is that all meetings of his supporters including those ferried from Otuke are taken to statehouse. They are not taken to the office to campaign for candidate Museveni, but they are taken to use the facilities of State House like the entire aura and soda. So, this is just an example that a candidate is a candidate.  If he has to use the office of the President, let him use the office of the President.  If he is using the office of a presidential candidate, let him go their, meet students from Makerere, women wherever they are coming from and his supporters.

But when they go to State House and you have Kakooza Mutale leading the song you know and all sorts of things. You have the presidential TV shooting at all these presidential campaigns and action literally putting on TV. Then, surely I think it is a very unfair way of using the office of the President. I think the law was trying to address this situation. Then you come here and say the usual, the usual, the usual, I think you are abusing our intelligence. 
You must come out very clearly on what the President should have in offices because we are setting the precedent.  Today it is Museveni, tomorrow it is hon. Awori Aggrey, the next day is it Omara Atubo, another day it is so and so.  So we must be very clear. 
 Thank you very much.  

MR. LWANGA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just wanted to inform hon. Atubo before I sit down, that a President is a President until replaced by another President.  So, really, I think we are wasting a lot of time arguing about nothing.

MR. OMARA ATUBO:  Mr. Speaker, we are not wasting time.  The law is there. You are the one who passed the law.  Why did you pass the law?  I think you have forgotten there is something in your brain that is not working.  We are trying to implement the very provisions, which this very Parliament passed.  So, do not just stand up and say we are wasting time.  We are not wasting time.  We are implementing the law.

MR. BAMWANGA:  I respect you hon. Atubo as a lawyer. But I am wondering whether, in the law there was any provision for the President to go on leave in order to go for presidential elections. 
 I thank you

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Well, there is no provision like President going on leave.

LT. KINOBE: Mr. Speaker, the clarification I am seeking from the hon. Member from Otuke is that he has actually raised very important issues, but he has stopped only at raising them. Now that he brings them up, what does he offer as a solution, especially that clause which is ordinarily attached to the President?  Maybe let me guide the House, what are the issues if it is not what is listed here?  Thank you

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker, for example, I expect although the law did not address it, the presidential candidate to come with a clear budget A budget that is known to the country, and not mixed up with State House and presidential expenses. So that we know whether the President is going to campaign using three or four helicopters to go to Soroti, and he is paying for it. 

This is really what we are seriously debating.  Is there a clear budget for the presidential candidate Museveni, separate from the budgetary expense of the country? When some of his supporters use also State facilities.  Are these separate from the State budget. I think these are things, which the law was trying to address and we should really not play about with this. We are setting up very important precedent.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Yes, but hon. Members, don't you think you should address the problems, which you highlighted?  It is necessary may be to review the provision. But the provision states that he continues to use whatever is attached to his office. I think you are saying that, maybe we should look at it. I think that, maybe we try to amend the Act but as it is now, it is a problem.  

DR. OKULO EPAK: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was going to say precisely the point you hinted, because there could be a problem with the law. If the intention of the law is that we should restrict, the usual facilities to be used by the President during electioneering, then it should have been a little more specific. 

Otherwise as it is, it would appear that the President is entitled to use all his usual facilities attached to him for electioneering. This is the implication, but I do not think that was the intention. 
The intention surely was to restrict the usual facilities, which the President enjoys when he is on State duty. There should be some, which he would be allowed to use for electioneering. And I think we have a bit of problem.  I do not have a copy of the Act with me, but there could be a little bit of problem -(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, may be I can read it for the Members, Section 21(1) of the Act says: "As authorised under this Act or otherwise authorised by law, no candidate shall use government resources for the purpose of campaigning for election Notwithstanding." 
You see the use, notwithstanding sub-section one (1), that is the section that I have read above. A candidate who holds the office of President may continue to use during the campaign, but shall use only those government facilities which are attached to and utilised by the order of that office.

DR. OKULO EPAK: So, I think as far as I am concerned we have a problem with that formulation. The intention was not clearly stated by the law. The intention was to restrict the facilities he has when it comes to electioneering and law is not making it very clear. So, somebody is exploiting that loophole to do anything. I am afraid we are caught in our own limitations.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ETIANG  (TORORO COUNTY): Mr. Speaker, thank you.  May I first of all wish my colleagues whom I have not met since this year, a happy New Year? Hon. Okullo Epak has just touched on a point that I was rising. First of all, I was wondering about the ordinary application of the rules that govern the proceedings laying of Papers that leads to this debate.  I actually wanted to stand on a point of procedure, whether we could perhaps resolve the concern that Members have made. We could make a point to debate the issue which is another way of saying that maybe we have another look at the Act that is now being applied. Secondly, the law as some of us who did not study it, and I speak as an administrator, is interpretative in both cases.  You cannot possibly write each and every foreseeable incident that the law intends to cover.
 
Now, if on the basis of what you have just read out, the interpretation of the incumbent is as he has applied it. I see that he is within the law.  The pronouncement from this House states that during presidential elections, the incumbent shall Leave State House, and go on leave, and that we shall have an Acting President. I cannot see how anybody human can possibly be mathematical about what to do or what not to do within the constraint of the existing Act. 
 Thank  you.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think we end this debate.   I think the importance of having allowed people to express these views, is that, now we have cleared, we have set, the law and clear terms. There is no need to make other interpretations when the terms used are clear.  So, it is clear.  Next item.

MR. WACHA:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Since I started, maybe I should round it up. My problem is still the usage of the word "usual".  I don't think of interpreting that section. We would be going far if we left it hanging as usual. I think the section meant that the facilities attached to the President or to the Presidency must be itemised. But as it might sound, that was the intent of the law and I am not going to be satisfied with the word 
"usual"as used here casually.   

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the colleagues for the comments made and especially hon. Ben Wacha who itemised some of these issues we are talking about and, I have clearly explained that the incumbent President shall continue to use the usual facilities as law states.  If colleagues have some views about the law, that is a different matter. Now, some serious accusations have been raised, especially by hon. Okello Okello that RDCs, DISOs and Ministers are campaigning for candidate Yoweri Museveni.  Mr. Speaker, RDCs and DISOs are public servants and they are responsible for treating all candidates equally.  This is the formal position and we have also communicated – (Interruption) 

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I would like for the sake of clarity the hon. Minister, to tell this House, under which law the RDCs are supposed to treat Presidential candidates equally, under which law?

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA:  Mr. Speaker, my brother Dick Nyai, knows this very well that the Public Service in Uganda serves all Ugandans as equal citizens of Uganda.  So, if there is any civil servant who goes beyond this, then he or she is liable to disciplinary measures in accordance to the law.  So, this is clear. Ministers are political leaders and definitely, they campaign for candidates of their choice.  I campaign for candidate Yoweri Museveni, he is my candidate, and it is my right.  So, that is now a matter for debate.

MR. WACHA: I think the law, Sir, prohibits Minister Ruhakana Rugunda from using the facilities of his office while campaigning for candidate Yoweri Museveni. Can I be assured that, Minister Ruhakana Rugunda does not go around with the facilities of his office?

DR. RUHAKANA RUGUNDA: Mr. Speaker, I will campaign for candidate Yoweri Museveni in accordance with the laws of Uganda.  So, in conclusion, Sir, I wish to thank you very much for the contribution that has been made.  Thank you.

BILLS
SECOND READING

The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Ms. Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that, the Bill entitled "The Parliamentary Elections Bill, 1998" be read for the Second Time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Seconded?  It is seconded, proceed.

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS  (Ms. Namusoke): Mr. Speaker, under Article 76 of the Constitution, Parliament is enjoined to rationalise the provisions of Chapter 5 of the Constitution, which refers to representation of the people.  The Bill, therefore, is to replace the Parliamentary elections Interim Provisions Statute of 1996 Statute No. 4 of 1996 under which the current Parliament was elected. This Bill, deals with, among others, parliamentary elections generally, and by-elections, their qualifications, tenure of office and rights to recall MPs, District Women Representatives and special interest groups, nominations of candidates for elections as MPs, campaigning, voting procedure and so on and so forth. This Bill is not a very big and Members have had it since 1996.  So, I do not need to go into the details of the Bill, because I am sure, they have already read it and the Committee has already gone through it.  I therefore, beg to move.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN, COMMITTEE ON LEGAL AND PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS (Mr. Wandera Ogalo): Thank you Mr. Speaker. In 1996 the National Resistance Council enacted a Parliamentary Election Interim Provision Statute as an interim legislation to provide for Parliamentary Elections due to be held that same year. That law was made pursuant to Article 264 of the Constitution, which gave power to the National Resistance Council to make Interim Laws for elections and other matters connected with elections to any office under the Constitution. The law was therefore to provide for the transitional period.  Article 76 under which the present Bill is brought requires: Parliament to enact law interalia for registration of voters and conduct of public elections.  It is for that reason that the Bill was introduced in Parliament and referred to the Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs for scrutiny as required by rule 143 (c) of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament.

Procedure.

The Committee held discussions with the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the National Organisation for Civic Education and Election Monitoring (NOCEM).  Invitations were extended to Uganda Women Network and Uganda Women Parliamentary Association who failed to turn up.  The Committee also perused the relevant provisions of the Constitution and the Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Statute 1996.

Observations.

Education Qualification:
One of the Constitutional requirements for a person to qualify to be a Member of Parliament is completion of a minimum formal education of Advanced Level Standard or its equivalent.  This was therefore reflected in the Parliamentary Elections (Interim provisions) Statute 1996. There however, followed uncertainty on what is the equivalent of Advanced level Standard, partly because the list of those provided in the law was not exhaustive.  The Electoral Commission reverted to the use of affidavits from challenged candidates to verify the equivalent or Advanced level standard.  

After election petitions were filed in the High Court, seeking determination as to whether challenged qualifications were equivalent to Advanced Level Standard and the Courts made interpretations.  The Committee noted that the above situation, causes uncertainty both before and after election, and inevitably adversely affects the electoral process.

Public Office:
Article 80 (3) reads: "The Constitution requires that a person elected to parliament, when he or she is a member of a local Government Council or holds a public office shall resign before assuming the office of a Member of Parliament." 
The Bill provides that: "a person holding a pubic office, who wishes to be a candidate shall apply for leave of absence at least fourteen days before nomination day."

The Committee observed that the period provided is short and does not give the intending candidate enough time to make the necessary preparations.  The intending candidate may also spend a lot of time campaigning at the expense of the public he or she serves.  There is also an added danger of abuse of office during the campaigns, if a candidate is allowed to stay in office up to a few days before nomination day.

Recall of Members of Parliament:
Whereas Article 77 (3) of the Constitution prescribes that; "The term of Parliament shall be five years from the date of its first sitting after a general election." And a Member of Parliament is elected on the understanding that he or she will serve for that period. Article 84 of the Constitution: confers on the electorate of any Constituency a right to recall their Member of Parliament before the expiry of the term of Parliament.  Parliament is required to prescribe the procedure to be followed for the recall of a Member of Parliament. The Committee noted with approval that, the Bill clearly sets out the procedure to be followed. But it does not provide for authentication of signatures of the electorate for the recall. Where a sitting member is in Parliament with a minority, it is easy to mobilise the majority who voted against such a Member to sign a petition for recall.  The Committee noted that there is need to provide safeguards so as to avoid a situation where few individuals can commit acts of forgery so as to attain the required number of signatures for a recall.

Election of District Woman Representatives:
The Committee notes that it is the proposition of Government that, District Women Representatives are elected by universal adult suffrage and by secret vote on the same day as the general election of Members of Parliament, elected directly to represent Constituencies.  Adult suffrage carries better representation than electoral colleges. On the other hand the Committee notes that the proposed method may be seen to result into an election by adult suffrage of two Members of Parliament for the same geographical constituency.
It is also worth noting that Article 78 (1), (3) and (4) of the Constitution read as follows:
(1) Parliament shall consist of-
    (a) Members directly elected to represent constituencies;
    (b) One woman representative for every district;
    (c) Such members of representative of the army, youth, workers, persons with disabilities and other groups as Parliament may determine; and
    (d) The Vice President and Ministers, who, if not already elected members of Parliament, shall be ex-officio Members of Parliament without the right to vote on any issue requiring a vote in Parliament.
    (2) The representatives referred to in paragraph (a) of clause (1) of this Article shall be elected on the basis of universal adult suffrage and by secret ballot.
    (3) Parliament shall, by law, prescribe the procedure for elections of representatives referred to in paragraphs (b) and (c) of Clause (1) of this article.

The Committee noted that a clear rationale for district women representatives needs to be spelt out, that is whether they represent a special interest group or otherwise.

Voters Registers:
To ensure credible elections there is need to have a clean voters register.  Many dead people still appear on the register and the updating of the register is done at the last moment, leaving a lot to be desired.

Campaigning – Candidates meetings:
Clause 22 of the Bill provides for joint candidates meetings organised by the Returning Officer of the district. The Committee observed that joint candidates meetings draw the Electoral Commission into the arena of campaigns.  Article 62(b) of the Constitution reads: –
"The Electoral Commission shall have the following functions: -
(b) To organise, conduct and supervise elections and referenda in accordance with this Constitution." It is not the function of the Electoral Commission to organise, conduct and supervise campaigns, if it does so, it is put in a position of conflict of interest when the conduct of campaigns is a subject of an election petition. The Commission’s impartiality will be doubted when it is perceived to be giving support to one side. 

Returning Officers have to traverse all Constituencies in Uganda at great cost to the taxpayer in supervising the exercise. Campaign period is the time when election officials are most needed to put in place mechanisms to ensure free and fair elections which is the Commission’s first Constitutional function. Their attentions therefore, should not be diverted elsewhere.

    7. Nomination fee; 
There is now a practice by which intending candidates have to pay a fee, as a qualification to stand for elective office. This was introduced, as method candidates would use to contribute to the cost of the electoral process.  The money is treated as revenue and directly paid into the Consolidated Fund. It is not recoverable whether the candidate is elected or not, each candidate irrespective of income levels pays it.  It is argued that it acts as a measure by which a candidate shows his or her seriousness to contest for elective office. The Committee does not support the notion that financial capability necessarily indicates seriousness.

Recommendations.
    1. Educational Qualifications;
Those candidates claiming to have equivalent of Advanced level should have their qualifications equated.  A certificate indicating that such qualifications are equivalent to Advanced level should be issued prior to nomination day and submitted to the Electoral Commission at the time of nomination.

2. Persons holding Public Office;
A Public Officer intending to stand for elective office should apply and obtain leave of absence at least one hundred and twenty days before the expiry of the term of Parliament.

3. Recall of Members of Parliament;
The Minister should lay before Parliament a statutory instrument providing for authentication of signatures obtained for purposes of recall.

4. Joint candidates meetings;
These should no longer be held but each candidate be left to organise his or her own campaigns.

5. Nomination fee;
That this is raised to one hundred currency points.
The committee notes that there is a constitutional obligation to enact legislation relating to Parliamentary Elections and hence supports the policy behind the Bill.
The committee will at the appropriate stage move amendments to the Bill and recommends that subject to other amendments moved by the hon. Members, the Bill be enacted into Law.
Mr. Speaker, I beg to report.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Hon. Members, the debate is open now.

MR. NYAI (Ayivu County, Arua) Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and I wish to thank the hon. chairman of the Committee for a very clear report, although there is a contradiction, I am sure he will clarify. On page 3 just slightly above the big Item called No.5 ‘Voters Registers'. There is a paragraph where the Committee noted that, – No, I am talking about the last sentence on nomination, and it is on page 4. I am sorry, the last sentence on page 4 of the report reads: "The Committee does not support the notion that financial capability necessarily indicates seriousness." I could not agree with the Committee more, because we have a case in point of a gentleman called Mr. Senkubuge. He raised the eight million shillings to become a presidential candidate, and within a few days he was no longer a candidate. Now if that statement is true, it is therefore contradictory on page 5, where you have nomination fee. The Committee then goes ahead to say, that this is raised to one hundred currency points and one-hundred currency point, is 2 million shillings. 

We cannot say that, financial capability is not equal to ability and then go ahead and say that, we raise it so as to keep out others.  That is being very selfish. We as a Parliament cannot hold our Constituents to ransom.  If you are very good, it does not matter how many people stand against you to determine the win.  The voters have trust in you, why do you want to protect yourself by trying to keep people out by currency points?  It is not democratic! We shall come to that Debate. I am very sure the people who elected us here are also watching us closely if we are going to be protected by law that says we must raise the Nomination fee to two million shillings. On page 3, Mr. Speaker –(Interruption)      

MR. WACHA: Thank you Mr. Speaker and l thank hon. Dick Nyai for giving way.  I think this point needs to be explained.  When the statement on page 4 was written, Members will recollect that the committee had suggested, during the Debate on the Presidential Election Bill, that the nomination fee be done away. And instead put in place a notion for a deposit that would then be collected by any candidate who could have attained a certain percentage of the vote's cast. This House rejected that proposal - I want this understood - this House rejected this proposal and the House went ahead and retained the nomination fee of 8 million. 

Now when we wrote this – and I want Members to know that this was not done in one day.  The Bill went through a number of people before the Committee. So, when we wrote this proposal, it is unfortunate that the nomination fee was not removed, we still had the notion that we would have a deposit instead of nomination fee. Now when the House passed the figure of eight million in respect to Presidential Elections, there was then an internal debate, which stated that if you are having Presidential Candidates having a nomination fee of eight million, why do you put yours at two hundred and fifty thousand? Will you not look ridiculous? I think members should understand that – (Laughter and Applause).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Members again you will remember Section 15 where a person withdrawals within thirty days.  There was a proposal that he should account, but I think we rejected it and said he has to refund the money. Again I think the purpose here was the seriousness and then I think the consistency, which hon. Ben Wacha is trying to state.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Ben Wacha for his explanation and it actually confirms my anxiety on the method of work and what seems to form the basis of debate in this House. I remember that on the Presidential Election’s Bill, the committee had moved a reduction on the deposit from eight million to two million, I seconded hon. Dr. Okulo Epak and we argued that in offering yourself for services as a President of this nation, you are doing a noble service.  There is no need for a deposit. It cannot be treated as revenue because what the state spends on you is a lot more than that revenue.  Instead of only defeating our Motion, the House then went ahead and defeated the Committee’s recommendation and said let us go back to eight million. Now I understand why they was eight million, so that they can have the Parliamentary deposit to two million to keep out  - others shouting – for four million.  Now Mr. Speaker, for representatives of the people of Uganda – (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Nyai, this recommendation of hundred-currency point is not by the members here.  It is by the committee.  We do not know whether they will go over that recommendation or they will reduce it. 

MR. NYAI:  No, Mr. Speaker I thank you for the guidance but you can also hear the chorus and it is a very bad sign for members of this House to seek, and protect themselves by saying this is the law to protect ourselves. Mr. Speaker – (Interjection) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member are you suggesting that the members – (Interjection) 

MR. NYAI:  I am suggesting Mr. Speaker – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Are you suggesting that the members have the ability to raise two millions themselves?  

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Speaker if they did not have the ability, they would not be so jubilant – (Laughter).  So that being the point.  Let me finish – (Interjection) 

MRS. SALAAMU MUSUMBA: Mr. Speaker I think hon. Dick Nyai is reading too much in his smiles, but I want to inform him that members here will hardly earn any money, in the remaining part of the session because of the motor vehicles. I am sure he is aware that we are so badly in need of financial assistance that when we talk about –the committee reports of two million, it is hardening our return to the house.  Thank you very much.  

MR. OMARA ATUBO: Mr. Speaker I think they are asking hon. Dick Nyai in the House to compare the two million proposed for Members of Parliament and eight million for presidential candidates, that is the point we should not miss!  The point is that when a presidential candidate contributes or gives eight million shillings, the state or the Electoral Commission gives the member a tune much higher than eight million shillings. Now, I am wondering whether both of you are going to be Parliamentary Candidates? When you pay two million, are you are also going to be facilitated? The state should give you some money also – Yes, because when you argue that eight million or two million, then somebody should be higher.  But you should know that eight million, which you have paid as a presidential candidate is, cancelled actually by what the state gives you.  I think you should bare that point in mind.

MR. NYAI:  Thank you for that information.  Mr. Speaker I am not persuaded that Members of Parliament are so hard up, that they will not be able to raise the two million shillings.  I am very sure as we rely on the secretariat, there will be money made available.  But what I am saying is, I hope that we as the Parliament, will take cognisance of the fact that we must have the interest of the country at heart.  The other matter Mr. Speaker I want to turn to with your permission – (Interjection) 

THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Hon. Janat Mukwaya): I want to learn from my colleague hon. Dick Nyai.  The word Secretariat is ambiguous.  We have the National Youth Council Secretariat, and the Church of Uganda Secretariat.So which secretariat will fund – (Interjection)

MR. NYAI: I am very clear hon. Minister, what I mean just to clear her doubt, there is a Movement Secretariat, which freely hands out money to some members here, When there is even Movement MPs Desk, but that is a matter which we shall come to.  But the other point I wanted us to reflect on is on page 3 of the report.  There is a long section on the election of District Women Representatives.  I understand the anxiety of the committee, they spelt it out very well but they end by saying the committee noted that a clear rational for District Women Representatives needs to be spelt out, that is whether they represent a special interest group or otherwise. Now the clarification I am seeking is whether this position has been spelt out because if it is not yet done, then how do we proceed with the Bill?  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. RWABITA (Ibanda South, Mbarara): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I want to first talk about the problem of qualifications for both Parliamentary and Presidential Elections. We have been having a problem of true documents for candidates especially regarding their standards of education. I think to make things easy, UNEB should make a list of Diplomas and Certificates that would be equivalent to Advanced level.  This will be easy, because when somebody brings his or her certificates, there will be already a standard list of the equivalents.  Otherwise, when at the last hour somebody tries to make his or her document fit in any list for the UNEB to prove the equivalent it becomes a nightmare. – (Interjection)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member you think the UNEB should know the Diplomas in Finland, in Greenland, in Argentina because a member may have had his Education there? 

MR. RWABITA: Mr. Speaker, UNEB should have time to consult various countries and give them a list of certificates in those countries equivalent to ours here then that will facilitate their judgement. For example, when you say the certificates belonging to Mr. Ssebagala are equivalent to P.6, how do you judge that?  Unless there is already a standard list of certain certificates that would qualify to be equivalent to H.S.C.  So, I think that would ease our problems with candidates and their supporters.

THE DEPUTY Speaker; Regarding qualifications, there is also a problem whereby somebody, after failing to get a certificate but has a chance to get a job, uses somebody’s certificate and name throughout his life – this has happened and I think Members must be knowing such people.  Now, when that person comes to stand as an MP and is using that name, it can be proved that he is using somebody’s certificate, and he should be disqualified. That also should be taken into consideration because some of these certificates presented do not belong to the candidates, they belonging to other people.  So, that is an area that needs research also, Mr. Speaker.

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker and thank you, hon. Member for giving way.  The information I want to give you is, if somebody uses a certificate that is not his, that is fraud and such a person should go to prison. He should not even belong here, because his or her level of integrity is below standard.

MR. RWABITA: Yes, you are right.  That is what I am saying that if some people are using other people’s certificates, that should be checked so that he or she is disqualified right away.

I want to talk about voters' registers with the experience we have had in the field. This is in regard to the youth.  The youth that were born in 1980-1982 now are ready for voting, but we have found a problem. One, the girls are registering, alright, but the boys fear to register because they are going to be asked to pay graduated tax.  This is an area that should be revisited because we might miss many youths think when they go to register, they will be considered to qualify to pay graduated tax.  I think, the Government should come out with an announcement to allay their fears.  Otherwise, these young men may not register to vote in the presidential and parliamentary elections.   This is not just a wishful thinking, but it is a factual. We have had especially in towns' cases where youths are very, very slippery. They do not want to pay taxes and therefore they say, for this time they are not going to register. Perhaps with more research, we are likely to get more facts from other areas of this Country.
   
I want to talk about the updating officers, because I think it is connected with registers.  The updating officers are not doing a good job because they just sit in one place, either at the Sub-county Headquarters or Parish Headquarters, and expect people to come to them, then register.  I think this is being too much of unseriousness. An old woman who is about ten kilometres away, a sick person who is five kilometres away, how do you expect these people to come and meet the returning officers sitting at the Headquarters of a Parish or a Sub-county? I think the Electoral Commission should make sure that these officers are facilitated to move into the Parishes and cells. Some cells are so large that if you expect people to come to one centre, there will be many people will stay at home and never check on the registers nor register themselves.  This is the problem I have found in my area, and I think other Members may have found the same.
  
 Again, we must call upon the Electoral Commission, not to sit in the next four years when there's no election and just come at the last hour to choose anybody to be a civic leader.  Civic Education is again very, very poor!  Why wait for the fifth year?  Why can't the Electoral Commission train people during the time of no activity?  They have four years to train people in every Sub-county, so that they know what to tell the people. We are losing many votes because an old woman does not know where to put the fingerprint or the young man does not know where to tick. So, our civic education is still very poor and I am sure the results should have been better or they should be better if these people are trained earlier enough so that they have all their material at their fingertips to educate our communities.

The last point I want to talk about is about joint candidates meetings.  Mr. Speaker, I agree with the Committee that really it is not necessary to have joint candidates meetings. The experience is that, this is an area where some ruthless candidates with their supporters who are unruly can sabotage a meeting of a member.  Somebody, who has got a lot of money can import five lorries of his supporters from other area to make a lot of noise when his opponent is talking, make a lot of abuses and what have you. So, definitely let each member plan his or her campaign programme and definitely people will listen to him or her according to their timetable.  Some of these candidate meetings have been very unruly and the people who want to listen have no time to listen because these young boys are shouting, drumming and what have you, and sometimes it is very difficult to discipline such people.
 
So, I agree with the Committee that some candidates meetings are not necessary.  I think people are mature to listen to each candidate and let him or her present his or her manifesto or programme of action.  Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.

MR. ASANASIO KAYIZZI (Kassanda North, Mubende): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, and I wish to thank the committee for its precise report and recommendation. But I only wish to vehemently oppose the committee's recommendation number 4 which seeks to abolish the joint candidate's meeting. Talking from experience I have noted with concern that these joint candidates' meeting does provide free and fair campaigns. This where the voters can make their position correctly, when all the intending candidates are given their platform. So, if we try to abolish these joint candidate's meeting, what we would expect is what we are seeing now in the presidential campaigns, such acts of violence as you can see, ambushes here and there and all other acts of intimidation are carried out during individual campaign rallies.  
Therefore I would recommend that we resort to our joint candidates meetings. It is only maybe some of my colleagues who don’t have support on the ground that will fear candidates' meetings.  Otherwise if you are strong enough, I do not see why you should fear to go and face the challenge. So, with me I do not totally disagree with the removal of this joint candidate's meetings and if it is possible I only urge my colleagues to support me and we revert back to this joint candidate's meetings.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. KITYO MUTEBI (Mawokota South, Mpigi): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  I would like to thank the chairman and the committee for a job well done.  I want to comment on two recommendations. I want to comment on recommendation number 2 of the intending public services to take leave for 120 days before the elections.  I think this is very good, because already civil servants have already started abusing their offices, by openly campaigning using government facilities. 
  
And I think if it was possible, political leaders intending to stand for parliamentary elections should also take leave. This is because we have already seen the problem of depreciating between an incumbent president and an aspiring presidential candidate. Some of the LCV chairmen, LC II, LC III who intend to stand for parliamentary elections will definitely misuse their offices.  So I think also they should take leave.  I also wanted to support the parliamentary meetings, which are not joined, I wanted them to be separate and I support the committee.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO (Chwa county, Kitgum): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I feel that, if the fee of two million is too high, I think it is not fair to compare a parliamentary position with a presidential one.  These are two separate different positions.  When you are aspiring to become a president, you know what is in store for you, if you do succeed everything will be free. But for a parliamentary candidate representing just a county to pay almost a half the fee of a presidential candidate, I think it is too high.  I think we should not appear to be protecting ourselves, it should not be more than five hundred thousand shillings. I would like to appeal to honourable Members to look at that once again.
  
My second point is about these affirmative action groups. My belief is that people come to parliament, to further their intention so as to promote the interest of their groups, and be able to climb and reach decision-making positions. I feel that, it is self-defeating if one individual benefits repeatedly from an affirmative action.  Mr. Speaker we give points to the girl student going to Makerere, but you only get it once.  If you intend to go and do a Masters degree course you do not get again.  Iam therefore, saying it is unfair for a woman representative or a person representing people with disabilities to benefit four or five times from the same affirmative action.  It is defeats the purpose - (Interruption) 

THE Minister of Ethics & Integrity (Mrs. Matembe): Thank you Mr. Speaker, from the presentation of hon. Okello, it becomes clear to me that he does not seem to understand the purpose of the affirmative action.  He thinks of, to one individual who benefits by becoming a Member of Parliament. The purpose of affirmative action is two folds; One is to remove the imbalance that does exist between men and women in terms of participation in the national affairs, political, economical or otherwise, and this was to be achieved through election of woman representative. By bringing a woman representative in this Parliament you elevate voice of the woman in this Parliament, so that there is a combination of two different group interest.
Secondly, it was also, to enable people in the Parliament have the woman, who best know how women feel and how they are affected and be able to articulate their views and ideas in this House, and the same applies to the youth, the disabled and so on.                  

Therefore it is not by our presence here, to benefit the individual standing here.  For instance when Matembe was in Mbarara talking so loud and made a good impact, more women came up to stand in there Constituencies.  Therefore by being here the benefit to women is not just this woman in parliament as an individual, but to increase the participation of women, by raising the confidence of women over there and bring the voice of woman in this parliament.  I thank you Mr. Speaker.

MRS. MPANGA JOYCE.  Mr. Speaker, the position of women representative was created as a constituency just like the other constituencies.  If you don't want women to stand more than once or people with disability to stand more than once in a constituency, it should be uniform elsewhere, let us say Kasanda north should not stand again because he has benefited.  When you give this woman exposure, when she comes back next time, she articulates the women concerns better. We are articulating not only women concern, but also all social, legislative and human issues that are discussed here, So, I can not see what you people lose if a woman stood once or twice.          

Secondly, you should remember that we are fighting attitudes, and attitudes take much longer to die.  I may be a better Parliamentarian than other men but then when I stand the men say go back to your place because this is for men. What, we are fighting are these attitudes and it will take time, and that is why the Constitution says it should be only reviewed every after 10 years.

MR.BAGALANA: Mr. Speaker, I want to give information to an earlier point made by hon. Okello-Okello concerning the nomination fee.  With these affirmative groups and interest groups, I think the motive and the whole rationale behind it, is putting up affirmative groups to be represented in Parliament and strengthen the weaker sections of society financially and politically. 

So if we say, three million for a district woman or a youth or disabled, it will be defeating the purpose, because these are very weak people, already weak so you are weakening them the more.  So I would suggest that these interest group pay two hundred or five hundred for women and youth but for general constituents I recommend 3 million.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. Members for the information given.  But, it would appear that the minister of ethics and integrity did not get my point.  My point is that, even if we change a woman representative every five years, the imbalance will be improved.  It does not need to be improved by keeping just one face all the time. I do not believe that, it is only the ladies who are in this Parliament who can really articulate the problems of women better.  There are some left out there who are in- (Interruption) 

MRS. MUKWAYA: Mr. Speaker, I want to thank hon. Okello-Okello for giving way.  I want to get a clarification from him when we talk about capacity building.  One term of office for a Member of Parliament, who is already learning on the job, and culturally, I do not see any of these hon. men here, who have mobilised their communities to allow sisters in their constituencies to come. So attitudinally, many of you have not helped the Ministry of gender and culture to turn around the attitudes of men.  So, why do we lose this woman who has been here for five years, and acquired the capacity of national debate, national issues and internalise issues for presentation to be here 

Secondly I want also to get a second clarification.  We are dividing districts where some districts are bigger than others.  So, if you want a woman Member of Parliament to be in Parliament only once, then let us also debate on this Bill facilitation of interest groups, which is bigger than a normal small constituency of 2000 voters.   Thank you.  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:   Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the hon. minister.  But, it is not my responsibility to mobilise women to come to this Parliament.  I think those who come to Parliament should know what to do, and how to come here. You do not have to wait for somebody to mobilise you. I am talking about affirmative action.  The world over affirmative action can not be repeated.  I am talking about affirmative action because these people are being given some benefit to allow them to be here.  What I am saying is that, they should not benefit more than once.   Mr. Speaker, I am no longer taking any information.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member let him finish I will give you opportunity to contribute.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, my second point- (Interruption)

MS KIRASO: Mr. Speaker, today, we are debating the report of the committee on legal and the Parliamentary affairs on the Parliamentary elections Bill, 1998.  The Constitution provides that after 10 years of the coming into forth of the 1995 Constitution, affirmative action will be reviewed.  Mr. Speaker, is it therefore in order for the hon. Member of Parliament from Chwa County to drill the House and bring such issues, which should be considered after 10 years of the Constitution at this time. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: No, my understanding of the hon. Member’s contribution is not that we review the requirement of having special interest groups being represented. His contribution is that with these affirmative action groups, more opportunity should be given to more people coming under that category. So that more people are trained, instead of one person being exposed for more than once or twice. 

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker you have put it in a better way, we have about nine women Members of Parliament here who defeated men without the benefit of affirmative action. I just wonder whether some women are more women than others.  If a woman can defeat (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think you wind up so that others people can contribute.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  I am winding up, Mr. Speaker. What I am saying is that, these people eat from affirmative action then they eat from somewhere else, including the army representatives.  They have 10 places; they also go and stand somewhere else.  Mr. Speaker, my suggestion- (Interruption)

MS NAMUSOKE: Mr. Speaker, article 78 of the Constitution says among others: 
"Parliament shall consist of Members directly elected to represent constituencies". 
"One woman representative for every district". And so on and so forth.  Is the hon. Member in order to give the impression to this House and this nation that women Members of Parliament who are elected as district representatives are here to eat here and there?  And what do we eat?  (Laughter).  Surely is the hon. Member in order to give a wrong impression about woman representatives?  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think before I rule hon. Member, what did you mean by 'eating' there?  Please explain!

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, what I meant is that, if women representatives in this House are coming on affirmative action, I think it is not fair to allow another woman who should have benefited from that affirmative action to go and defeat Okello-Okello in Chwa. This is because she has got to benefit from Affirmative action, She should leave me alone and looks to their affirmative action.  (Laughter).  

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, is it your view – because there was a point of order which I have to rule on.  Is it your view that because there is affirmative action under which women can come to Parliament, they should not participate in another general election?  Is that your view?  Then that is not a correct view.  It is out of order.  Please wind up.

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO:  Mr. Speaker, I know it is a constitutional requirement.  This equivalent has become guesswork.  Even with UNEB, and the courts, it is very difficult.  I know it is a constitutional requirement, but I think we should really look at it again.  This idea of equivalent is very, very confusing and I wish we could find way of leaving it. I thank you Mr. Speaker.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI (Bugangaizi county, Kibaale): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I want to take this opportunity to thank the committee for a good job done. I have a few observations to make.  One is on the education qualification. It has not come out well in the report whether every person who intends to contest will be required to produce a certificate from UNEB. In our case trying to certify that one has the qualification as it was for presidential candidates l think it should come out well.  This is because we want to avoid a situation, where people will go to their former schools and possibly convince the heads of those institutions to give them letters. And then they will use these letters to present to the Electoral Commission as letters certifying that they have the qualifications.  Mr. Speaker, there is a chairman of LCIV–(Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, I think let us put this to rest.  Once this law is passed, it means anybody including you sitting in this Parliament, if you intend to contest for next the Parliament, you will have to prove that you have an equivalent of A Level.  As to colluding with past, that is a different matter but I think everybody if he wants to stand next time, he will have to do that.

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  That is what really I wanted to be clarified.    I know somebody who was nominated on to whom it may concern and really that is terrible. This person does not have the qualifications but he went to his former school, convinced them and he got to "whom it may concern letter" and he was nominated.  

MR. BAGALANA:  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker and the Member holding the Floor.  I think this is a very important issue in the politics of our country.  There are issues where you find that in a village, in a county, and in the country, people studied with this person, he ended in primary six, he has been in that village, and he has never gone anywhere, but he is nominated as S.6. This is a problem.  So when hon. Kasirivu addresses this point, I think as a Parliament, we must come up with a solution to this point.
   
The issue of the nomination fee, you are aware that when this Parliament was debating the Presidential Elections Bill, there was the previous debate on whether presidential and Parliament elections should be held on the same day. There were people who were seriously in for these elections to be on the same day and their main concern was that it would reduce costs. Two million shillings seems to be much, but in order to reduce that gap these two elections be held on different days, so that the contribution of a person standing for parliamentary elections in this electoral process be necessary. So that we try to reduce the cost, and each person to contesting will have to contribute to this electoral process. 

I tried to make some preliminary calculation and found out that with 214 constituencies, plus the 53 constituencies that are open to our sisters. We would have 267 constituencies, assuming each constituency will have three candidates at two million shillings. Then those who intend to stand for parliamentary elections will contribute 1.6 billion and I think this is fair.  We would have contributed to the electoral process –(Interjection) – exactly.  So I still think what the committee suggested two million shillings be upheld by this Parliament.  

MR. JOHN ERESU: I would like to inform the Member holding the floor that many of the elections in this country have been sponsored partly through foreign donations. Raising the figure to two million shillings, holds ourselves responsible, to provide funding for our own elections, without depending so much on foreign donors. In turn this will infringe on the methods of our democracy.  

DR. KASIRIVU ATWOOKI:  Thank you Mr. Speaker.  Hon. Eresu stresses my point.  The other issue is the proposal by the committee that those who intend to stand for elections should go on leave. I support it. However, there is the issue of the LCs as raised by hon. Kityo.  How does the chairman LC111 or LC1V or councillor – if a chairman LC 1V, if he is to go on leave to whom does he leave the office?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member, a councillor, a chairman LC 1V is not a public officer envisaged under the law.  The public servants they are talking about, are those who are employed as public servants and not political leaders.

DR. KASIRIVU: Yes, Mr. Speaker, but in the report it is also indicated that those who are in elective offices as brought out by hon. Kityo, there are the ones who are using the facilities of government to campaign!  Now how do you get the LC people who are also using the offices to campaign?  That is my concern.

THE CHAIRMAN: But you see, if it is elective office you are also in elective office, you Member of Parliament – yes, you have said elective office; what is elective office?

DR. KASIRIVU: Mr. Speaker, the only difference between a Member of Parliament and the chairman LC1V is that; a Member of Parliament has no public facility he is using Whereas the chairmen has the vehicles and fuel at their disposal.  So, something should also be looked at to make sure that these people do not unnecessarily misuse the government resources.  I thank you. 

PROF. MWAKA (Woman Representative, Luweero): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker, for having given me the chance although, my neighbour here was nearly kicking me in the tummy when I stood to give him information.  

MR. OKELLO-OKELLO: Mr. Speaker, is the hon. Member representing Luweero and Nakasongola districts in order to make a clear statement that I nearly kicked her in the tummy when I never did.  Is she in order?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Unfortunately, I did not see it, it might have been paying a courtesy or something, and I do not know so let her proceed.

PROF. MWAKA: Mr. Speaker, my words were very calculated, I said nearly because I was behind him so I could not see what was happening.  Thank you very much.  I will just concentrate for the time being on the issue of the women representatives. Women representatives who came here the other time were elected by Electoral College, which electoral college actually is not a small one. It starts from LC 1, and I wonder on which basis is that government. The report says that it is a proposition of government that district women representatives should be elected by universal adult suffrage and by secret ballot on the same day as the general elections of Member of Parliament. The fear to pay for the cost of the elections, I do not see any rationale for the election expenses to be transferred from government to the women. How is it done?  A woman – for example, a district like Mbarara with 44 sub-counties, with more than ten male representatives, and you expect the lonely woman to canvass for votes in her constituency where there are more than ten men. 
 
One time we argued it here that those women should be given a special allowance for mobilisation and the men refused.  We are getting the same allowance and the same treatment, now come to the elections they are saying we get ten men onto our heads and we carry them – I have some statistics from Luweero –(Interruption).

MR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Member holding the Floor.  The clarifications I seek is, are women representative of the Electoral College or are they representative of the whole district?  Are you saying that women do not have the capacity to canvass for votes from the entire district?  Please clarify, because if they do not have the capacity to canvass for votes from the entire district, you are by implication saying that women, actually, are not capable of representing everybody in the district!

DR. NKUUHE: On page 1 of this report the committee called Uganda Women Parliamentary Association and they failed to turn up.  Could you clarify to me why they did not turn up to the committee, to express you views so that we could then strengthen your position.

MRS. MATEMBE:  Mr. Speaker, hon. Tim Lwanga knows very well that a county is not a district.  For instance, eight counties constitute Mbarara, and some of my colleagues in Parliament like hon. Nkuuhe represent three sub-counties and hon. Guma three and me 48.  So, is he in order hon. Lwanga to equate incapacity of mobilisation of a huge and a bigger area when we are not facilitated with capacity to effectively represent the people the way we do in this House?  Is he in order really to underrate us in this way?

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Well, I think, my understanding was really a question by the hon. Member that the women Members of Parliament represent a district, and as such, here they have to traverse all corners of the district.  They do not only campaign in the Electoral College when it sits, but they must have contacted various people. – This is what I think he was saying. I do not know whether that is not the position, but I think, he was wondering like that.  So, I think, he was not out of order.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker.  Anyway, I am not surprised with due respect about the selfishness of men.  They give you with one hand and they take what they have given you with another hand.  You are saying we are coming on affirmative action and then we carry the burden of running a whole district when some other men have only two sub-counties.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But hon. Member you will assist us.  I think, in the report the committee seems to have raised this question – these women members are they representing the entire district as such including men, or they are representing women? Because if they are representing women, how do you conduct a universal suffrage on the same day with women.  I think, that is something, which we need to be clarified on by the hon. Members contributing to the debate.

PROF. MWAKA: Mr. Speaker, while I agree that the Women MPs represent districts, the essence of their coming is to make the women’s voice represented. Therefore, while we represent districts, emphasis actually is on the women. Otherwise what will the men do?  You hon. Members here, if the women are representing the districts, we are putting emphasis on the women and if we do it for the youth and everybody, you people, what will you be doing?  So, what we are saying, is what is the role of Women Members of parliament! One is to bring the issues of women to be heard and making sure that the interests of the women even at local level are catered for.  We are their mouthpiece therefore, while we are arguing that we represent the whole districts, everybody knows even the way we debate. Here whenever there is an issue of women, all the women get up to support it. 

We are just saying as I was giving my statistics that during the Referendum, Katikamu North has about 25,000 voters, Katikamu South about the same number, 25,000, Bamunanika, about 30,000 and Nakaseke 35,000.  We know that the expectations of the electorate, and what they expect from the men is not different from what they expect from the women .So while the men will be fulfilling their mandate to their 25,000 voters, we women are in 100,000 already.  So, given the resources available to us, and the distance to be covered, how do you reconcile?  It seems we are making work harder for the Woman MP and then the affirmative action actually is spoilt.  It is no longer affirmative action because a woman’s coming here is not just to come here, and get money.  

No, we have a role to play and, therefore, at some appropriate time definitely we have to move an amendment. For this time let us continue with Electoral College until the Constitutional review, because I know so many things can be taken into account.  We may even say those women their interest is mainly for women.  Let the women constitute the electorate and the women elect us. otherwise men are asking us to carry our own load as usual and also carry their loads.  

I would also definitely wish with due respect to do the same as the Committee did, to ask Government to clarify why they want to have this review now when the Constitution says ten years.  The review I am talking about is removing affirmative action and by the way -(Interruption)

MRS. MUKWAYA: I want to inform hon. Victoria Mwaka that the Constitutional Review Commission being put in place is not reviewing affirmative action but it is reviewing the whole Constitution after five years, its performance, the encumbrances and so on.  It is only five years now, after ten years, the affirmative action will be reviewed later, not during this review of the Constitution.

PROF. MWAKA: Thank you very much.  That even makes it better.  I am asking why the hurry unless if there is some hidden agenda or with due respect the male folk are frightened that the women are becoming too strong. So that when we remain here ‘for another five years,’ we will become too strong and remove them from their seats, definitely that is not our intention, let us be fair.  If somebody is really gaining experience, let the experience be gained otherwise people will go out half-baked and then the purpose will be defeated. 

And by the way, even the incoming competitors, those people who are going to stand against us, they also find it a problem, because somebody new being able to canvass a whole district like Mukono, like Mbarara, even Luweero is a big one, like Iganga for example. So, I suggest that Government clarify the issue on which they base the decision I raised earlier that it is because of fear of the cost that women are elected differently. And then the men and they fear prepare a different voter’ register. But let us not put the burden on the women whom they assume they are helping yet they are giving us with one hand and taking away what we have been given by the other.

So, I sit down by saying that the Electoral College is appropriate in terms of population.  The population, if you get one constituency with two sub-counties, definitely the Electoral College will even be larger than the people being voted by universal suffrage.  Yes, if you have one county for example this new district, Nakasongola, it has six sub-counties, it is only one county and they are taking the same condition with a woman in Mbarara with 44 sub-counties.  It is actually unfair.
 
Let us use rationale, let us look at cost effectiveness, the geography of the constituencies and then make the decision.  Let us not be taken by emotions that women are becoming too powerful and I know all of you are just talking for the sake of talking.  I know when we bring the amendment, all the men will support us because you will see the logic.  I thank you.

DR. OKULO EPAK (Oyam South, Apac): Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I certainly sympathise with women who have been unfairly given such a large constituency in return for the favour of affirmative action.  I opposed this thing in the C.A so I was very surprised when hon. Bagalana said that women are weak and hon. Matembe did not protest.  In the first instance, somebody cannot be weak who represents a whole district. So I think we have assumed that women are very strong and I must congratulate them for their strength. 

My understanding is that the district was just a convenient constituency from which women would be elected in an affirmative action. The responsibility of those women is for the entire constituency like that of a Member of Parliament representing a constituency. But somehow the tendency has been that these women represent the interests of women.  I do not think so, and that is where there is a bit of confusion.  I think they represent the interests of women, youth, elders including my own interests in the context of a district constituency and I think that is very unfair.  Unfortunately it is now too late to review it.  The women were so enthusiastic about this thing, they accepted it and we could only sympathise with them as they go through this hurdle.  

I want to make a general observation.  I do not know whether the Electoral Commission is here. It is high time the Electoral Commission employed its own staff as returning officers.  It is absurd and really unfair to use Chief Administrative Officers and Chiefs as returning officers. It might even be worse for us during the presidential and parliamentary elections. But when it comes to local elections these people are highly intimidated and manipulated.  These are civil servants that are responsible to other authorities and they really cannot be partially responsible to the Electoral Commission. I think the Electoral Commission should be urged to fill those vacancies of returning officers. If they cannot employ permanent staff then they should employ them on contracts when the election are over dispose them off. I think the people in the Electoral Commission are not being adequately innovative and they do not know what suffering we are undergoing by using borrowed staff.  

I want to speak on qualifications, Mr. Speaker, I am not one of those people who supported prescription of qualifications for political offices in the Constitution nor in the Electoral Laws.  Unfortunately we lost this battle in Constituent Assembly and I am glad that those who are interested in these qualifications are now going around the country saying that it is unfair to prescribe qualifications.  I think that with the hindsight they have learnt that qualification should be a matter for contest. I should be able to challenge a candidate and say, this one is not qualified rather than prescribe it, as a requirement for being electoral candidate, it is very unfair.         

Nevertheless, my understanding of the minimum qualification prescribed in the Constitution and that which we should prescribe in the Electoral Law should apply only to someone with maximum qualification of an advanced level or its equivalent.  Those could be the people required for verification. It is preposterous that I should be required to submit my school certificate, my advanced level certificate, my first degree, my second degree even my PHD this is preposterous.  

Mr. Speaker, I am going, if I am not satisfied with the present provision, to come with an amendment to the effect that a candidate whose qualifications are above the minimum requirement should not be subject to any verification. And if some one wants to challenge the qualifications then, that person should be obliged to go to courts of law to challenge the qualification. It is not the burden of UNEB to verify my qualifications particular some of us who have worked in the Civil Service, and employed by the Public Service. We have been properly vetted and have worked until we have retired.  So when just contesting for an electoral position somebody starts asking for your certificate.

I am 60 years old I am no longer interested in my degrees and it would be unfair to start looking for my school certificate.  I think we want to make this very clear and the Electoral Commission I think was misguided by working out regulations, which required presidential candidates to undergo this tedious process.  I think they were misguided and we should make the law so clear that even when - their regulations this condition does not arise in case of other elections.  

MR. OMONGOLE: Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I thank hon. Okulo Epak for giving way.  The clarification I am seeking is, some times we claim to be, I do not know whether to call it holy or whatever, we may have the required qualifications as such but many of us are also unscrupulous in the event that you are claiming to be having degrees and so on and you actually do not have them what should the Electoral Commission do?

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, I thought I made myself very clear that, if I present anything false to the returning officer, it should be the duty of someone else to challenge that and prove that my submissions were false. It should not be my burden. Am confident that I have those qualifications anyone who doubts, the onus for proof must be on him not on myself. I think this is the English law, it is the French law which works the other way round, and if we apply the English law, I see no reason why the burden of prove should be on me.  Mr. Speaker, I hope I have clarified.  

I would like now to touch on the question of nomination fees. The Constitution is very clear on qualifications for being a Member of Parliament.  I think it is unfortunate and I think it is quite clear that the requirement to pay money in order to qualify to be a candidate is an additional qualification beyond what is prescribed in the Constitution. It is really unfortunate that we had accepted this without questioning. Now, that it is there, I am totally opposed to the present proposal that it should be 2 million shillings for Members of Parliament. The intentions of those who support 2 million shillings are not moral. It is to bar other people from participating in the elections and I think this is unfair. If someone has not done his good job in the Constituency, and he wants to bar other candidate by simply raising the fees, that person is behaving very immorally. It is shameful. I insist, and I am coming with an amendment to retain the old deposit of 200,000 shillings. This is a civic duty and people should not be debarred from it by those who may have stole money from here and there and can afford to pay that high fee.

DR. LWANGA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you hon. Okullo Epak for giving way. Many of us and I think the majority of us are people of very high integrity. And many of us, I believe are qualified to be Members of Parliament and we have not stolen anybody’s money. Is it in order for the hon. Member to imply that we in this House, who support the idea of a fee of 2 million shillings, which I believe is a contribution toward the cost of the elections, depend on donor funding? That we are thieves or we have stolen money is the hon. Member in order? 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think the hon. Member is out of order to say that anybody who affords to pay 2 million Shillings will be taken to have stolen money he is out of order.

DR. OKULO EPAK: I apologise and I withdraw that statement. Nevertheless, I maintain that to raise that fee to that level without justifiable reason is immoral. We are not here to pay for the organisations and conducts of elections, that is not the purpose. Before elections we debated the budget of the Electoral Commission here which includes the amount of money it intends to spend on elections.  I am not convinced that the budgeting process included estimates for incomes from Members deposits. And for anybody to allege here that, we raised these fees in order to support the funding of elections is to subject our election process to a fundraising exercise, that if we do not raise enough money then we cannot hold elections. 

I have said and I do not want to repeat this issue. I am going to move a Motion here and I believe there will be persons of sound moral standard, who will support the reduction of the fee to 200,000 shillings.  We do not get anything after putting that money and if it is not going to be –(Interruption)
 
THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, implying that whoever will not support your proposal will not have – I think it is out of order.

DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Speaker, that is not the implication, but that is the argument. I think we can read between the lines and know when to behave in what manner.  The other thing I would like to raise in this Bill is the question of civic education. The Electoral Commission should be urged to conduct civic education as a routine exercise not as continuing exercise, as an exercise, which arises shortly before elections, and done haphazardly.  Civic education is perhaps the most important of the electoral and democratisation process in any country, particularly in a country where illiteracy is very, very high and ignorance also is equally high. I think the major duty of the Electoral Commission should be to conscientise and educate our people on electoral laws, electoral process and good conduct in elections. So that they cannot be cheated and that is the most important thing. 

Even right now the question of registration and voter registers up-date has been fraught with problems because people do not understand.  Unfortunately the same Electoral Commission held a registration of women, youth and people with disabilities almost secretly, and nobody knows why they were doing this.  Then soon after that, they bring this question of registration of voters and voters up-date of register.  

So, people are confused, they are saying but we have just been registered and they did not see the need for this exercise.  So, the Electoral Commission has confused this process. I am coming from my constituency and I came back yesterday, l went to my constituency before the 11th until about last Friday. I had not seen people conducting this exercise until suddenly on Friday at 4.00 p.m. 

The officer walked to my compound carrying the register in his bag.  That is contrary to the requirement to display the register.  How do you display the register in the officer's bag?  Up to Sunday when I had my public rally and I inquired from people whether they were aware of the registration and voters up-date, many of them were not aware and the books for new members got finished.  So there were many people who could not be registered. I think the chairman of this Committee must really urge the Electoral Commission to go back with voters' up-date and new voters registration.  I thank you, Mr. Speaker.

MR. BAKU RAPHAEL (West Moyo County, Moyo):  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I would like to commend the Committee for the policized report they have submitted to this House.  I will confine my comments on the recommendations on page five.  I wish to agree with the Committee that certificates indicating that a person is qualified to be nominated as a Member of Parliament should be obtained in advance. So that we avoid unnecessary court procedures after nominations are done or sometimes after elections are done.  It seems the last parliamentary elections many MPs were taken to court in order to question the validity of the papers they submitted and sometimes the definition of the equivalent of A'Level is not very clear. So if you talk to the Electoral Commission, they will not be able to competently interpret what is an equivalent of A'Level. Therefore subjecting this test to the Board responsible for the question of qualifications, I think is an appropriate measure, which should be taken so that once one is being nominated, there are no questions, which would arise after that process.  

On number two concerning public officers, I agree that two weeks for taking leave is too short. But also, I think 120 days is too long.  This is a period of about four months where you get a person who takes leave while the elections are still being planned, after the nomination we may have another one month or so.  So about the five months or a half a year for somebody to be on leave from a public office, l think it is not fair to that person.  So my real recommendation is to find a middle ground maybe of two months that may be sufficient for the public officer to do some consultations prior to the nomination day.  

Then on the call of MPs, I also agree that authentication of signatures should be made a condition -(Interruption)

MAJ. KATIRIMA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I wanted to seek clarification from the Member on the Floor about leave for the public officer.  He mentioned that it might not be fair for the officer to have leave for that long.  Are you considering the individual or the government, which is employing him?  Are you saying, is it fair for the individual to go away for the six or so months or are you saying is it fair that an individual should leave a public office for such a long period?  I am just seeking clarification.

MR. BAKU:  Mr. Speaker, I am considering all the interests, the national interests including the interests of the public and the interests of the individual.  You see when a person goes on leave, normally there is nobody else who is hired specifically to replace him.  So, you have another officer who is assigned to do the duties of the one who is on leave.  Therefore, you are going to over burden this officer to the extent that he might become incompetent or over loaded when the substantive officer is on leave.  So, I think it takes the interest of all us.  

On the authentication of signatures, I agree that it should be done because we have got a lot of unscrupulous people, they can forge, and get into malpractice to ensure that somebody is removed from Parliament.  So, the precaution of having authenticated signatures I think is welcome.

On joint candidates meetings, I have read the justification for it and I think it makes some sense.  Otherwise my personal experience is that, joint candidate meetings have been one of the best ways of campaigns we have ever engaged in this country.  I participated in it as all of us did and in my case I was very satisfied. It provided a platform where you discuss the issues, and where lies, are peddled, can be answered there and then. So that people are able to see between the two candidates who is competent of presenting issues in a consistent and systematic manner and who is not. 

So with a lot of resistance, I would support the recommendation that, candidate meetings should be cancelled if we think that it is contrary to the spirit of the law relating the responsibilities of the Electoral Commission.  If it is not against the spirit of the law relating to the responsibilities of the electoral Commission, I would really pray that we should maintain it.

On nomination fees, I am also supporting the opinions, which have been expressed by hon. Okullo Epak, by hon. Dick Nyai, and others who are opposing this fee.  I think imposing a fee of such amount introduces property qualifications or wealth qualification in electoral process. I think this is very unfair because most of our people are living below poverty line.  So, we cannot impose high fees for elections as a measure of eliminating competition in elections. 
 
I think we must be very serious and sincere to ourselves and to the country.  By our own Constitution, leadership is supposed to be accessible to all people who have the minimum qualifications. And constitutionally there is no minimum qualification relating to wealth.       Therefore, yes, we passed the 8 million that has been already competently debated earlier on; the presidential candidates paid that 8 million. In spite of that, they got a lot of facilitation's, two vehicles, 15 million shillings and others. So, unless you are also saying that on top of these, we must make some facilitation available to Members of Parliament in order to score the implications of this cost. But I really oppose this amount of money and wish that we should go back to the proposal by the Government which is maintaining the 200,000/= that we paid before.  Mr. Speaker, I thank you for giving me this opportunity to make these comments.

MR. LWANGA TIM MUTEKANGA  (Kyamuswa County, Kalangala): Thank you Mr. Speaker.Iam, going to suggest a solution with regard to election of distribution of women representatives. I think the issue here, is not that women members representing districts have no physical capacity of going around the districts, and talk to the people in the constituents, but I think the problem is money.  They do not have money to do the job.  

So, my suggestion is that they be facilitated. How?   We are talking about this nomination fee.  We have said 2/= million and you have 267 constituents.  Now, if you took 267 and multiply by 2 you get 534/= million. If you made it 4 million, we are talking of a billion shillings.  So, let this money go to facilitate women, so that they can go round the districts and be able to convince everybody, and then we go by the recommendation as given in the Bill.

The issue of voter's register, in this report, the maintenance of the register leaves a lot to be desired.  This is a pain in the neck for many of us. Why does the Electoral Commission wait until the last minute and then start panicking to up date the register, why?   Everybody is wondering why?  Some people think that probably since Government finances the Electoral Commission, it is intentionally holding money until the last minute.  Why?  Why is the question?  Is it because some people are planning to play games?  I do not think that is the reason.  The reason is probably is that the people who are heading the Electoral Commission are probably lazy or they are not organised enough?  We have got to find out why they are waiting until the last minute. 

I was in Ssese Islands, and I came back this afternoon, thanks to the new technology, you can fly by a floating plane and you get back here and attend Parliament in the afternoon. I was amazed that people were travelling from all over the country to come to Kyamuswa to try and get registered at the last minute, because the registers were made available at the last minute. Had this been an on going exercise, by this time, we should just be taking out the names of those who are dead and adding on those who have attained age for voting. But unfortunately, this is not what is happening. And I am also wondering, recently, the Electoral Commission spent money on buying 5,000 advanced cameras.  At the same time, the Ministry of Internal Affairs is carrying out I think, assessment of ways and means of how to provide National Identity Cards. I ask a question, when will our Government get coordinated properly?  If we are taking photographs for voter's cards, can we not coordinate the two, so that we actually end up having National Identity Cards which will eventually double as voters cards?   We will this save this country millions of shillings?

PROF. NSIBAMBI: I thank the hon. Member for giving way. Mr. Speaker, I want to inform the Member that I have had inter Ministerial meeting on this very matter that has been addressed and we concur with his observation.   

MR. TIM LWANGA MUTEKANGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker, thank you hon. Prime Minister for coming up with that idea.  You see hon. Prime Minister, great minds think the same way.  Now, we go to the joint candidates meeting. I think all of us, participated in joint candidates meetings in 1996 and it would be cheating this nation to say that the majority of the joint meetings were problem. In fact, they were very very good.  People could not tell lies because you were there. And if people did not have facts, it was obvious people did not know what they were talking about and when we went to the ballot box, ladies and gentlemen, elected us as the most capable, out of those who attended the joint meetings. 

So, I do not see any fact why you should think of abolishing them. I wish to recommend these joint meetings unless as hon. Baku has said, they contradict with the laws of the Electoral Commission. I do not see any reason why they should not continue. Thank you, Mr. Speaker.

DR. NKUUHE (Isingiro South,Mbarara):   Mr. Speaker, I thank you very much and I thank the Committee for a good job. I admit this is a Bill of 1998, so, getting on is turning it into yellow pages, because it's a report.   Now, my observation, the first one is addressed to my sisters because, I would like to regard my self as a gender sensitive man and I support a lot of the Women Programmes, but sometimes, I get frustrated by my sisters.  This was a good opportunity for my sisters to express their views at Committee Stage, it is the culture we are trying to develop So people can go to Committees and when we come here, we just formalise things. 

Now, on page 1, the Committee observes that they approached Uganda Parliamentary Association UPA and they failed to turn up.  Surely, my sisters, what were you doing?  Why didn't you turn up? A lot of issues that we are discussing here could have been solved at that stage.  The issues especially of the Electoral College versus adult suffrage, at that stage, you could have articulated that in a smaller Committee and you would have presented evidence and a recommendation could have come that way.  Now, there is a book I contributed to and this gives skills on lobbying and advocacy and this is what it says about lobbying and advocacy.   It says: "Do some research so that you know what the issues are", 
"You should know your allies and the way they are thinking, you should know the people who are opposed to you". 

 So, I would urge my sisters, really to advocate for their position, because, they have a point in what they are saying. What I am saying is that UPA should get organised, so that when you hear there is an opportunity, the debate is coming, you attend and give your views.
Now, on recommendations –(Interruption) 

MAJ. KAZOORA: Mr. Speaker, the hon. Johnson said that he is a supporter of various gender programmes and he is wondering why the hon. Lady MPs could not come to the Committee to express themselves.  Could it be that they are waiting for his support before that Committee?

DR. NKUUHE: I am not a member of that Committee.  So, regarding, the education qualifications page 5, I think the law is very clear.  The problem is when it comes to equivalents and I do not know whether each one of us will have to go to UNEB to get a certificate.  It seems people – my reading was that, it is for people who think they have an equivalent rather than an A Level.  So, if you have A Level, my view is that you do not have to present yourself, that is the way I understand it. if everybody has to present a certificate, then, can that be a problem.  The other question I have about this is, what does this – (Interruption) 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER:  Hon. Member, you see, you may say you have A-Level, I think there is a body to recognise that what you have is A-Level.  That is why you have to submit it there.  Otherwise, you may say I have A-Level and how will we know that what you have is A-Level other than that official body which we have set up to vet it..  But of course, there have been laws in other jurisdictions, for instance, the proficiency in English.  They made exceptions saying, the sitting members you know for them I think it was approved. But if you do not say that, you have to submit your documents to the appropriate body.

DR. NKUUHE: Thank you very much- (Interruption)

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: The Only problem is that the Constitution says: you must have completed an Advanced Level Standard something like that.  I do not know whether completing means passing.  These are some of the things actually, which we should really consider.

DR. NKUUHE: I think there are some of the things we really have to clear.  Because from what I read here on page 5 top, it says: “Those candidates claiming to have equivalence of advanced level should have their qualifications equated. A certificate indicating that such qualifications are equivalent to ‘A’ level should be issued prior to nomination day and submitted to the Electoral Commission at the time of nomination.” 
Anyway since this will not affect me, but I can see a lot of administrative problems with this kind of thing.  Supposing you submit it and then the certificate does not come?  Supposing there is not clear. 

Now, the second one is a person holding public office. I tend to agree with Committee recommendations that there are a lot of people abusing their offices and using the opportunities given to them for political or partisan politics, which I think is not fair.  And I think they should express their views in one way or the other.  

Recall of Members of Parliament.  Ladies and Gentlemen I really do not know whether we can really give a fair debate on this one, because it directly affects us.  It is like asking a fish in Lake Victoria to vote on whether we should drain Lake Victoria. I can assure you this, we shall get a fair assessment during the Constitutional review in my view, because a lot of us have vested interest and I do not think we can give a fair judgement on this one.

Joint Candidates’ Meeting.  Last time we participated, I thought there was a good way of actually assessing support for candidate.  In my view they were very good at taking the opinion of the voters that is the only thing I found in those candidates’ meetings.  But of course they were manipulated in many, many ways because people would ferry in their supporters. – And then in my case, I saw the chiefs actually manipulate the electorate and even giving them questions because they were not on my side.  But the beauty of it is that, whoever is trying to pedal any lies can be exposed right there.  And of course if we hold joint candidates’ meetings, probably this will be the last time, because I cannot see us in future really going for joint candidates’ meetings.  But for me I have no strong views either way, but I found a very good way of testing your popularity or unpopularity as the case maybe.  

Nomination fees.  I think it is important that we show a bit of seriousness and we discourage speculators, because I can see a lot of people who come in to speculate.  But I would go for something slightly less than 100 currency points, 75 or 50 something like that.  I think that way we can strike a balance. We get rid of the speculators, but at the same time we do not hurt especially the special interest groups and areas where the economy is not all that strong. So with those few words I would like to thank you Mr. Speaker and to say that, I thank the Committee for a job well done.  Thank you very much.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: I think Hon. Alleluia has gone, therefore hon. Bagunywa.

MR. BAGUNYWA (Mityana South, Mityana): Thank you Mr. Speaker. I would like to address myself to the recommendations of the Committee on page 5.  My first concern is that as an educator, I find it rather unsound for us to base our judgement or evaluation of initial competence of Parliament on certificates like advanced level and equivalence, leaving out experience all together. I think it is true to say that experience is the best teacher, and educators tend to think that education is what is left after you have forgotten everything that you learnt at school. 

So when you solely base your judgement on competence, shall we say that initial competence for Parliament is on certificates, and paper qualifications; you are likely to go wrong. If you do that you will find that someone like the Late Sir Winston Churchill will probably not pass, and yet he was an outstanding debater and Prime Minister in the British Parliament.  You might find that even Shakespeare would not pass although he is the greatest dramatist of the English Language. He was competing with university men like Christopher Marlow who went to Cambridge University and had learnt Latin, which was the language of the educated classes, and yet Shakespeare was using vernacular as the English language by then and he was the best of them all.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Hon. Member, you see the problem about these qualifications is not an issue now because the law, which we are debating, is based on the Constitution.  You may recommend that we review, but as far as the requirement of qualifications is concerned this is not the issue, because even if we reject it, what shall we do with the provisions of the Constitution?  So I think the essence really is, how do we measure the equivalence?

MR. BAGUNYWA:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I was coming to that, how do we measure?  That is the question in fact.  I wish to suggest that the best way to evaluate competence or measure competence is to have a combination of the Uganda National Examinations Board, the Public Service and the Education Service to constitute a panel. If you leave everything to the Uganda National Examinations Board, it completely leaves out the experience. 

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: But then, what will you do because there is a law,  “Presidential Elections Act” where also they are considering the same qualifications. Will you not have inconsistency in your legislative programme?

MR. BAGUNYWA:  Mr. Speaker, I think we probably have to refer this to the Constitutional Review Commission if that is the problem. My other concern is about public officers - persons holding public office.  If the recommendation is that they have leave of absence for at least 120 days, which is a good four months, then it seems they cannot possibly be expected to raise 100 currency points, and the two million shillings.  Because even a permanent secretary who gets less than two million shillings per month if he is laid off for four months, how is he going to raise the two million? That means all public officers who will have qualified to come to Parliament would probably be unable to do so. So I agree with the hon. Members who think this requirement is probably not the best.  The requirement for 8 million for presidential elections is understandable because after all they are given money to cover that in the end.  But the Members of Parliament will not have been given anything to cover that, and so they would be in trouble and you will attract not necessarily the best people to Parliament, because you have left out those who should have qualified and provided something good for Parliament.

Lastly, Sir, I also want to join those colleagues who think that joint campaign meetings were very, very good.  I think the logistics of organising single meetings in a constituency where you have eight or so will just even make it impossible for you to operate. I think when candidates were put together, it was an excellent opportunity for the voters to see the competence of the panel of four or sixth all on the same trail, So I would certainly support that.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

THE DEPUTY SPEAKER: Thank you very much.  Now we come to the end of the day.  I think I will ask the chairperson of the Committee to wind up tomorrow with the Minister and then we shall proceed. – But I want to appeal to you, hon. Members, please, please, for the next three Parliamentary weeks, attend parliament so that we wind up the kind of business that we have before the Presidential Elections. So that we finish the Political Organisation Bill, Local Government amendment Bill, there is another Bill. So, please, mobilise our friends who have not been here to come tomorrow. The Electoral Commission is complaining that we pass these Bills when it is too late. With this we come to the end of today’s Business. The House is adjourned until 2.00 p.m. tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.47 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 24th 2001 at 2.00 p.m.)


