

Thursday, 25 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al- Haji Moses Kigongo, in the Chair.)

(The House was called to order.)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE (Mr Kisamba Mugerwa):  Mr Chairman, when some time back this resolution was moved, I made a special statement regarding this resolution.  Perhaps to remind the Members, it was only left for general debate.  Perhaps to remind the Members, it is in connection with granting the private sector foundation which is a body which is composed of different private organisations like Uganda Farmers Association, Uganda Manufacturers Association which formed a body called Uganda Private Sector Foundation which is seeking funds borrowed by Uganda government but it is going to be coordinated by the Uganda Sector Foundation to facilitate private investors in capacity building; in terms of information and knowledge and in some consultancy.  They are also seeking funds which is equivalent to 80300 million special drawing rates which is about 12 million dollars.  I remember at that time, I had to lay on the Table the agreement on the project and since then they were circulated. So, I only wait for any reaction or else I beg to move Mr Chairman.

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for bringing this resolution because for a long time, we have been talking about building the capacity for self sustenance.  They have been talking about the private sector and government managing the affairs which are both treated each one of them.  I think this is the correct way of doing things.  For the first time in our government financial arrangements, we are going to have a facility which is going direct to the beneficiary instead of the previous bureaucracy of money coming to government and then being on lent to those concerned.  Many times, in my experience over the last 30 years, involving these kind of arrangements, I think if we give the support to this facility to go in the way it is requested, I think we will have opened up a system which saves money, which reduces, costs and which makes programme implementation more effective.  

I have had a look at the major beneficiaries to the programmes which will particularly benefit from this major programme.  It is going to be managed by the private sector foundation.  These include, the private sector foundation itself, that is the secretariat which will be running this programme.  This one has a total of 2.5 million dollars.  I have looked at the business Uganda Development Scheme.  This is a Scheme under which businessmen or business parties are going to benefit by way of sharing out of this fund, to the extent of 50 per cent.  In other words, if any individual Ugandan has got a project which he would like to present as a bankable project for financing, he will have access to funds to the extent of 50 per cent through this arrangement.  I think that many Ugandans who have had projects have not managed to present them in a bankable form because they have lacked a facility like this one.  Now that this facility is being provided for, I have no doubt it will increase the performance in the economy once these projects are done and the cost borne by the promoter 50 percent and by the foundation 50 per cent. This also goes for project enhancement.

I have also looked at the equity-financing component which is nearly nine million dollars.  What does this mean?  What this means in practical terms is this that if your project has been worked jointly between you and the private sector foundation who have borne 50 per cent and your project is bankable, and you are only able to raise half of what the banks require you to raise, you then can also access additional funding through this component of equity financing.  This will enhance the economic performance in various fields.  

Another aspect is the investment promotion facilitation.  We need a lot of investment promotion; we need a lot of marketing.  Now this component is going to assist the activities surrounding the Uganda Investment Authority which has I think in my view, done a tremendous job promoting investments in this country throughout the world.  The world out there is not just relaxed.  There is so much confusion even in the so called north, they are still competing for as little money as some of this which is included and therefore, in our case, we need to do a little more and this kind of facility will help to achieve partly that kind of requirement.

The total amount of money involved is 20.9 million dollars.  Of that one, as we have already been informed by the Minister, 12.3 million dollars is going to be guaranteed; which means therefore, there is a little element of self-help by the private sector itself making up the difference.  The terms for repayment of this loan are very soft in that it is a forty-year loan.  When this loan is due, it is not going to be repaid by the private sector foundation.  It is going to be a grant to the private sector foundation; which means therefore, the people of Uganda will repay this loan.  How will the people of Uganda then benefit from this kind of arrangement?  

The people of Uganda will benefit through the benefits which come through enhanced performance of the economy, through taxes levied on improved performance.  I think that in the process in fact in my assessment, this money will have been already or gone through to benefit the population.  So therefore Mr Chairman, I have no hesitation to support this programme and in fact to go ahead and support even the one which is coming after this.  (Interruption)

Yes, there is no hesitation because in principle, we are beginning something new, something worthwhile.  This is an innovation where the government bureaucracy is not going to take any money out of this.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

MR OBWANGOR:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  In supporting the resolution before this House, I would like to say this that other laws particularly that govern public finances Chapter 149, which gives the State the opportunity for the recurrent expenditures and development expenditures.  Now, the mover has not stated to the House, although some of us have the papers of a possible sum of money to be committed.  To me, the commission of such money is a debt and therefore he ought to have stipulated the amount so that it helps the implementers when they have to lubricate the schemes, the programmes for which the money is sought under the resolution before the House.  

The Minister mentioned to himself how much money will be committed under the resolution under debate.  Otherwise if it is just a blanket cheque, it will be either wrongly utilised or there will be no control because they will say Parliament stated in a resolution that no amount was given but merely a blank cheque.  I do not like that.  Those people who are in public service committee, you should help me to ventilate this point of view because we need to have a careful utilisation credit or money given from the public exchequer to the private sector.

MR TIVU:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I support the motion on the view of first of all, on the role of privatisation in the economic transformation of our country as we have seen.  In 1989, when I was in Kampala still in school and I looked at Kampala at that time and I reflect it today under the privatisation policy, I have no hesitation in supporting this motion.  You find that under the private sector economy management, we have seen a lot of industries coming and we have seen the facelift given to Kampala buildings and therefore, it is essential that we need to coordinate the activity of private sector development and we cannot do this unless they themselves put an input; and the only way they can put an input is for the government to come in and assist them and that is why I support the motion.

If we have to have the private sector foundation put in place, they will advise government on the practical business problems which government will have either got through basic research.  But when the businessmen themselves come up with a body to advise government on practical problems, government will come up with practical solutions and for this I support the motion.  

My fear is just one.  This is a government loan and it will be paid by government.  Therefore as a representative of the people, my fear is the distribution of this money and how will it benefit the people?  I do not want this money only to benefit Kampala alone because when it comes to Parliament, all of us can pay as citizens.  Therefore, the distribution of this money whether on regional basis or on the development of urban regions, there must be a formula for the distribution of this money otherwise it will end up a city or Kampala affair.

Secondly, many people have been talking about the development of economic infrastructure.  The implication will be directly on this because the industrialists are going to ask, if the private sector is advising us to establish a factory maybe in Kotido, what electricity is there?  How about the conditions of the road?  Therefore, as the Minister is requesting us to put the private sector foundation some amount, I also request the Minister to implement the government projects on roads and electricity so that this money in future can assist all of us.  Thank you.

DR BYARUHANGA:  Thank you Mr Chairman.  In support of the motion, I wish to say that I am not very excited because this country is under a very heavy debt burden and when you look at the portfolio, you will notice that only about a third has gone into the development of infrastructure.  The rest has been sunk in parastatals and in government Ministries.  For example, Agriculture.  Now the country is having a problem in servicing these loans because the parastatals and Ministries have not delivered.  Now, because the public sector as it were has not delivered, we all think or believe but believing without foundation that the private sector is still to deliver.  Where do we base that conclusion that the private sector is efficient?  Because unless we have an efficient private sector, we shall end up also losing this money that we are now trying to sink in.  So, I beseech the people responsible to find ways and means of making our private sector as efficient as possible and let me believe that this private sector foundation is mainly intended for that purpose.  

Secondly, I am also not happy about the grant to the foundation.  Since we have been informed that this is very soft loan payable over 40 years, why are we making our private sector dependant on grants?  Because in the history of this country, we have noticed that grants have always been poorly administered because they are grants.  Why do we not cause the private sector foundation and the beneficiaries of the monies to pay back this loan?  Is it a case of the poor subsidizing the rich?  Why should we get these people whom we would wish to be efficient depend on handouts?  Really a real businessman should not depend on handouts.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

MR KASAIJA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I also add my voice in supporting this motion.  It is a good think for government if it recognises the role of a private sector because the world over, it is the private sector which is the engine of development.  Countries which have registered the highest growth rates, the highest employment rate and the highest standard of living are the measures of economic performance. These countries have used private capital.  I do not need to emphasize; America, Germany and so on.  Of course in Africa here also some countries in fact which recognised the importance of private capital like Kenya though it has had some problems, it was relatively better off than some of the countries around especially during those good days of the East African Community in the 1960s.  

Therefore, it is good that our government has put emphasis on privatisation and when we stand here to give a grant to the private sector, it is a good thing because this is part of the programme that the government has started of assisting what I call vulnerable sectors.  The first sector was the rural sector where we have the majority of people we represent when we started with Entandikwa.  

The Entandikwa has not done very well but I hope if it is well handled, I think it may produce something.  Of course we also need what I may call a big push.  Since my Friend has just got a Ph.D in economics, I think he knows very well what big push theory means.  It means that you look at that sector and assist it wholly, give it a lot of more support.  Therefore Mr Chairman, my biggest problem here is, if you compare it with Entandikwa in the rural areas, the people we gave the Entandikwa we have asked them to pay back with at least a certain fee; that is the interest rate.  

But here when I was reading the document that was circulated, I did not see where the Minister said that the beneficiaries of this loan are going to pay something.  Money has never been a free commodity.  If I get money today, it may not be the same value like the money I will get ten days to come or one year to come.  Therefore, if this money is going to be taken back to government, then there should be an element of maintaining the value.  Either that rate should be just to make sure that the money that is returned to government is the same as it was given to the private sector or at least something higher so that it benefits more sectors.  So I think the Minister should really look into this. We want to assist the private sector but at the same time, we should not make them sail, just have a free right.  They should understand that money or capital is never free.

The second aspect why I am also supporting this grant to the private sector is the employment.  In Uganda here, we have been having a problem of unemployment.  In fact the unemployment rate is running at between 50 to 60 per cent of our population and I envisage if this loan is handled properly, I am sure the rate of employment will grow up.  

But I would like to urge the Minister for Finance, that when they identify the projects, they should go to where most of the people are unemployed.  Most of the people who are not employed are not in the urban areas.  They are in the rural areas and in fact these are the people whom we are representing.  So what do we do? What we should do is to emphasize small-scale industries.  That is why you find that India is doing better because for them, they started a strategy of assisting small-scale industries.  First of all, small-scale industries could be even industries which employ between 15 and 25 people.  So if we can emphasize that and we have as many as possible; the money may not look much, 12.3 million dollars but if we started with that, I think the impact will be more from this grant.

Lastly, by no means the least, I have appreciated I think the strategy the Ministry of Finance is following.  Now that we have a debt of about 5.6 billion dollars for this country, we should not again start going in for loans, which will give us a lot of burden.  I was happy to appreciate that this loan to the government is a soft loan which is going to I think make us to pay only 0.5 percent when we are repaying the loan.  So I think this is encouraging and we should encourage the Ministry of Finance to continue with these sorts of loans if we are going to reduce the burden that our taxpayers have been facing on these big loans.  So, Mr Chairman, with that I wish to support the motion.

MR SSEBANA KIZITO:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  As you can guess, I support private initiative. (Laughter) For a long time, Uganda as a country has tried to get investors both local and from overseas to come and invest in our country.  Investments are required because they help the economy but for investments to be beneficial, they must satisfy the following: One, they must be able to create employment.  

I want to emphasize the fact which has been made by my Colleague hon. Kasaija to the effect that there are a lot of people who are unemployed, many of them, very well trained but because of lack of employment opportunities, they are not productive to the economy even if we have spent a lot of money in training them. 

So, investments which must be encouraged to come here should be able to create employment and rid the country of that problem. Investments also which are desirable should be those which utilise our local raw materials so that people can produce the raw materials and these companies utilise them to create something or finished product which will be useful.  I have noticed that early in the regime of NRM, we have tried to support some of the big industrialists with loans.  

For example, Metha and Madhvani.  They were supported with loans, feasibility studies were written to show that by the year 1992 I think or 1993, we shall be exporters of sugar and we have been excited because it is a long time since we last exported sugar and we have gone out of our way as a government to assist these industries.  

However, I know we have got information that even up to last year these companies have been importing sugar.  Madhvani imported sugar, Metha imported sugar rather than exporting sugar, and they imported sugar.  So, actually we should also while we are going out of our way to assist private investors, we should be in a position to see what those private investors whom we have assisted, what have they done?  Have they benefited our economy to the extent that we were expecting them to?  

Actually private required investment should be in a position to export because foreign exchange, although nobody is talking about it so much these days as in the past, foreign exchange is a required item in our economy. 

Therefore, investments in general must be in a position to export; that is, if they turn our raw materials into finished products and export them, so much the better so that we earn money from those operations.  They should also be in a position to substitute for imports so that instead of importing, we consume products which are made here locally and this brings me to the fact that when we look at the local industries, we should look at those which have got good standard products.  We must not just encourage local production because it is local but it should be produced in such a way that the product is of a standard which is acceptable.  That is why I think that the Bureau of Standards is a very important thing in our economy and it has not been operating as it should because in the market, we still have both locally produced and imported products which are substandard and this one is very important.  

Take for example, cement; if cement which lacks some ingredients is produced locally or imported and you use it and it is a hazard to your building, this is very bad and this is not something which we want.  Somebody was talking about Sure House.  There was a time when we used cement which was below standard and we had to demolish a whole floor.  But I want to caution Ugandans.  Ugandans who get loans from government agencies tend to think that loans are free gifts and as a result, they do not pay them back.  You know the story of UCB, you know the story of Uganda Development Bank, you know the story of many parastatals which are given loans to Ugandans to enhance their production but because these are government agencies, some Ugandans have a tendency to think that these are free gifts and, therefore, they should not be repaid.  

When we talk about investments helping in creating employment, we are mainly thinking about our local Ugandans.  We are not talking about employment of expatriates because I have noticed especially for the parastatals which have been privatised and have been bought by companies from overseas, I have noticed that they have come with them.  They have brought quite a number of expatriates to work here in Uganda and even to do a job which a Ugandan has ability to do.  This makes me wonder whether our immigration department is in a position to check on people who come here to work; whether they really have got the expertise which is required, which is not obtained locally.  Otherwise, if it is obtained locally, how can we grant an employment permit.  

With those few remarks Mr Chairman, I wish to say that I support this motion but also to appeal to my fellow Ugandans that when they get any money from this grant, they should utilise it for the reason for which it was applied; because this is another problem we have among especially the local ones. They would write a good feasibility study and it is approved and money is disbursed but instead of utilising that money for the purpose for which it was applied, that money is utilised elsewhere and the result is that what you intended the money for is not done and money cannot be paid back.  Thank you Mr Chairman.

DR KIYONGA:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  I rise to support this motion because Mr Chairman, in my view, I think this is a progressive step in the development of our country.  But before I give my reasons for supporting the motion Mr Chairman, allow me to make to general remarks.  One, that we be enabled to guide or instruct the Minster of Finance to come to us before signing this loan because the constitution which we made so required.  So, by establishing a legal procedure, we have been able to get our Colleague to come here without having to go before coming here.  I think this is a very important thing to watch that this is one of the positive results of the constitution recently made.  

As our term of office as NRC Members comes to an end, I would like to observe Mr Chairman, that many of our Colleagues here will have acquired a lot of experience, the country has built capacity and it is my hope and prayer that most of the Members if not all should be returned in the interest of the country.  (Applause)  

Now, if we should get returned, I wanted to appeal to my Colleagues because many times here, we do raise very valid complaints maybe by mistakes made by the executive.  But they are just left as complaints.  I think this should teach us that in future when we want something done, we do not just complain.  We should bring a resolution and say, we in NRC or in Parliament have decided like this and you the executive will do this; because when we just complain and it just goes in the Hansard, we are really not helping our people.

This motion by the hon. Minister is a progressive step because until now, it has been the practice that government merely provides security and infrastructure to the private sector; good roads and good security.  Then the private sector would have to struggle on their own to make business and the government would come and collect the taxes.  The world we live in today Sir, is a world of very severe competition.  The economy of the whole world now is integrated.  There is free movement of capital.  The multi-nationals are going everywhere to capture markets and business.  Now, any country which will sleep and not see this competition will definitely be sidelined, it will be marginalised even when you are independent.  

It is just like the case in our schools.  We have been complaining that the Minister for Education is allowing coaching but as many of you know and as many of you I think practice, many of your children are definitely coached at least primary school level; because the competition is so severe.  If you want your child to go to Budo, if you want them to go to Gayaza, you cannot avoid but get them coached; and I see this progressive step by the hon. Minister as a way of coaching our own children, the business community so that they are better placed now to face this severe competition which is recognising no boundaries of national or independent States.  So this is a very progressive step that we should very firmly support.

Having said that Sir, I would also like to show my appreciation to the Uganda Manufacturers Association.  I think it is the one Non-Governmental Organisation which starting from scratch and on its own, has built a capacity that has brought benefit to this country.  They have held trade shows which have attracted people from Europe and from the rest of Africa and I do hope that other organisations like Chamber of Commerce could build similar strength because it is only in that way that we can withstand the competition that I have talked about.  

More Sir, I think this step the hon. Minister is taking is enhancing what we call unity of purpose.  We are in NRC here, some of us are in the executive, we do work and we get paid for our work from taxes collected from these people the private sector people.  So, there is a tendency for the private people to think that the people in government are the only ones who use the taxes.  But now for the first time for them also to get a grant in order to enhance their business, they will really see that we are all in the same country, the resources belong to all of us to facilitate everybody wherever they are.  

So just as we are beginning to see people who oppose government, they are put in five star hotels, air-conditioned; they are given headlines on the radio and in the newspapers; even when they are abusing the President.  It is part of this strengthening of society, the openness and we do hope that really the private sector, politicians who at any one time may be in the opposition should talk but recognising that we belong to the same country and appreciate that an atmosphere has been created by some organisation, by some person to facilitate them to do so. 

Now, as you know hon. Ssemogerere who is an aspiring candidate for Presidency, we give him security because he is a Ugandan and we do hope that the politics he is pursuing will be positive to this country.  So, I would like to appeal also to our Colleagues who as of now appear to be on the opposition to realise that there is one Uganda and even when we compete for leadership, we should do so without endangering that same country for which we are competing for leadership.  I think this is a progressive step we should support.  But I also want to appeal to the private sector to do certain things.  

First, in regard to tax collection.  I think we in the private sector should recognise that it is necessary to pay taxes and should support URA and support does not mean that we should say whatever URA is doing is correct. It means that we should pay the taxes, we should take the advice URA is giving us and where we think they are acting out of normal practice or illegally, and then we criticise them constructively. But there is a tendency for people just to take one negative thing and think that everything is bad.  Definitely, URA has brought dignity to this country.  The level of begging, the language of begging has now changed because of the work that URA is doing.  So I would like the private sector to support URA.  

Secondly, I would also like the private sector to recognise that there are other institutions in the country which are there to enhance their own work; educational institutions for example like Makerere, rather than some private people continuing to take their children and relatives abroad because there is better education, we could find a mechanism how these private people could also influence curricular in the university and finance their people directly there.  This is cheaper and more sustainable in the process of developing our own country.  

I would also like to appeal to them to support programmes intended to better manage the environment; what is called environmental protection; because at the end of the day, the resources we are exploiting come from the same environment.  Even if you are he cleverest businessman, but you degrade the environment, it is a question of time.  Even your own work will come to an end.  So I would also like them to support environmental programmes.  

Lastly, I also want to appeal to the private sector not to support under hand method of corruption.  You find the private sector - some people get into the tender board for example, and influence things unethically just for individual advantage instead of supporting ethical method.  Once the private sector themselves do not support corruption, it is going to be a much easier way for this country to defeat this dangerous cancer that has entered our society.  So Mr Chairman, I would like to add my voice to my Colleague the Minister for Finance in calling upon Colleagues of this House to support unanimously this motion on the Floor.  I thank you Mr Chairman.

DR MAGEZI:  Thank you very much Mr Chairman.  If you asked me today, what was my view of the priority of Uganda in the development of the private sector, I would say that it is the training of entrepreneurs in Uganda and after their successful training, their facilitation to access credit from the banking institutions; so that the private sector have the capacity to teach the Uganda not even in English.  How do you become an entrepreneur and how do you sustain yourself?  Having passed that course, that entrepreneur should be availed an opportunity to access credit, be it Entandikwa, be it any other form of loan from institutions but not grants.  

I agree some subsidies should be given to certain sectors but I would not agree that people having been trained, they should be given grants to start profitable enterprises.  That is why I would seek the indulgence of the Minister to convince me if the private sector foundation is a limited liability company by guarantee should be given this money as a grant for on lending.  I would like also to get clarification because scheme is not Entandikwa and it will only benefit those people in the private sector who have got form of equity on which this private sector foundation can then add money and we know but then we are talking about less than one percent of the private sector in Uganda that is going to benefit from this programme.

Whenever we go out of this country or even talking in Uganda here, the problem of the debt burden to some of us we feel that it is one of the biggest problems Africa sub-Sahara is facing and we are pleading for debt forgiveness as a pre-condition for democratisation of institutions in our country, debt forgiveness for the improvement in the environment.  So we must be careful when we borrow however concessionary the loans may be.  I think we must go back to the priority of priorities of our country and how much of this money do we envisage will remain in Uganda?  Or is it a conduit again?  Funds come from outside, they through us like water flowing through a conduit and the funds go back.  So I look at the withdrawal of the proceeds of the credit Mr Chairman and he is talking of goods and services in special drawing rights equivalent of 1,680,000.  Now if I look at that particular portion in c(1) which is page 23, it is the establishment by the private sector foundation of an account to be referred to as Uganda Equity Facility through which the private sector foundation shall make available equity capital to participate in equity funds in investment enterprises in the territory of the borrower.  Maybe that would remain here.  But when you look at (3), consultancy services which draw more than five million out of a total of 8.3, is for consultant services.  

Maybe the Minister could clarify how much of this is going to be indigenised so that the people who do this consultancy work actually are wanainchi, Ugandans who will be able to maybe benefit meaningfully from the five million.  But it is five out of eight going to consultant services and 1.6 out of 8 is what we think could be the money that will actually go and do what we require and I am getting convinced Mr Chairman, that there can be a problem here.  To Uganda, it is a loan.  To the Foundation it is a grant but we are getting five million dollars or the special drawing rights - I do not know the conversion rate for that matter but it is important that the Minister must put his foot down, that except in very, very few conditions or to the extreme of specialisation, this money should be given to Ugandan consultants in Uganda who are qualified to do this job.  (Applause)

We have heard of the matter of intermediary agencies in the Entandikwa scheme. It is too early yet to judge their effectiveness but this is part of capacity building by giving an opportunity to local people through the intermediary agencies or local NGOs to administer some of these funds rather than thinking you are going to put there consultants; and if you look at B(1), the consultants we are talking about; it is carrying out of a programme to assist farmers in our country to acquire know-how and achieve a higher rate of output growth.  This can be Ugandans, there is nothing special about this and I beg that, therefore, much as we shall continue to get these funds, we should not be diverted from the creation of a middle class in our country and this is by agreeing that we must train trainers. Those trainers can then go on the ground to train the local entrepreneurs who should benefit from such programmes.  I will definitely give my support to the Minister when you put the question but I would like to register my reservation on the second motion concerning NEMA.

THE CHAIRMAN:  We have not gone to it.

DR MAGEZI:  I support the motion.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  I thank you Mr Chairman.  I would like to support the principle of this resolution and I think that the support of the private sector foundation is a wordy cause which should be supported.  Nevertheless, I am a bit apprehensive about the consequence of the resolution as it stands today.  I know and I am aware that the hon. Minister did say that it is in reference to a motion which had been tabled here sometime ago I think last week.  But if that be the case, then it is very important that this resolution today should have made a reference to that particular one; because as the motion stands today, it seems that we are giving power to government to make a grant without specifying the parameters of that grant.  

I know that a number of contributors have referred to a document presumably from which this resolution comes from.  Nevertheless, for this resolution to be competent, there should be some specific reference either to that document or to the motion which the Minister moved before.  So I hope that before we put the question, that reference will have to be made and be incorporated in the present resolution.  I am very much touched by the contributions of particularly hon. Kiyonga and hon. Magezi who has just taken the Floor.  I think while we appeal to the private sector to do its working in paying tax and so forth, in the same breath I think we should also urge government and government agencies to be more vigilant in combating the disease that hon. Kiyonga talked about.  Corruption and embezzlement of public funds and diversion of funds designated for other purposes has become too common in Uganda today.   I believe that corruption is one of the greatest challenges of this government and successful governments are going to see.

(Incomplete.)
             

