Wednesday, 20th January, 1993

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House Kampala.

PRAYERS

The Chairman (Al-Haji Moses Kigongo), in the Chair.

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

Julius Omute

MRS. DHUGIRA OPOTI (Women Representative, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand to support the Bill.  But before I embark on it, I would like to extend my heartfelt welcome to the youth who have just been sworn in -(Laughter)- and automatically, I am sure, he swears the support of this Bill. 

A lot has been said and it will be needless to repeat some of these issues, but I thought it is important to mention some things.  I feel it is unfair to put the age bracket and age limit for both the female and the male youth at par. What I mean is that in educational psychology, and in the customs and tradition of our society, the female youth is always advanced in development.

In the informal sector, that is in the villages, and back at home, when a girl becomes 13, as soon as she begins developing into a woman, she is straight away sent by the auntie or by her mother into training, to shape her into a mother and into being a responsible housewife; and the father or the brother also, immediately after noting a sign of development into womanhood of a daughter or sister, begins to count on bridewealth.  As a result, to put all the youth at 13 years old is apparently not proper. 

On that note, I propose that to support the Amendment, where somebody is going to propose the age of 18 years to be the lowest age limit.  A Ugandan youth should start from the age of 18 years other than the age of 13 years.  That is when both female and male youth can reason at par other than starting with a girl at 13 years and a boy at 13 years where the girl will automatically be advanced in reasoning than the boy.  

For the limit, as Members have said, how sure am I that my brother who has just sworn in is going to be protected, by the age limit. I want to leave that to the Members, but at the sametime, I would like to say that a woman at the age of 30 years is not going to be comfortable in the youth council.  She is going to be much more comfortable in women’s council.  It is going to be much more tedious for her to sit in three councils in the same village because she will be demanded in the women council, in the youth council, and also in the village council.  As such, much as some of us still feel useful at 30 years, I think my sister at home is not comfortable because she has much more responsibilities than attending to these meetings in her village.  

One thing I have noted is that we seem to be legislating only for the school youth, and there seems to be very little provision for the youth at home who provide the bigger part of the - lot of people we are talking about. And going back to the age limit, a village youth, who has not gone to school at all; and a girl at the age of 16 years, if she is not already married, is preparing to get married; while a boy at the age of 30 years, who is unmarried, is not very proper in any circles. 

So, I would like to call upon the Minister to address the issue of the village youth much more seriously, and I am raising this point bearing in mind the fact that the Ministry which has been responsible for moving this Motion is a very poor Ministry, unlike the Women’s Bill where we were physically involved in formulating the document and also before that Bill was tabled here, some of us at least went down to our districts and discussed it with the women leaders and even the RCs.  What is going to be taken down to the women is not something new but the youth council is going to be a completely new set up.  

On this note, Mr. Chairman, I think I will join the others to say that this Bill has been long overdue.  It would have been easier for those of us who are going to mobilise, only if these youth were represented in this House earlier than the proposal we are making had been made. Because politically, among us here, who is now going to go very actively, to go and mobilise the youth, particularly to form the youth council?  When - even from RC V to RC1, they are still very ignorant, and they are waiting for somebody to come from above, most probably the hon. Members here, who are already pre-occupied with their own activities. Who is going to look after the interests of the youth? 

On this note, I particularly call upon the NRM Secretariat which has been the solely responsible for the delay of this Bill - document coming to this House, for the delay for the youth being represented in this House.  I say this because the task has been thrown to the Minister of Women in Development, Youth and Culture, who has a very meagre Budget of only about 300,000,000/= which is being twined every now and then as time goes by.  We are not throwing them the challenge of mobilising two different bodies at just the same time.  Will the budget allow that? I am afraid, Mr. Chairman. So, I am requesting the NRM Secretariat youth desk to take up this as a challenge and seriously work hand in hand with the Ministry of Women in Development to make sure that the youth are mobilised and organised into these councils to beat the deadline of the Constituent Assembly, which is already a burning issue in the country.  Thank you.

I thought it would be unfair to really leave this entire burden on the Minister of Women in Development, Youth and Culture alone.  The conception, the idea of having youth represented in this august House came right away with the conception of the NRM. So, the Secretariat must really work harder than the Ministry to get these people properly organised.

I would also like to call upon the Ministry for Women in Development to seriously consider setting up workable structures at district level.  Right now as I talk, at the district level, it is the office of the DES, who looked after the portfolio of the Minister for Women in Development, and many time, when you go to them, they say we are shifting too much responsibility where it is not supposed to be.  

So, with the establishment of these two important bodies, the Youth Council and Women’s Council - it is only going to be proper with the full-fledged development of the department of the Ministry of Women in Development, Youth and Culture at every district level, and with a representative officer who will look after the affairs of women and youth. Otherwise, the youth organisers who have been living with these people in the district have not been able to do much just because they are so much incapacitated by what is on the ground and because they lack adequate funding from the Ministry and local administration.  

Lastly, I would like to thank the hon. Minister for all the efforts she made during the little time since she was appointed the Minister of Women in Development, Youth and Culture, and for her relentless effort, despite the meagre Budget, that she has made to try and leave to it by visiting almost each and every part of this country.  She has been very exemplary and there are few others who have done exactly what she has done.  So, I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MRS. NKWASIBWE (Women Representative, Kabale): Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I also stand to add my voice to the views about the Youth Bill. This is a very important Bill concerning the Youth, a section in our community, which involves young people. I am happy that the NRM Government considered this very important and included secretary for the youth at every level of the RC system; and it is very good that we are now setting -up a law to establish the councils; which means the youth will be catered for right from the grassroots.  

First of all, looking at the age bracket, it would be unfortunate to include the youth of below 16 years, because these are really children.  Those who are not fortunate enough to be in school are with their parents, and moreso, they are really young.  Both boys and girls are passing through their puberty stage.  They are totally dependent on the parents, and it would be very unfortunate to include them in any administrative responsibilities.  The children below 17 years are teenagers, and since they are still growing, they still have a lot to learn.  They learn by copying, listening, and so on.  They do not really have a personality which has developed so that we overburden them with responsibility like those who are18 years and above.  We should not also include them because, even in the Bill it does not provide for them to stand to be elected, or even to have the right to vote.  

So, we should leave the children where they belong, under the care of their parents in all respects.  Children above 17 years, that is 18 to 26, I would also wish to call them children, because they are also still under parental dependency, especially when you look at those in school or colleges. They are still dependent on foster homes or parental care.  But I think they are growing up and those above 18 years have the right to vote.  So I think it is right that we put the lower age limit to 18 and it is right that they get involved in development activities.  However, the youth this Bill is seeking to cater for, are those who are in school or have dropped out or those who have never been to school; everywhere in the community.  It is good that the Ministry of Education has succeeded in mobilising the youth under the educational system as we know.  But we have also the youth who are outside, and who have not had a chance to enjoy formal education.  

So, I appeal to the Ministry to set up activities which will embrace all of them at every level. Those above 18 years - looking at the way parents have handled their children. On several occasions, we the adults have failed to look after the youth or to give them what they deserve and it is only through the establishment of such a law that we should examine how we have been looking after them, and how we have been providing for them, or how we shall involve them in productive activities. 

So, I appeal to the Ministry concerned to link up with the Ministry responsible for social affairs, and ensure that there are viable programmes, which will not leave out any youth in our community.  I also recommend that the secretary for youth at any RC level be the Chairman of the Youth Council.  I believe that these youth councils should remain pegged to the RC system. We adults must keep in touch with the day today happenings of the youth.  They are still under our custody and we must be responsible for their interests in order to deliver the goods to them, and to avoid strikes in schools, children roaming about, and for those who are not yet able to be employed in jobs which are suitable for them.  We must keep in touch.  We should not let them just - throw a system to them alone and just stand by and look.  I foresee a problem, if the councils are not pegged to the RC system through the chairmanship of secretary for youth.  Children learn by copying. Supposing they decide to work out their own systems according to their interests, these children have wisdom but they have no life experiences like those that we have gone through.  They may decide to form their own activities which we as adults, may feel are not beneficial to their well-being because they have no experiences in many ways of life like those we have gone through.  

So, we should really keep in touch to make sure that in whatever they are doing, we are providing counselling. They very much need our guidance as adults. One of the objectives of my suggestion is to avoid manipulation of the youth and if we do not keep in touch with them, how shall we stop them from being manipulated?

The upper age limit I believe it should be up to 30 years not 26 years.  We know some people become parents by the time they are 30 years, and I think that is a small section in our community -(Interjection)- well they may be many, but still those are young, they are youth, whether productive, and they are the people who must keep in touch with those below 26 years in all activities.

Looking at the culture in our society; I have just said that the youth usually learn by copying what they see.  We have seen how the youth like video shows, discos and so forth. How much are they interested in our cultural dancing or cultural behaviours?  What has the Ministry got in plan for cultural activities? Because, we have imported a lot of western behaviour in our country which is a pity, and we have a lot of customary values which we must keep within our society and those which are dying out which are good. We should try to look at them critically and teach the youth to value their African culture.  So, I hope the Ministry concerned will work with the Ministry of Education, practical activities for the Council to be able to mobilise the youth in every area, whether they are in school or otherwise.  Mr. Chairman, with those few words I support the Bill.

MR. LYADDA (Bunyole County, Tororo): Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I stand up to support the Bill but with some reservations.  It is true that young people are the advanced fighters for their social well-being as the future generation.  It is also true that youth are dynamic and have energy, are very courageous, fearless and persistent.  These are their characteristics. Youth are also very responsive to what is new.  They have the sense of touch and they always want to touch they always want to feel by touching.  Without feeling, they will never like anything. They want to have it through experience. They also have a proverb which states that; ‘ofa essasi notofa bwavu’; that is to say, ‘you would rather die of a bullet, rather than dying of poverty’. A youth of today, when he hears a bullet at Nakaloke or Kireka, he will run to see what is happening in that particular area.  That is the type of youth we have.  They are also very enterprising. I think you can -(Inaudible )- NRM Government we have.  Because of their enterprise if these youth were not organised, they would have brought another bad enterprise.  

So, it is our duty today to see that the youth are handled with care. Once youth are provided with good politics and good leadership, they are always a formidable force towards development.  They also lack justice and truth for which they fight through all conditions.  Given just and truth, they are always very reliable for true development. Besides that, because of the splendid politics they have, they play a very important role in social revolution and keeping of a new society.  

However, I have my reservations and I, therefore, feel that this Bill may not do wonders for the youth of Uganda today.  Youth are very responsible, as I have said, they can sometimes make fundamental social progress depending on good leadership, education and training.  Unless these three factors are satisfactorily implemented, youth can be very dangerous. 

It is also when they are led and taught properly, that they can portray their politics, and this politics can come to their homes. In order to encourage development, we must ask ourselves why the youth are always a problem to organise in Uganda today.  So many governments have organised them but instead, they have turned up to be very dangerous.  Before we organise our youth today, have we answered these questions? It is easy to say we have organised them, but when we have not provided them with good leadership. 

That is why I am worried, because there are many factors, and one of these is corruption. Everybody is crying about Government money being embezzled left and right. Will this Bill, therefore be successful?  
We have also talked about bad leadership.  Bad leadership is usually easily noticed. But I want to ask this whole House and myself whether the NRM provided good leadership? If it did, why are other Members complaining?  Let us sit down and try to see where we have gone wrong and then talk about the organisation in a proper manner. 

I am also afraid that people who have got some sufficient know-how are not training; we may not get good leadership.  We are complaining of meagre resources, we have no money and also because of bad leadership, very few people go for training and this is because of nepotism. Other areas are left out.  Can the Minister assure us he is going to provide some sufficient education and training to all parts of Uganda without discrimination? That question also is still puzzling me. 

As a history, we have been testing so many things in this country; even some things, which we left here, are still in the cupboards. Have we really got a very helpful team to plan for the use of the little money we are going to give them?  Unless we have good planners, I do not expect any good out of this Bill.  

So, I would like to ask the Minister concerned to assure this House that she will do some good planning in this Bill. Some Members have already expressed fears that the youth might fail because of political interference.  It has already been theoretically explained here that so many previous Governments have used the youth to antagonise the other groups.  All those who were considered fighting Government have used the youth.  How serious is the Minister with this organisation, especially in this particular line - the political interferences - that they will not take place.  Because I do not know whether this Bill also is trying to bring in some youth to come and strengthen the NRM Government - I am not sure.  If it is so, then there is already political interference. So, what I am trying to ask here is, let us have some organisation whereby we have some understanding and -(Interruption)

MRS. KALEMA:  Point of order. Mr. Chairman. Is the hon. Member holding the Floor in order not to wish NRM Government to be strengthened when he is part of it and is in this House because of NRM?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his views.

MR. LYADDA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for protecting me. I will not answer that.  I think hon. Members know what I am talking about.  I am talking about political interference by UPC, NRM or DP. What I want is to see that the youth of Uganda are organised properly like the youth of other countries.  I am a strong supporter of NRM and I have done a lot in my area.  NRM is very much liked and there is no war; it is very peaceful. (Laugher)

Whether Members have got me wrongly, we are part of the NRM. In Africa, there is always a strong and social foundation for most organisations.  I think the hon. Minister concerned should also try to inform us how organised they are and what foundation they have built to lift the youth of Uganda at this stage.

I am coming to the financial mis-allocation. (Interruption.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Try to wind up.

MR. LYADDA: Mr. Chairman, I have been concerned about the paper when they talked about free education, which was discussed at random and was going to be effective this year.  I do not know whether we are really organised or whether we are mis-allocating resources, because I thought that everything which happens must come through this House.

Lastly Mr. Chairman, I would like to ask this House to support this Bill, but with some reservations.  Thank you very much.

MR. PINTO M.X. (Kakute County, Rakai:) Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. all of us are interested in harmony and I believe that we should try to harmonise whenever we have conflict, and in what we see as conflicting and contradictions in our laws. 

I pray that we support the Amendment of having the child up to the age of 17 years and the youth from the age of 18 years. Already, there are many conflicts. If you look at what has been published as the Child Law Review Committee, the Approved Schools Act defines a child as a person under 12 years of age, and a juvenile as a person of 7 to under 16 years of age.  The Reformatory School Act uses the term ‘Youth Offender’ to mean any male person under 18 convicted of an imprisonable offence.  No lower age - (Inaudible) - the law defines a boy under 15 years and a girl less than 13 years.  You can see that if you do not do harmonise this law and come out with this Bill without the correction, we are continuing with the confusion. This is in contradiction with the UN Convention of the right of a child and the OAU Charter which talks of the child up to the age of 17 years.  

Having said that, I would like to say that the youth of this nation show that if they are well organised they can be sure of a victory.  I am so concerned about the status of the youth because first of all, generally they are very beloved by us when I consider my own children.  My last born is 20 years old.  I am concerned because with the older generation, failing these youth - and I think of the times we have failed these youth.  We talk and comment on these good things for the children and some of us go to churches and preach the Bible.  But we do not live by example. The youth need leadership by example. According to the Census, the youth referred to in this Bill are victims of mismanagement and misrule by political organs. If you look at the Census results, you will see that since Obote’s time in 1967, the youth aged 25 to 29 years were a total of 1,283,000 youths. During Amin’s time in 1971, those aged between 20 and 24 were 1,525,000; in Obote II in 1980, those aged 10 to 20 years were 4,022,000, a total of seven million out of our 16 million people.  

We, therefore, have a challenge for the youth.  But we, the leaders of today, even leaders of tomorrow, have to show them a good example that over 60 per cent of the youth who are going to be given this leadership, to be able to chart out a development programme.  To know that over 60 per cent of the youth we talk about today did not even get primary education; that they are not properly employed and they are not being catered for in any way. That they need appropriate technology to train in self-sustenance skills such as those used in India and other places.  The Minister of Agriculture can no longer have an excuse that she does not have an organised body when these youth are there ready for training and deployment so that they do not depend on the primitive traditions and knowledge passed on by their grandparents in agriculture.  We want them to come and play a useful role when they are equipped. And deliberate efforts to transfer technology into productive sectors should be directed to the youth.  

We are helping out today to organise these youth.  The whole lot of the youth faces a challenge of the AIDS pandemic.  The most effective way to ensure that these people survive is for them to abstain from sex.  The second method is to have one faithful partner.  The third and last resort, if you have indeed to have sex, is to use a condom.  But do not have an unsafe sexual relationship.  There is no laughing matter here. As adults, we must now advocate for behaviour change to the youth leaders, and this has been recently made in the statements of belief; that we believe that individuals and the whole community have the inherent capacity to change their attitude and behaviour.  The power to fulfil this capacity is to deny or not to exercise it. This power must now be recognised, called for and supported from both within and without.  This will enable people to initiate plan and sustain behaviours that promote a healthy state of mind, both in spirit and environment.  A critical component in this process is to be supportive to those living with HIV in the community.  We recognise that behaviour change at individual and community level in the present HIV phenomenon is a constant and an on-going process between inexplicable links -(inaudible)- respect for people, solidarity and support. The present phenomenon affects everyone. Our experience as infected and affected individuals prove that behaviour change is possible.  We believe that behaviour change is a most essential thing in overcoming the HIV phenomenon.

MR. WANENDEYA: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for the hon. Member holding the Floor, after having been appointed Director of Uganda Aids Commission to read to us the sermons on AIDS?

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member, can you proceed.

MR. PINTO: I thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let those who have ears hear and those who have eyes to use them to see. (Laughter)  We have to ensure that the youth survive and lead a quality life; that they achieve their ambitions; that they continue to take this nation to great heights for future generations; and that they instability from the progress of our people, and I believe in supporting this Bill, it will be giving the youth and this country a future to ensure that they survive.  I thank you very much.

MR. Y. KANYOMOZI (Kajara County, Bushenyi): Mr. Chairman, I would like to say that I support organised institutions including youth, women and any other professional institutions that we are likely to set up.  I would like to say that even what we have heard about the history of the past, that I am a bit concerned as to whether these structures that we are putting up just now in this Bill will not end up in the same way as those which people have tended to criticise.  I am saying that because we have a history; empirical evidence to support that in the past, institutions set from above, at the Government level, have always tended to be a problem for countries, not only here, but elsewhere as well.  I would have, therefore, wanted the youth themselves to take up the initiative to organise themselves, and ours would have been to set up rules to regulate them as they do in other professions.  I am sure the women, for example, have already started.  There is FIDA and so on.  These institutions would be the ones that would regulate after the initiative being taken by those who are directly concerned.  

Secondly, I would like to question the issue of how the youth is defined.  I think the hon. Director General and our Member, hon. Pinto has done us justice by pointing out the contradictions.  If you look at the Census figures, the only area maybe, which we are going to cover, is marginal.  Because if we take the age of 18 years and keep it at 25 years, we are only dealing with a group of about two million people and no more. These are people who are freely going to vote if we accept the Amendment.  In the Memorandum, they have put this as the crucial point or one of the objects why we are setting up this National Youth Council.  

I want to point out another problem. Most people are saying rules - we are putting this so as to build the future leadership together, today.  It may be true, but what has happened in the past?  We are to do the same.  And we are being told that the same youth are the ones who caused us trouble; that they were misused.  Who are the youth that cause us trouble? Most of them are now the leaders of the present status  -(applause)- and if you want I can mention names, they are all here. (Interjection)

AN HON. MEMBER: Mention them.

MR. KANYOMOZI: Well, I think you are one of them. (Laughter)  Mr. Chairman, starting from me downwards to hon. Rwakakoko, we were at one time or another youth. (Laughter)  We all did not cause trouble in - (Interruption)

MR. MUKISA: Point of information.  Mr. Chairman, through you, I would like to inform the hon. Speaker holding the Floor that these leaders he is talking about, who were the then youth, have had to undergo terrific transformation to be where they are now.  Many of them who did not go through this transformation, and who did not humble themselves to serious panel-beating, are very far from here.

MR. KANYOMOZI: So, I can see that there is a possibility of panel beating the youth.  A good number of them have been transformed, and have been panel beaten; they are all here.  And I think that in future, we can still panel beat, and transform them, and still have a capable leadership.  

I want to question numbers and responsibility. People are questioning representation in the National Assembly. If you look around - I do not know whether hon. Buzabo or at least the youth for Mukono is here - the adhoc chairman, I am sure is here.  And if you look across both sides of the House, from the ladies’ youth to the militant youth like me -(Laughter)- we are fully represented and the numbers are adequate. Moreso, if you increase the age bracket, the age of 35 years, then I find no justification for that issue.  

But I want to look at the question of responsibility, Mr. Chairman, you and me are fathers. I am wondering whether my 18-year-old son is more responsible about the interest of his younger brothers and sisters than I am.  Definitely if he was or if he is not, and I am more responsible for the interest of those who are young, maybe I am the one who qualifies for the second vote. Mr. Chairman, I posed a question when the hon. Prof. Kabwegyere was talking, when he said that the more levels of decision-making and interaction that we have, the more we become democratic. (Laughter)

The hon. Members have already passed the verdict with the chorus we have heard. Let us take a Lady Member of this National Assembly who is at the age of 25 years, and who is a trade unionist, and she is a Member of this House, and she has the capability of being a leader. She will qualify as a youth. By nature, she qualifies as a woman. She is also a member of the trade and a trade unionist, and has been voted to this NRC.  If we were to pass the Constituent Bill as presently in, as most people think, we tend to rubber-stamp whatever comes from Government without amendment.  That individual youth, who is the trade unionist NRC Member would end up with four votes.  And, I wonder whether that is very democratic? Is that the democracy we want? 

I say no.  Because this is like the old justification of the rich.  The rich used to say, we need more than one vote.  The reason we are more responsible, and also, if there is chaos, we are the ones who lose.  So, in that case, for example, I can see my colleague Mr. Kizito agreeing.  You can know when there is a riot period, what would happen on Bombo road.  So, you can see in that justification that in essence, the hon. Sebaana Kizito and his likes, and me, should have more than two votes.  And so, Mr. Chairman, I think that logic is faulty.

On resource availability we are - and as the privilege committees have been meeting to decide our fate on certain things.  But we are already trying out resource availability; schools cannot open on time.  What concerns the youth most, is it this structure or the ability to go to a primary school ? (Applause) Or, is it to get Makerere open on time, or to avail resources on time for them to graduate?  We read these things, and we express concern.  This institution which we are setting up at the moment needs resources.  Do we have them? If we have them, have we made a priority for them? I would say, if I were to make a priority, my emphasis would be to avail those resources.  To get the schools organised, to get the social services working, and to use the propaganda machinery to re-direct the youth. Afterall, we have a national radio or where we can carry out those programmes and it is supposed to do that. On radio we have institutions, and secretariats doing some of the educational programmes.  Let us conserve our resources because I am worried. As I said, I support organised youth. But I am worried about setting up a structure which will end up deadly.  Or not to be able to fulfil even the objects; those few objects that hold here, of having institutional structures that can work.

Given that our resources are limited and that we have other pressing matters to deal with, especially in education and in health. I would rather direct to them these limited resources or to the youth organisation like this one we are trying to set-up, and encourage them to voluntarily set-up structures that will influence the politics of this nation because if it is their initiative, I can see them going far and taking great strides to improve the welfare of this nation. Mr. Chairman, thank you very much.

MRS. LOYCE BWAMBALE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am grateful for this opportunity of rounding up this Bill, I would like at the same time to inform the House that hon. Dr. Specioza Kazibwe, the Minister, is out of the country.  Allow me before I round up on the Bill, to wish you and the hon. Members of the House a prosperous New Year of 1993. (laughter) It is a year of hard work with minimum resources.  Allow me again, to inform my colleagues at the back bench, that I have been pushed up the ladder to come down to the front bench where you are effectively represented. (Applause and Laughter) 

Concerning the Bill, the Youth Council Bill, the Ministry appreciates and commends the contributions that have been made by the hon. Members on this Bill. Their fruitful deliberations, diversified ideas and for taking into consideration various issues beyond the Ministry of Women in Development, and we shall take it upon ourselves as a Ministry, and collectively as a Government, to see that the concerns which the hon. Members have raised in this House are taken into consideration. (Applause) With that, Mr. Chairman, I do call upon the hon. House to cooperate when it comes to the stage of passing the Bill.

The Bill seeks to address genuine problems of the youth as it has clearly come out of the debate. I want to respond first of all, to the blame that has been put on us for delaying to bring the Bill to the House.  I must confess that it is not the fault of the Ministry, but it is because of our inadequate resources in the Ministry which could not allow the Bill to be printed on time, although it had already been drafted.  The Members said it was delaying the representation of the youth in this House, because this Bill provided for the mechanism for which the youth should be represented in this House.  But, there was already the RC Statute which brought all of us to the House, and which was already catering for the youth to come to the House. At last we are here, and the opportunity has been availed, if we pass the Bill. 

This Bill is in line with the Ministry Programme on the youth, and it is in line with our action plan for the youth of this country.  We call upon you to support the Bill, to support its objectives and functions because we feel they are appropriate and achievable.  And for the Members who have voiced the concern over the reality of the objectives, we have taken note of that, and most of the objectives are covered in our action programmes of the ministry.
	
The Bill provides an organisational structure, for the proper management of the youth from local levels to national levels, and we are convinced that this will help us to develop the youth. The Bill, accommodates all levels, sectors and types of youth, moreso the unemployed and the uneducated youth, and the school dropouts.  We have programmes in the ministry for training and retraining them, and we are aware that 75 per cent of the youth of this country, live in rural areas.  If this Bill is passed we hope the resources will be directed to the grassroots, where these youth with these problems are living; it is the dream of the ministry. (Applause) And we need your assistance as hon. Members in mobilisation of the youth at the grassroots so that we can harness the talents of the youth.

The contributions of the House have clearly indicated that we are responsible for promoting the meaningful participation of the youth in development. Some Members have said we need to empower the youth through their own participation, by enabling them make their own decisions, and influencing their own destiny.  Indeed, this is our target as a Ministry. The youth must be given an opportunity, once for all, perhaps, to make their own decisions in accordance with their own rules.  We feel we must channel the energies of the youth towards nation building, and national development.  And we feel this Bill will help us to do that.  We must fulfil and develop the youth in the sense of correct leadership, discipline, integrity and resourcefulness.  

So, we appeal to Members to cooperate.  We intend to develop in the youth a sense of self-reliance, problem solving, awareness and a sense of determination through the passing of this Bill. We are aware, of the potential of the youth as a very big human resource of this country, the greatest asset we can boast of in this country. Yet Members have voiced that the youth lack skills, education, and guidance, and that they need employment; they are energetic, but they are not guided.  So, if we pass this Bill, it is our hope that this will be taken care of.  This Bill will make the Ministry more responsible to the youth.  It will also empower the Ministry to give the youth the right direction.  And this is a Ministry of Uganda, the whole Uganda, it is not a Ministry for NRM; this must be made clear. It is a Ministry for the whole of Uganda.  

During the debate, there has been a lot of controversy about the age bracket, which we are proposing in this Bill. From 13 to 16 years as a definition, for the real youth whom we are forgetting in this Bill.  Allow me to make a comment.  We have, critically studied the concept of the youth being a person between the age of 18 and 35 years.  It is being proposed in this Bill that the age be viewed downwards, from 13 to 26 years, and 18 years for those being voted into the office.  

In order to explain this, the voting age of 18 years is only applicable at the village youth council.  From the village youth council, as you move upwards the rest of the voters will be 18 years. Thereafter, at parish, sub-county, county, district and national levels we are talking about the same age.  So, we hope there will be no controversy there.  Although we have genuine reasons for proposing these adjustments downwards, the House is free to adjust the age accordingly -(Applause) - because they have the powers to adjust it.  

But we are proposing and we have reasons for it, that it would be fair that I explain these reasons to the Members before they make up their minds at the Committee Stage.  The reasons for this proposal were that the right age of the youth has never been identified and their problems have never been addressed correctly.  I will talk about the upper limits, where Members have had several discussions with me, and the Ministry, and everybody opts for the upper limits to be 35 years.  We consider 35 years to be a period where somebody is at the prime of his life.  You know our life expectancy on average is 47 to 49 years in Uganda or in Africa for that matter.  So, you can see where the youth of 35 years stands now.  An adult youth of 35 years in this Bill would have a tendency of inhibiting the needs and enthusiasm of the real youth that we are targeting as a Ministry.  So that the upper limit of 35 derails us from defining the youth.  I am saying, since the aspirations and needs of a person of 35 years, are diverse and different from those of a real youth, we must give this age bracket serious considerations in this House. It becomes worse when you begin to think about the female youth.  The divergence is even greater in reality, because we are thinking about the actual implementation law if the House passes it.  A woman of 35 years -(Interruption)- let us consider a woman of 35 years, she will never come to these councils, and moreso, at RC I in the village, where she will be married already - (Interruption) - I need your protection, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, please.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Especially at the village where she is married, she will be out of place and she will never turn up for the elections.  So we are looking at the real youth regardless of sex; both men and female alike.  What are their needs regardless of sex? Incidentally, the two sexes have got different demands, but we must try as much as possible to put the two groups together.  This was our purpose because we think they have similar aspirations, needs, and ways of articulating the solutions for their needs if the age bracket is between 13 and 26 years.  

So, we were not out of place in proposing this age bracket.  We expect this woman of 35 years to be shy and perhaps to be rejected by that local council and to be pushed to other levels where they feel she would fit. Yet in our society, we need the female and male youth, in building the nation.

On the other hand, a man of 35 years is an adult; he is likely to hijack the objects of this Bill.  In our opinion, he may manipulate the real youth we are targeting.  In any case, it is very difficult during elections to verify the age when we do not have birth certificates in our society.  So, it is very easy for anybody to somersault from 40 years and say they are 35 years. (Laughter.) Moreso if they are well trained and they are smart in the game, they will know what to do.  So, we are trying to avoid some adult to hijack the Youth Council to achieve his or her own targets beyond those of a real youth whom we are targeting.  I feel that this explanation must be given to the House, so that when we are deciding and voting on the age, it is a guiding principle.  We have observed during the debate, that if we are not very careful, some adults have already misinterpreted the objectives of the Bill.  Some male adults may join youth councils just to go to NRC.  They will fail and frustrate the real youth that we are targeting.  
So, I would like to call upon the hon. Members to give this a very serious consideration in view of our presentation, the reality on the ground, the laws and conditions in place. Let us think very carefully and support the Youth Council Bill proposals with minor amendments, if any.

I would like now to move to respond to some of the specific issues that have been raised in this House, and others passed on our desk, for us to respond to specifically.  I am afraid I will not have time to respond to each and every contribution by hon. Members, but I have already given the assurance that they would be addressed not only by the Ministry, but also by Government.  

A question, has been raised on whether the provisions of this Bill, the Youth Council Bill, particularly Clause 9/4, and the definitions in Clause 2, which state that the youth age should be from 13 to 16 years, will not conflict with the Constitution which describes different age limits for the youth.  Members raised that question, and I am advised through consultation that there is no conflict between the Bill and the RC Statute 1989 or any other law in place.  This Bill is designed to deal with the general organisation, general management and the representation of the youth in a broad sense.  It does not in any way affect other legal and constitutional rights or obligations of the youth.  This is the advice I have been given and I am passing the same advice to the House.

I have dwelt much on the age because it is important, and it defines the real youth, and it is a fundamental issue in the Bill. We do not want to establish a parallel youth system where the aged youth manipulate them for double standards.  It would not be wise for this House to have a system that is in conflict with the RC system when it comes to age. 

I intend at the Committee Stage to come up with some gender consideration amendments arising from the trend of the debate in the House. These amendments will be concerned with gender promotion, a myth that was well articulated in this House.  A Clause scrutiny of the Bill throws the Bill in an imbalance at some stages of it.  And it is our wish that this gender imbalance should be corrected through the deliberations at the Committee Stage.  One of them, is that the National Youth Council, Clause 5, where it provides for two students to be elected by UNSA or to be elected by the Conference for that matter.  It is silent about whether the students should be both female and male.  We intend to propose that one of the two student representatives is female and another is male. We also intend to propose that the Council completely forget all about the female youth they were seriously committed to.  NRM Government is taking an affirmative decision to ensure that there is gender balance as much as possible, and on merit.  I would like at the Committee Stage, to propose that the Youth Council, which in the present Bill comprises of one representative from each district and two students, that the Council, through the Provision of this House, gives consideration to include ten females on the National Youth Council.  If you take 39 representatives from the 39 districts plus two students making 41, and there is no provision for a female, it does not provide for women participation at the national level.  When at the bottom, she was very well provided for under secretary for women youth.  

Another area, where gender imbalance was felt, is with the five youth representatives in NRC.  The Bill is silent about women representation.  And given the fact that our people are not yet fully sensitised and aware of the women’s role for a period of time, we will have to take a deliberate action. This is not awkward because we are here; I am standing here, from the very fact that the NRM took that gender decision to include women in parliament.  So, it is not a surprise that this request should come from the Ministry of Women in Development. And we propose that a provision be put for at least two of the five to be female youth.  

Mr. Chairman, I am rounding up.  Another specific response to the Members’ contribution, this one is from hon. Adrian Sibo, some Members felt it strongly that youth NGOs should be represented on the Council.  The Ministry has in place a draft Constitution as of now, for the youth NGOs all over the country; to be organised and governed by an umbrella NGO for the youth, because we know very well that donors prefer having such youth NGOs or NGO organisations which they can fund directly. And since we are saying youth need funds and skills, it is high time they got organised and acquired skills, both from the Government side and through this Council organisation, and also from the NGO umbrella youth organisation.  

In the Bill, we are not proposing that the NGOs should come in right from the start. We are proposing that the NGO youth retain their independence and come in at the Delegates Conference level.  NGO youth will come in to link with the councils at the consultative policy level. I thought, Mr. Chairman, that this point should be made clear and explained to the House.

The Ministry is saying and appealing to the Members to pass this Bill.  Because, if this Bill is in place, it will be easy for the Ministry to develop a National Youth Policy, and it will be easy for the Ministry to identify priorities for the youth, and develop appropriate plans to address problems of the youth.  This Bill if passed, will also put in place channels of implementation, mobilisation, monitoring and it will streamline youth programmes. All youth programmes will then cater for all the youth in the schools, the unemployed, those working, and so on. It will facilitate easy ways to channel funds for the development of the youth who are already organised, and moreso, those in rural areas.  

Mr. Chairman, in conclusion, I call for the support and sympathy of the House.  when this Bill is passed. I call for the participation of all the youth of this country, regardless of sex, so that this Bill is a success. I call upon the NRM Secretariat to be more vigilant in mobilisation -(Laughter)- for the success of this Bill and moreso, the female youth who may mistakenly think that the Bill is for the male youth.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put, and agreed to)

BI LLS 

COMMITTEE STAGE

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL STATE, 1992

(Clause 1 agreed to).

Clause 2.

MR. KIGYAGI:  In Clause 2, under the definition of ‘Youth’ it is stated that ‘Youth’ means a person between the age of 13 and 26 years. On my amended paper, I am suggesting that the definition for ‘Youth’ be between 18 to 30 years for the reasons which have been given by the Minister and, you will agree with me that between the ages of thirteen to eighteen these people are really infants. We are giving them political power, participation in the public affairs, and we must take liability, and as you know, some of our laws also don’t regard young people between the age of thirteen and eighteen liable.  So, I suggest that the definition for ‘youth’ be between the ages of eighteen and thirty years.

MR. KARUHANGA: Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Amendment as proposed by hon. Kigyagi.  First of all, if we allow this Bill to go as it is, we shall be catering for two million youth.  If we support hon. Kigyagi’s Amendment, we shall be taking care of four million youth out of seven million who are below the age of 35.  So, for the purpose of sheer numbers, of getting to the target group, it is very important that we cover more people than wasting so much time and resources on a few people.  

Secondly, the Bill will move from being a Youth Bill to a Children’s Bill, because 13 year olds are really children.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTH (Mrs. L. Bwamble): Mr. Chairman, I Accept the amendment.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 2, as amended agreed to).

Clause 3.

MR. OBWANGOR: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  It is important that these youth are engaged in production so that they are occupied, and their time is not wasted only on politics. They must also be productive and must, therefore, be employed in political, economic and social activities.  So, it is in this respect, Mr. Chairman, that I beg to move an Amendment so that the Bill is made, to make the youth more useful.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, I am afraid I have not got his Amendment. It has not been circulated.

MR. KIGYAGI: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment moved because in (d) of the same Section, it is stated that, “To encourage the youth to play a more beneficial role in national development in the economic, social, cultural and educational fields.” I am sure here it is well catered for.

MR. OBWANGOR: Mr. Chairman, we want practical things not just a matter of mandingise -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Use the microphone please.

MR. OBWANGOR: -(Inaudible)- if the law is clear – it must be clear so that we ensure that there are different opportunities which are more meaningful to the society.  The law must be clear.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment because Clause 4(g) caters for all other incidentals and this could fall in that one.  It is upon the youth to identify what they want to engage in, that is beneficial to them.  I, therefore, beg to reject the Amendment.

(Question on the Amendment put and negatived)

(Clause 3 agreed to).

Clause 4.

MRS. KALEMA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to delete Section 4(a) to organise the youth of Uganda in a unified body  -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Kalema, we do not have your Amendment please.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that in Clause 4 2(d), we delete the word ‘play a more beneficial role’ in the paragraph and substitute it with ‘to consolidate their role.’ This was the same objective as earlier and was amended and accepted by the House and I expect co-operation.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 4 as amended agreed to).

Clause 5.

MR. A. SIBO: Thank you Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 5 be amended by adding sub-clause (c), which should reads, “by addition of five representatives from registered voluntary youth organisations.” I have heard what the Minister said with regard to the role played by the youth organisations, and that she would like the voluntary organisations to come in at a consultative level. 

I would suggest that there is need for a stronger linkage between the Council, the Youth Council and the youth organisation.  Today, there is a lot of work being handled by youth organisations, they are handling the dropouts, and the children on the streets, and they have a lot of experience in youth affairs.  The Bill as it is, stresses a lot on the structure, and there is very little on the work to be done; and I would like to suggest that the youth organisations which are more experienced in this field should really come in and assist the Council.  They will have to assist them by providing leadership, by training for leadership and by inculcating moral values.  So, I would like the voluntary organisations to come and assist the Council in carrying out these responsibilities.  I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of clarification. Where are the five representatives from this youth organisation; how will they be elected and by who?

MR. SIBO: Five is not a very big number; when we look at one representative from each district, that is already forty nine and two students; that makes it 51.  Five is not too big compare to 51.  The second point that hon. Karuhanga has raised is that these people will be elected by the associations of the voluntary organisations which are already registered.  I understand the Ministry is encouraging them; and, therefore, can elect these five to join the Council.

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, I oppose the proposed Amendment.  First of all, the election to the Council starts from villages where every youth is participating.  Secondly, it is very difficult as hon. Karuhanga stated.  These organisations are registered as individual organisations and since they do not have a body that they will represent them, it will be very difficult, yet they are so many. Thirdly, we should encourage the majority of the youth to be members of this Council. Otherwise, we shall fragment the youth in these various organisations.  Thank you.

MRS. JOYCE MPANGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to oppose hon. Sibo’s proposal.  I would like to leave the NGOs, these proper NGOs and not mix them with the government structure.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, for reasons stated in the debate and the support of the House, I do oppose the Amendment.

(Question on the Amendment put and negatived).

MRS. MPANGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose that in Clause 5, we add we add paragraph (c) after (b), to state, “ten female representatives elected by the Conference from among the female members, at least two to represent a region.” Because, if you look under Clause 8, you will find that there is a secretary for women at the district level. But when we came to the national structure the women were forgotten.  I think it was just an oversight, we did not transfer it to 5.  So, this is just to make it uniform so that the women are represented at all levels.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment because it is also included here in my proposed Amendment and I had already, in my round-up, explained the reason for it that this is a very serious omission.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 5(c) agreed to)..

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, my Amendment is on Clause 5(b), which states that, “two student representatives elected by the Uganda National Students Association.” I beg to propose that one of the two student representatives on this Council be female so that we have one man and one female.  Sir, I beg to move.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

MR. SEKIZIYIVU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose an Amendment to Section (a) that it should be two representatives from each district elected by members from the District Council and not the Conference and, secondly, in Section (b), instead of two students it should be four.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us deal with one first.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Okay, Section (a).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr. Chairman, I wish to support this Amendment in that, if we are going to increase democracy, the representatives of the districts should be elected by the District Youth Council and not at the headquarters or at the Conference.  Therefore, I support this Amendment so that the people in the district send their own representatives and not to be told who the representatives are, and I support the Amendment that they are two instead of one.

BAGUMA ISOKE: Mr. Chairman, I wish to oppose that Amendment in that there is a provision for the National Delegates Conference.  In these structures, one leads to the other.  The districts elect their representatives to the National Delegates Conference and it is the National Delegates Conference which elects the Council.  Therefore, we should not confuse these levels.  The Council is not elected from the grassroots but it is elected by the National Delegates’ Conference and the interests of the districts, if one of their candidates is through, will be taken into consideration by the Conference.

DR. MAGEZI; I strongly support the proposed Amendment. I think the representative of the District Youth Council must fully know what he is representing there.  If he is representing the district, the district has the powers to recall him if he does not deliver goods, and to consult the district.  The only way we can guarantee this is to make sure that the District Youth Council elects the members who go to Council.  In fact, I repeat, you will find that the Conference does not know all the district representatives and it is, therefore, very easy to be manipulated to vote for these same people, whereas the districts themselves are going to have more representatives elected by themselves.  I, therefore, very strongly support the Amendment.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, in view of the argument I support the Amendment.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that Section (b) should read “four student representatives elected by the Uganda National Students Association”, because we have many students in Uganda and if they are represented by only two members at the National Youth Council, we shall have hidden a very big number of our students.  I, therefore, propose that it should be four students instead of two.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to support the Amendment.  I think it is very unfair for us to treat the students, one female and one male as the representatives of all the students in Uganda.  It is unrealistic and not representative.

DR. MATOVU: Mr. Chairman, there is nothing that stops a student contesting under Clause 5(a) to be a district representative while still a student and in fact, a member of the Uganda National Students Association.  If that is the case, then I do not see why we increase the number to four.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, raising the number, yet at the same time the Members are voicing constraints on national resources, on that indication I oppose the Amendment.

(Question on the Amendment put and negatived).

(Clause 5, as amended agreed to).

Clause 6.

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, there is a serious omission of the county in which the Council is not provided for.  So, we propose that in Clause 6, we should insert Section (c) to read, ‘County Youth Council 2’, which consequently makes (d) to be (e).” There is a serious omission in the establishment of councils of a County Youth Council.  I propose that (d) is inserted as (c), ‘County Youth Council’, so that (d) becomes (e).

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 6 (e) as added agreed to).

Clause 7.

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Clause 7(2) is not irrelevant.  I had proposed it because I had wanted the age group to be opened downwards. But now, we have moved the age bracket from 13 to 18 years, and it becomes even more irrelevant. It should, therefore, be deleted completely, because it is redundant.  So, Mr. Chairman, I propose that Clause 7 (2) be deleted so that we have a new system which we have corrected as in Clause 2.

MRS. BWAMBALE: I support the proposal, it is obvious following that clarification of age.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

(Clause 7 as amended agreed to).

Clause 8.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, in Clause 8 -(Interruption)

MR. KARUHANGA: Point of order. (Interruption and inaudible)

THE CHAIRMAN: Proceed please.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Under Clause 8 (2)(c), the statement, ‘Secretary for Women at the District level’, I propose should be deleted and a new sentence to read, ‘The Secretary for Women Youth at the District level’, replaces it.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU (Mukono County, Mukono): Mr. Chairman, under Clause 8, sub-section (ii) part (c), I beg to propose an Amendment that we should substitute - we should delete the word ‘women’ and substitute it with the word ‘female’, and the word ‘female’ should replace ‘women’ everywhere in the Bill.  (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, let us deal with her Amendment first.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: There is something additional.

THE CHAIRMAN: No, no.  I now put the question that Clause 8 (ii), (c) be amended as proposed by the hon. Minister.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Mr. Chairman, there was something additional to part (c) of the same that there should be a word ‘female’ wherever there is a word ‘women’ anywhere in the Bill.  We should replace that because the women are already catered for in the Women’s Council Bill.  This one is a Youth Bill.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, it is a biological difference in the definition.  I maintain the ‘women’ and oppose the ‘female.’

(Question put and negatived).

(Clause 8 as amended, agreed to).

Clause 9.

MR. KIGYAGI: I would like to Amend Clause 9 (i) (a), I want to delete the whole statement and I leave (a), ‘Chairman’, and then I delete 9 (ii) completely and then I Amend 9 (iii) and cross out other than the ‘Chairman’.

THE CHAIRMAN: Let us go one by one.

MR. KIGYAGI: Mr. Chairman, in (a), I was proposing this because I wanted to bring the whole idea together, because if we amend one by one, maybe, it might not make sense.

THE CHAIRMAN: So, you leave it then.  (Laughter)

MR. KIGYAGI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to delete 9 (i) (a), ‘Chairman’ only, because as I go down, I will provide that the Youth Chairman is elected by the Youth Council not the one of the Secretary for Youth in the RC system, to avoid any collision between the two systems.  

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

(Question put and agreed to).

Mr. KIGYAGI: Mr. Chairman, I would propose that since we are not trying the youth committees and councils in the RC system, we delete Section 9 (ii).  That one is consequential, Mr. Chairman.  Then in (iii), I propose Mr. Chairman, that the members of the Youth Council, since we have Amended and we have said ‘Chairman’ in (a), we say the members of the Youth Committee shall be elected by the members of the Youth Council from among themselves.  So, I delete ‘other than the Chairman!’

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Point of order.  To go to section 3, when we already have Amendments for 9 (i), part (f) and (d).

THE CHAIRMAN: How do you expect me to know, if you have the Amendments and you do not bring them up?  Take your Seat.

MR. SEKIZIYIVU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.  

MR. KIGYAGI: Mr. Chairman, as I was saying, consequentially, since we are not trying the youth systems of the RC system, section 9 (ii) is deleted.  So, I am proposing that since we have already accepted that there will be a Chairman, and a Chairman who is not attached to the RC system, I suggest that we delete ‘other than the Chairman’, in (iii) and it reads, ‘the Chairman of the Youth Committee shall be elected by the members of the Youth Council from among their number’. 

MRS. BWAMBALE:  Mr. Chairman, I support the Amendment.  It is consistent.

(Question put and agreed to).

MRS. BWAMBALE: Under 9(e), Mr. Chairman as earlier stated instead of, ‘Secretary for Women Youth’, we propose to insert ‘women youth’, under 9(i), (e) as earlier on Amended.

(Question on the Amendment put and agreed to).

MR. MANZI TUMUBWEINE: I wish to propose in 9 (i) (f), ‘Secretary for Students’ affairs’, we should add the word, ‘who shall be a student’, so that we do not create a situation where those who are not students will end up as, ‘Secretary for Students’ affairs’, then he shall be a student. Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MRS. BWAMBALE: I support the Amendment.

MR. KIGYAGI: Mr. Chairman, I propose an Amendment in 9 (iv), but since we have already amended the age group, it automatically becomes amended.  You see, here they are proposing the age group of 26 years as we have already amended it up to 30 years. Under 9 (iv) we delete -(Interruption.) 

MR. WANENDEYA: It is consistent due to the fact that we have amended (f) to be, ‘who shall be a student,’ and we have accepted that Amendment. I take it that 9 (g), to be who shall be a worker, rather than just leaving it blank, Mr. Chairman.  Thank you.

(Clause 9, as amended agreed to).

(Clause 10, agreed to).

(Clause 11, agreed to).

(Clause 12, agreed to).

(Clause 13, agreed to).

(Clause 14, agreed to).

(Clause 15, agreed to).

Clause 16.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Under Clause 16, Mr. Chairman, I beg to propose that we delete, ‘five youth representatives’, in sub-clause (i), and insert, ‘Five youth representatives, at least, two of whom shall be female’.

(Question put and agreed to).

DR. MAGEZI: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I would like to propose an Amendment under Clause 16 (ii) to add 16 (iii), to read as follows: ‘The election of the NRC Youth Representative must ensure that the regions of Northern, Western, Buganda, Central and Eastern will each be represented by one of the youth representatives.’ Mr. Chairman, this is to try and achieve more balanced representation in the NRC, which is in line with better accountability and checks and balances.  I beg to move.

MR. KARUHANGA:  Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose that Amendment for the following reasons.  First of all, we are - by prescribing these statements assuming that the youths are so inadequate, incapable and unaware of the circumstances of their organisation, and that we must prescribe each step of the way.  Secondly, it is not right for us to be seen to be still continuing overtly in dividing this country totally.  Thirdly, I think that it is very important that we should allow these students their own national conference if they find that they have got better and able people, even though may all be coming from one region, as long as they are able to represent their interests better.  I think we should leave this matter to the students without dictating to them the obvious.

MRS. MUGARURA:  I support the Amendment. Mr. Chairman. If democracy must be allowed to advance, it is important that we legislate what we would otherwise not have legislated for. It is important that there is regional representation because, we should not under-estimate the capacity of whichever region sends its people. 

MRS. BWAMBALE: Mr. Chairman, after serious consultations, I oppose the Amendment. (Applause)

MR. ONGOM:  Point of Clarification.  I am seeking clarification. Mr. Chairman, can it be clarified to me, the difference between Buganda and the Central Region.

MR. KAYONDE:  Mr. Chairman, I oppose the Amendment -(Interruption.)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, clarification first. Are you clarifying his point?

MR. KAYONDE: Mr. Chairman, as far as we know, and as far as I understand, these regions or the nomenclature you are using, do not exist now! In any law -(Interruption)

MR. KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr. Chairman, I stand to oppose the Amendment on the following grounds.  We are trying to organise the youth of Uganda; they are being organised by themselves.  Therefore, why are we putting labels that you belong to the north; what is north and what is south?  Mr. Chairman, where does it begin and where does it end? (Applause)

DR. MAGEZI: Point of order.  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I stand on a point of order. Only this afternoon, we passed an Amendment, which refers to representation, of at least two from each region.  Secondly, Uganda Government in which the hon. Kirunda  Kivejinja is a Minister of State, has began a policy of decentralising services so that they are taken near to the people. This decentralisation is based on regions in Uganda.  Is he, therefore, in order to confuse this august House that there are no regions in this country?

THE CHAIRMAN: He is entitled to his views. Order please.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Clause 16 as amended agreed to).

(Clause 17, agreed to).

(Clause 18, agreed to).

(Clause 19, agreed to).

(Clause 20, agreed to).

(Clause 21, agreed to).

(Clause 22, agreed to).

(Clause 23, agreed to).

(Clause 24, agreed to).

(Clause 25, agreed to).

(Clause 26, agreed to).

(Clause 27, agreed to).

(Clause 28, agreed to).

(Clause 29, agreed to).

THE SCHEDULE

MR. KIGYAGI: Mr. Chairman, under Schedule 2 (i), paragraph (ii) should be deleted since the Chairman of the Youth Council is not necessarily the Youth Secretary in the RC system.  So, that section should be deleted.

MRS. BWAMBALE: Point of clarification.  If it is 2 (i), page 14 on paragraph (b), okay with paragraph (i), I have no objection because it provides for the periods they will be in office.  That one should be retained. But the paragraph (ii) which says, provided that the first Youth Council, is not called for after the previous Amendment. I support the Amendment.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Schedule as amended agreed to).

THE TITLE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTHS (Mrs. L. Bwambale): Title and throughout the Bill, that the Title be, ‘The National Youth Council Bill 1993’, and wherever 92 occurs should be 93.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(The Title as amended agreed to).

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTHS (Mrs. L. Bwambale): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House reports thereto.  I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTHS (Mrs. L. Bwambale): Mr. Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled, “The National Youth Council Bill, 1993,” and has passed it with some Amendments.

ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTHS (Mrs. L. Bwambale): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the report from the Committee of the whole House be adopted.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

BILLS 

THIRD READING

THE NATIONAL YOUTH COUNCIL BILL, 1993.

THE DEPUTY MINISTER FOR WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT, CULTURE AND YOUTHS (Mrs. L. Bwambale): Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled “The National Youth Council Bill 1993” be read the Third Time and do pass.

(Question put and agreed to.)

(Bill read a Third Time).

(The Council rose at 4.55 p.m. and adjourned until 2.30 p.m. on Thursday, 21st January, 1993.)



