Wednesday, 24 January 1996

Council met at 2.30 p.m in Parliament Building, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Chairman, Al-Haji Moses Kigongo in the Chair.)

The Council was called to Order.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

MR KIRUNDA KIVEJINJA: Mr Chairman, hon. Members, under rule 10, I would like to make a Ministerial statement on the telecommunication sector policy.  The Ministry of Works, Transport and Communication in association with Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning today 24th January, 1996 announces a policy of reform of the Telecommunication Sector coupled with an implementation programme which will deliver a modern telecommunication infrastructure to take the country into the next century.  

The policy demonstrates the government’s commitment to assisting Uganda’s businessmen to become fully competitive Internationally to increasing the country’s attractiveness to major International investors and to provide subscribers with the telecommunication services of International standard background.  You are aware that Uganda is a land locked country with a total area of 241 square kilometres, and a population of 18.6 million growing at the rate of 2.5 per annum. With a GDP growth rate of 5.5 to 10 per cent during the past few years. Uganda is one of the fastest growing economies among the developing countries.  It has a per capita income however, of one of the lowest in the World of 280 dollars.  

Telecommunication Services

Basic Telecommunication services and facilities are provided by the Uganda Posts and Telecommunications Corporation. A parastatal company wholly owned by government. Other services such as paging, vista** business services mobile trunked Radio services, cellular services and Value Added services are offered by private companies under licence.  With these facilities available, Uganda offers 42,000 subscriber lines, and the switch capacity of just under 70,000. Demand over the next five years is projected to 300,000 lines.  There is also a large animate demand as indicated by the long connection types.

The Market Potential

The current market potential in the telecommunication sector is divided into the following major segments. One; Local, two; long distance, three; international, four trunk capacity resell, five store and forward massaging services. Six, cellular and, or mobile radio services.  There is also a market potential for minor and business services such as private data and voice network, pay phones bureau fax, and public call offices connected to main telephone exchange lines.  Paging, Vista and radio call for own use.  

The Policy Objective

The policy in the Telecommunication sector is, to increase the telephone density from the current 0.205 lines per 100 people to at least 2 lines per 100 people. We are one of the lowest in the whole World.  Two; to improve telecommunication facilities and quality of services as well as adding a variety of new telecommunication services including a electronic mail, paging voice massaging, low cost data distribution and cable distribution of image services. Three; to serve animate customers’ demand for telecommunication services.  Four; to increase the geographical distribution and coverage of telecommunication service throughout the country ensuring a balanced and well-coordinated telecommunication network through appropriate licensing, regulation and standardisation.

Targets 

The sector policy objective and strategies aim to among other things, to improve the average successful correlate for only existing 35 per cent to 65 per cent. Two; improve the percentage of fault recovery to 60 per cent within 24 hours to 95 per cent within 72 hours. Three; provide automated services to all districts and county headquarters. Four; provide a National network which is at least 75 percent digital and supports new intelligent services.  Five; provide pay phones and public call offices, and other appropriate telecommunication services in the rural areas. Six; increase a subscriber line to at least 300 lines.  Seven; ensure a maximum connection time for new applicants in urban areas of two weeks. Eight; introduce a National numbering plan that promotes the growth of new services and is fair to competitors. 

The strategy to achieve all this that the government plans to reach these goals through implementing the following series of reforms.  One; repealing the current Uganda Posts and Telecommunication Act by enacting a new Telecommunication law to provide for: 

(a) Restructuring of UPTC by creating a new telecommunication company; Uganda Telecommunication Limited which will take telecommunication interests of UPTC and the Uganda Posts Limited UPL which will be responsible for the postal services and post office savings bank. 

(b) Establishing an independent regulated regime by creating National communication commission NTC. This will regulate the sector and provide for the rights and obligations of operators.  

Licensing, inter-connection, performance obligations and fair competition which will ensure the protection of subscribers and investors like interests. 

(c) Reducing and eventually eliminating government participation as a principle provider of telecommunication services through selling a controlling interest in the telecommunication business of UPTC to private interests. In this process participation of share capital by Ugandans and or Ugandan institutions will be provided for. The dual aim of this process is to increase Uganda Telecommunication’s capacity to provide competitive telecommunication services while eliminating the need for government subsidies. 

(d) A second National operator will be licenced after a process of competitive biding to build, own and operate telecommunication facilities and provide competitive telecommunications services to those provided by UPTC or its successor telecommunication company. At this material time, the Ministry of Works Transport and communication will liaise with the Attorney General’s chambers to pursue the possibility of immediate setting of a regulatory body by statutory or authority to facilitate the early licensing of the second National operator and provide for the necessary regulatory functions in the interim period before the repeal of the UPTC Act is effected. 

(e) Competition in the sector within a defined market structure will be further fostered and encouraged with the liberalisation of licensing rules of the providers of private business net works.  Paging, electronic mail, and pay phones and other new services as well as cellular and mobile trunked radio services which are already offered in Uganda. A limited number of licences will be made available and their terms will be specified by the interim regulatory authority established by statute of the new regulatory entity established by law.  

The Licensing Procedure

Major restricted licences.  These are services formally referred to as core. They have been high lightened in 1 (3) above. These are a major National resource and to ensure an open and fair process of their allocation, and to realize true value both monitory and in terms of service to the economy, they shall be granted up to a process of competitive biding or auction.  The process will consist of two phases.  Free qualification and biding or auction.  These will be coordinated with on going process of the sell of Uganda Telecommunication Limited and the sell of the second National operator licence.  Applicants in the major licensing category will either have the option to bid to Uganda Telecommunication Limited, purchase or bid for the second National operator licence.  After these processes are completed, new investment will be directed where needed.

Minor Licences   

Minor licences cover the provision of value added services such as private data, and voice network pay phones. Public call offices and bureau connected to main telephone exchanges lines, paging vista and radio call for own use, these licence will be issued under relaxed criteria coordination. The Government of Uganda in cooperation with the World Bank will secure expert technical advice in undertaking of these initiatives. 

The government has retained the services of the International Finance Cooperation, IFC a member of the World Bank group to act as a financial and investment advisor in this process. Further information will be made available to experience network operators and providers of public telephone and other investors who may be interested in the investment opportunities in the telecommunication sector in Uganda. Either for sell of the Uganda Telecommunication Limited, or for the sell of the licence for the second operator.  Thank you. Mr Chairman.

BLLS
SECOND READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS ITERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995

THE CHAIRMAN: I now call upon the Mover to wind up.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for this opportunity to enable me to wind up this debate on this small but very, very important Bill in the history of the democratisation of our society as a country.  Mr Chairman, I would like first of all to start by thanking all the Members who contributed to the debate on this Bill, and who gave very useful information and advice on various provisions contained in the Bill.  I also thank those Members who may not have had an opportunity to contribute on the Floor, but have shown very keen interest in the Bill and have attended as many committee meetings as there have been arranged.  I also, thank members of the Public who have debated the Bill along side hon. Members in this House. 

I also want to register special thanks to the Members of our committee on Legal and Security affairs who have devoted a lot of their time to the consideration of this Bill at length and have gone through all the provisions of the Bill, and have contributed very, very meaningfully towards improvements here and there in the Bill; and I am glad to report Sir, that the Mover has full backing and support of this committee of this Honourable House.

Before I go to the specific provisions of the Bill and the amendments proposed there under, allow me Sir to say one or two things about some of the information that found itself on the Floor of this House through contributions.  We were warned about time and this was a very valid warning to all of us, time is not on our side and we must do everything possible to see that we complete this Bill and the other parliamentary Bill in time to allow the commission to proceed with the arrangements of the election so that by the 7th of July this year, at the very latest there is a Government of Uganda elected by the people of Uganda, through a free and fair election based on universal adult suffrage.

 Sir, I want to explain that although government would have wanted to come to this House earlier, the very nature of the process of formulating legislation demanded that, it was not possible to come to this House earlier than we did.  

As you know hon. Members and Mr Chairman, there was very little that could be done before the final promulgation of the constitution in the way of formulating policy and this Bill, and the Bill that comes after this one, the Parliamentary elections Bill, because, it was possible and it was allowed by the rules of procedure that even on the last day the CA could have altered the constitution.  It was necessary to have the constitution promulgated before full blast preparations for this Bill and the other one could take place. 

Again Sir, as hon. Members are aware, various stages involved include inter-departmental and inter-Ministerial consultations which must be made then legislative instructions must be framed, discussed, and agreed. Cabinet must carefully study, consider and approve the policies involved in the Bill-the policies and principles involved in the Bill, and then drafting instructions must be framed and given to facilitate the actual drafting.  

The Bill must be published and of course, as hon. Members are aware, our own rules set a minimum of 14 days before which a Bill should not be debated after its First Reading.  Taking all these steps into consideration Sir, led to the fact that the Bill came when it did. But having said that, allow me to retaliate government’s commitment to having these elections held within the time prescribed by the constitution. 

Mr Chairman, along with that caution, our attention was drawn to the fact that in the interim period, we must not only have Presidential and parliamentary elections, but we must also have local government council elections.  Sir, I only want to repeat what I said when I first introduced the Bill that there is no constitutional requirement that we must have local government elections within the transitional period.  

The local government system provided for under chapter 11 of our constitution is slightly different from the one obtaining today, and the constitutional authority to legislate for the detailed modalities of implementation of the constitutional provisions relevant to the formation of local government under chapter 11, are vested with the Parliament that is expected to come as a result of the elections we are now legislating for.  Of course ,the situation may lead to an apparent lacuna but that can be cured through prudent political planning and action and government is already taking steps towards achieving that.

 Mr Chairman, a Member also wondered why government did not see the wisdom of consulting very widely on this Bill.  Sir, I want to assure hon. Members that the widest possible consultations were carried out within the time limits that we have.  I will not speak about allegations of harassment of certain Members, I will also not comment very much on the tactics of rigging elections all I want to say Sir, is that as hon. Members of this House and as the country at large, we should have the confidence that the National Resistance Government has no intention whatsoever to rig the forth coming Presidential and Parliamentary elections and the local government elections that will follow. (Applause)

 Mr Chairman, I will now make some brief comments about various provisions of the Bill which have been surfacing as we debated this Bill.  Mr Chairman, there were arguments, and I have seen amendments to the effect that the Minister responsible for elections as provided for in the Bill, should be the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and Attorney General. Hon. Chairman, I only want to refresh the Members’ memory that under article 99 of our constitution, the executive authority of this country is vested in the President of the Republic; and Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, the function of designating Ministers and giving them their functions is an executive function.  

I do not think and I do not want to think that this House has the slightest intention of usurping the powers or functions of the executive through amending this Bill to designate which Minister should do what.  Further more, under the current set up before reshuffle, we do not have a Minister for Justice and Constitutional Affairs, we have a Minister for Justice and Attorney General. 

Questions were also raised as to why the Bill requires for a Presidential candidate to get 100 names of supporters from many districts in this country.  I have also seen amendments to the effect that this provision should be deleted.  I only wish to remind hon. Members that this is a constitutional provision, and it was put by the framers of the constitution with a very good purpose. So that whoever aspires to go to the highest office of this land must prove beyond any doubt that he is a leader of a National character. 

Arguments were made about the deposit of the 2 million provided for in the Bill, many Members were saying that was too little. Many members in the public are also saying that it too little, it does not reflect the seriousness that goes with the participating in a bid to share power at the Highest office in this country.  

Proposals of UShs 5 million, 8 million, 10 million and 20 million have been made. I must say that, I am flexible on this matter and I will accommodate amendments that will suit the aspirations of the Members of this House who are the too representatives of the people.  Allow me to say that this matter is important because apart from showing that a candidate is serious, it will also help to reduce on the number of likely unserious candidates who could drag us into a constitutional crisis.  

As you remember, Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, we have set the 7th of July as the last day by which government of Uganda must have been elected, but in the constitution there are provisions which in effect, provide a kind of a time table.  For example, if we had an election, and non of the candidates obtained over 50 per cent of the votes validly cast, there must a repeat.  Now, if you are going to have conditions that are so simple, it is possible you get too many candidates and at the end of the day, you fail to get a candidate who emerges with required 50 per cent.  I do not want to call spoiler candidates, but they would have spoilt good job of the electorate in trying to determine who should be their President.  So, because of these constitutional fixed times, I think this House is very much in order when it looks at these provisions and it desires to make them as serious as possible so that we avoid constitutional problems

Of course, we all know that elections are very expensive and therefore, we do not have to attract unnecessary repetitions because of unserious legislation.  Mr Chairman,- and because elections are very expensive, I am encouraged by the mood in the House which tends to point to the direction that whatever we decide should be taken as a contribution by the candidates to the organisation and management of our elections as it was the case when Members of this Honourable House were being elected. I am saying, I have seen the mood in the House that, the deposit whatever we decide, should not be a deposit but a contribution and, therefore, subject to no refund; and I am prepared to accept the good mood and positive approach of this Honourable House in that respect.
  
Mr Chairman, on public campaigns.  There were arguments about why we should have individual public campaigns by the Presidential candidates.  Some Members were saying that these should be joint candidates’ meetings -rather public meetings similar to what we had during the CA elections.  I know that approach is very popular, especially, with our people.  But again because of the time limits we have set in the constitution, it is not possible that the electoral commission can be in a position to organize joint public campaign meetings for the presidential candidates throughout the country.  We have 39 districts Sir, even if you were going to say that there should be a meeting in one district everyday without a break, you need 39 days to cover the districts of this country.  If you had the resources and you said you wanted two districts to be covered a day, you need 20 days to around the country working non stop and I do not think it is possible that from day one people can campaign without a break going to these candidates’ meeting without attending to other aspect of their campaigning. 

Secondly, even if you were able to reach the districts, the impact made I think would not justify the time spent and the money.  Because our people are now used to this decentralization policy where power and responsibility plus money and, especially, political power is taken as far down to where they live as it is possible.  The tendency therefore, would be, that you would call a meeting at district headquarters like my Mpigi district the people who will benefit are likely to be those who are around the district headquarters.  

Unless the commission undertakes transport every Tom, Dick and Harry from the remotest corners of the district will want to come to the district headquarters to attend to this public meeting and those resources are not available.  If you wanted to say you wanted to go near the people and you said you will go to the county, the situation is even more aggravated.  Because we have over 160 counties, it will require over 160 days.  I do not want to take the House into this scenario of if you wanted to go to a sub-county which to me would be very ideal; but you know the amount of days you need are not just available.  

So, it is with all these considerations in mind that we had to decide that, let the candidates have the option to have individual public campaign meetings in accordance with this statute and any other law, on our   statute book so that they have the opportunity of reaching the voters as much as possible.  We did not say that, the commission shall never organise a joint candidates’ meeting, there is nothing in the statute to forbid that.  So that if there was time and resources, may be the commission would say okay we shall have a meeting here and there.  But I think it is important that we put provisions in our law that will not put us in positions that may lead us into constitutional problems.

I must say also that there were also some people who were saying that this question of meeting the electorate together is undemocratic people should be allowed to organize individually.  We accepted that and we put it very clearly on the law.  I know since then people have changed-those who were agitating for that line are the same people who are now saying, but look, it should not be individual, it should be joint and it should be mandatory and probably with the hope that, when you are not so confident of your capacity to draw crowds you may want to ride on somebody’s back who can attract very many people to come to a meeting and then you also put your programme across to the population.  But as I said, we have not prohibited joint, but we have said candidates are free to organize individual public meetings.

About provision of security, government is of the very firm belief and view that once somebody becomes a Presidential candidate, the state’s obligation to provide security to that person becomes enhanced.  It is true government provides security for everybody that is why we have the police and the rest of it.  But when one becomes a Presidential candidate there is more need for the security to provide enhanced security as a matter of a must.  Therefore, we are not very sympathetic to people who say that security should be provided at the request of the candidate because we think it is an obligation we cannot run away from, it is both in the interest of the candidate, and the nation that maximum security is guaranteed to our Presidential candidates who you have now graduated from being mere Presidential hopefuls.


 Mr Chairman, we had many arguments about the principle involved in the Bill about government facilitating to some extent the Presidential candidates.  I must explain that this matter was brought here to this House for debate because we felt that although we are not in a position as a nation to meet the entire Bill of the presidential candidates, their campaigning Bill, it is good politics and good policy for the state to recognise that they have offered to offer a service to this nation and, therefore, the state can also in its humble means available to it, contribute if only as a gesture to the financing of the campaigns of these various Presidential candidates. 

I must say, we do not intend that this is going to be something very substantial, because the pocket is not that big.  It cannot, therefore, accommodate what I have seen in some amendments ranging from transport for the candidate and his agents and campaigning managers to allowances, stationery, office, accommodation and the rest of it even posters.  But I think, if this provision is passed, then the commission would have an opportunity to go and assess the situation and look at what resources are available, and then they can come up with a proposal which will eventually come this House for approval as the state’s contribution to the cost of campaigns by the various Presidential candidates. 

I must mention also that this is another important aspect of leveling the ground. I do not want to mention names but if a candidate cannot even have a vehicle to take him to Kisoro I think he is a very disadvantaged position when his other Colleagues may drive a government vehicle, may enjoy the facilities which are available to them as a matter of their own office.  So, we are trying to attend to this, as part of meeting the policy of leveling the ground, and I hope Members will agree with the proposal so that the details will now be made and they come for approval by this House.

On mobilisation of funds, I must state that government is very firm on the fact that we must not ever allow by action or omission any person who is aspiring to become the President of this country either himself or through his agent to mobilize resources from known hostile sources. In normal criminal law, that would amount to treason.  So, since this gentleman or this lady is aspiring to become the Chief Custodian of our constitution and the law, he or she must make sure that he avoids a situation where he or she may be tempted to solicit funds from sources that are known to be against the interest of the people of Uganda.  Beyond that Sir, we do not intend to restrict anybody from mobilizing resources from anywhere as long as the sources are not hostile and as long as he or she does it in accordance with the law, and as long as he or she accounts or gives information to the commission about what funds he has received, and the sources thereof.  

The question obviously arises; how will these candidates know?  I must say that government has the machinery to know who are the friends and enemies of the people of Uganda.  This information will be made available to the commission and the candidates will be entitled to this information.  It is not a question of trying to lay traps for   candidates, government is going to do everything possible to put the commission in possession of this information so that, candidates can be guided to avoid skating on very things known. 

I have seen very persuasive arguments that we should a limit on what candidates should use.  I think good as that may appear, it may be not very practical in our circumstances. If we were going to fund these elections, we would be justified to put a limit.  But since we are not doing that, we do not have the capacity, I think we leave the people to mobilize their resources, and we leave them the freedom to campaign, to solicit for votes in the style that they want. While a candidate may feel safe enough to go in humble means to look for votes, another may feel, he will get votes by being sophisticated and the rest of it.  

So, since as long as these people are not attracting any problems for ourselves I think they should have the freedom to campaign in the style they want so that they will not point any accusing finger to anybody that I would have achieved this but I was limited unjustifiably because of the limitations put on how much I could spend and the rest of it.

 Then the other question was, why get money from outside Uganda at all?  I have said, as long as this money is not harmful to this country, it can find its way through here.  We are only worried, and we are against money from hostile sources.  Of course a Member proposed that he would not mind if government directly borrowed money and facilitated the candidates.  But I must say that, even when you go with a proposal to these people who they do not lend but they trade with their money. To these people who give their money, they will accept everything that you take.  

For instance in matters of election, it is difficult to see that they could accept that they give you money so that you can pass it over to a candidate to go and campaign.  They think it is part of leveling the ground between Uganda and them, that you should be able to meet these matters if you think they should be put in the law, and in the practice of our campaigns.  

In the Bill in Clause 8 government tries to level the ground again by restricting the use of government resources as we provided in the Bill. I have seen proposals that the entire thing be deleted, other that these should be drastically changed.  For instance that an incumbent President should only be allowed to use his security only, and not the other resources available.  I think the duty of a President or even a more humbler public officer does not cease because he is a candidate; and since in principle we agree and it is agreed the World over, that an incumbent President can campaign using those facilities available to him by virtue of his office, I do not see the reason why, if there was a Permanent Secretary who also wanted to wear the boots of a President, we should at this level say, you leave you house because you are going to campaign for Presidential post.  Leave the car and the rest of it.  I think it will be leveling in between the two, and of course as I said we are trying to level the ground for the others as it is provided in Clause 77 (2)

There is a provision for repeat nominations where a candidate dies or ceases to be a candidate, and some people were questioning the wisdom is this kind of thing. We are saying the politics of today and, especially, as far as it relates to the Highest Office of this country, is a joint venture between the leader, and the led. If somebody was nominated, and complied with all the provisions of the law, it means that there are people who had confidence and trust in him as a candidate. 

Now, should anything happen and God forbid, that he ceases to be a candidate, I think those people have a right to be given an opportunity time allowing to field another candidate if they so wish.  If they do not wish, well and good.  But I do not think it would be good to turn a blind eye to that kind of situation.  Of course, I can see this is a very remote possibility, I think we are going to elect-people will nominate very healthy candidates, they will not die, nor will they elect people or nominate people who are likely to get disqualified because of acting illegally or in contravention of any law.  But nevertheless, it is a good provision to have in place just in case as safety valve.

There was a voice complaining about the Chief Justice making some rules.  I must say that, the rules we are talking about in Clause 11 are more or less court rules. They are not regulations as those we normally assign to Ministers and I think it was hon. Obwangor former Attorney General who was saying this should go to -(Interjections)- former Minister for Justice, who was saying that this should go to the Chief Justice.  But really with due respect, the Chief Justice is normally empowered to make rules which govern the functions of those organs that fall under his jurisdiction, and in this case it is rules of court that we are saying will be made by the Chief Justice in consultation with the Attorney General.

Mr Chairman, I want to retaliate that Clause 12 is a very important Clause in this Bill. Because as I said, some provisions are going to be derived from the interim Parliamentary elections statute, and it is necessary that in this law, we put an enabling provision that will authorise legally the organisers of this election to borrow what is necessary and practical from the other Bill. I am agreeable to improving on the drafting of the Clause and I have seen a very attractive amendment from hon. Wapakabulo which I think we can accommodate in order to improve on this provision.

Clause 13 I think it is only good politics that whoever wants to become President, should tell this country the truth only and nothing else. So we are encouraging them to make sure that before they make these declarations, they check the facts and give accurate information.

MR OBWANGOR: Point of information. It is not the truth, a President of a nation, under article 98 he must put to the country a policy.  It is not truth because he can dodge you now and tomorrow. There is no truth but legality.

MR KAVUMA: I think hon. Members, from the piece of information given by hon. Obwangor.  So, Clause 15, there was some criticism about this provision but I think in the final analysis some hon. Members were worried about the enforceability of this kind of provision. I must say that one of the values of law is to deter those people who would be tempted to behave in a certain way. That is one deterrence value of any law is very useful.  Secondly, I think it would be most unwise, and I would not support it at all that we go in legislating for elections of a President and elections of a Parliament and we turn a blind eye to possible malpractices in the form of bribery to our population.  It is dangerous to our society and we must provide against it.  I must say, if need be, the state must pull up their socks so that the organs that are intended, those -(Interruption)

MR ABU MAYANJA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I am grateful to hon. Rwakakooko for managing these rather complicated gadgets for me; and I am grateful to the Minister for giving way.  The information I want to give him that this Clause is retrospective; it says that somebody did something in the past.  Now, therefore, it cannot deter if by the time it becomes law gets into forth, somebody would have done something; and as I said during my contribution, on this Clause already the things which the Clause is suppose to prohibit are being done, and yet it says that if somebody does it in the future or if he did it in the past. Now, how do you deter a person by making a provision that-because now they are doing it when it is not unlawful?  But the Clause provides that if somebody did it in the past, I do not have the Bill with me, but I read it and that is what it says. So that is the problem; it cannot deter because right now there is no law preventing people and people are doing it.  But we are going to legislate and we say that anybody who either will do it in the future or who did it in the past.  I hope the information is understood.

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I want to say to my hon. and elder Learned Friend that -in fact it is a Senior counsel if it were to be some where else that, we are legislating for a particular office, a Presidential office we are legislating about candidates as of now we do not have any candidate in law.  So when he talks about persons, my concern is about Presidential candidates.  That is one. Two; if the hon. Member and any other person has evidence about anybody, the law of the land is available he can put machinery in process to bring the culprits to book.  But we should not go by way of speculating or decampaigning and the rest of it; and Mr Chairman, probably I would also ask my hon. Friend from Busujju to tell me what policy he had when he proposed exactly the same provision in the CA statute which was made when he was Attorney General of this country, which has now changed so drastically that he does not see the value of the same provision today.

Allow me to complete, and I want to say that as far as Clause 16 is concerned, I have listened very carefully to the worries expressed by hon. Members, the fears which really result from what happened from previous elections, I must say that we tried as much as possible to put what would be regulations in the main Bills which we are going to debate. So that a lot of it will already have been passed as Clauses or sections of the statute.

Secondly, this provision also very normal and usual, but in this respect it was intended to be a safety valve just in case there was something that was left that could come up and we needed regulations.  But having said that, and I explained it, and I have seen Members’ worry I also take note of hon. Kanyomozi my friend’s warning that he does not want to see Kavuma as the person who rigged elections, an inscription on the grave of anybody as may be there is one already that herein, in this grave lies a man who together with others still at large rigged elections sometime in the process our development. I am, therefore, accommodative to subjecting whatever rules or regulations that will be made to approval by Parliament.

Lastly, I want to say that most of what I have been talking about is already in the report -(Interjections)- much of what I have been saying is already included in a report of the committee on legal and security affairs which I understand has been circulated, and as I said, all these provisions have been very carefully gone through by the committee and there was overwhelming consensus in that committee that these improvement should be effected and then we pass the law without any further delay.  I thank you very much Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that the Bill entitled the Presidential election interim provisions Bill, 1995 be read the second time.

(Question put and agreed to.)
		            
THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1995.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now adjourn the council for five (5) minutes.
                     
BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM BILL, 1995

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 1 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 2

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 2 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)
Clause 3

MR KAVUMA: Mr Chairman, I beg to move that Clause 3 sub-Clause 2 on page 4 be amended by deleting the word “may” and inserting therein or replacing it with the word “shall”. So that the Clause reads that the commission shall request such evidence as it thinks necessary of the qualifications specified in the sub-section.  We discussed this with the Members of the committee and we agreed that this should be a matter of a must and I accommodated the wishes of the committee.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, this Clause 3 deals with qualifications of Presidential candidates and these qualifications -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: What sub-section?

DR TIBERONDWA: Clause 3 sub-section 1 a, b, c. Mr Chairman, 1 (c) is a constitutional qualification and it is indicated in the law pertaining to the election of Members of Parliament.  Because it is so important before we finish this Bill to know what the qualifications are, I thought that we transfer this one and bring it here from the other law so that we know before we start what a Presidential candidate is supposed to be. In fact ideally this thing should have come after the Parliamentary elections law.  But it did not come.  

So, what I have proposed is an addition of another Schedule which we may deal with when we come to the Schedule talking about the qualifications of a Presidential candidate. So that we separate this one from the other Clauses which can be dealt with under the other law.  Because this is so important that we should deal with it now so that people can know after we have finished whether they are qualified to be Presidential candidates or not. That is article-I have added Schedule 4 if you want us to wait and discuss it under Schedule 4 we could, if you want to put it here, we could bring it here, Mr Chairman; that is really up to you.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, I do not see the worry of hon. Tiberondwa because even in the constitution the provisions of the qualifications are there; and will be provided in the other law.  Because when you say a person qualifies to be a Member of Parliament, there is no fear even if we make it now, and the Parliamentary law comes later.  There is no question why we should put it here.  First of all it becomes superfluous, and since it is provided for in the Constitution and in the next law, there is no reason why we should put it here again.  I think that one still services as it stands now; so, I do not agree with it.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I also stand to oppose the Amendment proposed by hon. Tiberondwa, because this is already a constitutional matter and we know for sure that if you want to be a Member of Parliament the qualifications are a, b, c, d; so, this should not disturb us at all, we should just proceed.  Thank you very much.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I do oppose the proposed Amendment, principally because, Sir, the proper place for it really is the Parliamentary Election Bill, and we are already treating it there as a schedule.  The Constitution legislates by cross-reference when it comes to the President to say that a candidate must be also a person who is qualified to be a Member of Parliament.  Since the Members of Parliament have been principally governed by the Parliamentary Elections Bill, the most appropriate position for this provision is in the other Bill, and I request hon. Tiberondwa to hold on until we get there. 

(Question put and negatived.)
 
MR OBWANGOR:  Mr Chairman, clause 3.1(b) the age of -(Interjections)- Mr Chairman, you know Article 98, and the qualification for a person to become a President is 35 years; but the addition to the question of not above 75.  Mr Chairman, you see, this is very important -(Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, as a matter of clarification we are witnessing a new phenomenon which started with hon. Tiberondwa.  Instead of standing up and moving the Amendment they start straight away with explanation and debating. We do not know which Amendment even is being proposed.  Now, hon. Obwangor is talking of age; now, what is exactly his Amendment?

MR WAPAKABULO:  I do appreciate hon. Obwangor’s anxieties but the Constitution provides, as it is written in (b) exactly in those terms; not less than 35 years and not more than 75 years.  This is directly from the Constitution, and if he wants to have that amended there is another procedure under the Constitution but not here.

Clause 3 as amended, agreed to.

Clause 4

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, in clause 4 sub-clause 2, paragraph (a) on page 4, I move that an Amendment be carried out to insert the words, immediately the words ‘a nomination paper’ the words; ‘a document in this Statute as’ so that it would now read that: “that person submits to the commission on or before the day appointed as nomination day in relation to the election a document in this Statute referred to as a nomination paper in the form specified in the First Schedule to this Statute.”  I beg to move, Sir.  This really is to provide for a procedural matter, normally when you are seeking election, the document you present is a nomination paper, and it is what document this clause is talking about; but for the sake of removing ambiguities we want to supply it so that it is very, very clear to those who administer this law that this document is the nomination paper we are talking about.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR ONGOM:  Mr Chairman, I had submitted a proposal to amend clause 4 subsection 9 - sorry, I thought we were talking about clause 4, I will bring it later.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that subsection 3, of section 4 be amended by -(Interjections.)- Mr Chairman, I wanted to move that subsection 3 be amended to read as follows:  “a candidate shall be proposed and seconded in the manner specified in the First Schedule to this Statute”, the other words, Sir, I want them deleted.  The reason is that the details are being given in the schedule, which is being mentioned, and these words are superfluous.  I beg to move, Sir.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MAGEZI:  Mr Chairman, I beg to propose an Amendment that clause 4, subsection 7(c) –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, let us go one by one.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that clause 4 as it appears now, be deleted and a new sub-clause 4 be inserted to read as follows:  “Each candidate shall attach to his or her nomination paper a list of names of 100 registered voters from each of, at least, two thirds of all the districts in Uganda and each of the 100 registered voters shall in the presence of the Returning Officer for the district in question or a public officer designated by him or her for that purpose, append to that list his or here name, signature, physical address and voter’s registration number as specified in the First Schedule. “ 

Sir, the reason is - really, the only addition to the old clause is the inclusion of a witness in the person of a Returning Officer for the district or a person designated by him to witness this kind of transaction.  Sir, the reasons here; this is an important election, and it is important that all those who sign are duly identified and sign before a responsible officer so that we can cut down on the amounts of litigation in terms of challenging elections and the rest of it.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I beg to oppose the Minister’s proposal for the simple reason that supposing a number of Zanzibaris or Tanzanians are brought here to be Returning Officers; so, maybe, if the Minister is serious we should have the United Nations to supervise the elections.  So, I strongly oppose the Minister’s proposal.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I do sympathise with the Minister’s Amendment but practically the exercise is cumbersome; there must be someone to prove that these people have, actually, signed, otherwise, you can put down names and even sign them without any witness.  But the thing is so cumbersome, that I wish the Minister specifically mentioned some other persons, either Chairman of RC or - because you may get these people from different parts, in each district, and for you to get somebody designated and that designation, I think, must be in writing it is going to cause a lot of problems, you are going to spend about a week or so in one district doing that exercise, and as the Minister has pointed out the time ahead of us is very, very short.  I would like to propose that you have somebody already specifically in place.  Like say, the Parish Chief or RC Chairman, I think that one is a much more certain person who is already there; instead of saying somebody designated by the Minister.  Otherwise, I do sympathise with the reasons behind the Amendment.

MR ASIKU:  Mr Chairman, I stand to support the Minister’s Amendment.  I presume when nominations will be done, the hopeful Presidents will, actually, make arrangements and during that particular time the various people who are coming to nominate them will be assembled on one side.  It is, therefore, very easy to do the nomination in one.  But to say let them sign in various villages of theirs, then somebody signs there, it is likely that you can sit in one home, write all the names and forge the figures which will not be true representation.  So, I support the Amendment to make it in order. 

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support this Amendment.  I could, for instance, show it this way; that if say hon. Tiberondwa wanted to get 100 names in Mbale District, we have got in Mbale District six counties, including the municipality, and if you divide 100 by 6 you can see how many people will come from each county, assuming you want to show yourself to be quite popular in the whole district.  You should arrange to get your people either to Mbale and they come and sign before the Returning Officer or you get a motorcycle and you ride from one county to the other to sign in front of the Assistant Chief Administrative of Officers resident at each county headquarters.  This can take place, actually, in one day; there is nothing serious about it.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 4, sub-clause 4, be amended as proposed by hon. Steven Kavuma.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 
MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I withdraw my Amendment on sub-clause 5, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, we go to sub-clause 6.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, on sub-clause 6, I have no Amendment on that.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Now, sub-clause 7;

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, my proposed Amendment is to clause 4, subsection 7(c); and my proposal is that the entire provision, that is (c) be deleted and it be replaced with the following:  “A non-refundable deposit of Shs.20 million payable to the Uganda administration in cash or bank draft”.  Mr Chairman, I take note of the unparliamentary language that is being used by Members of this House who call them saved democrats, belief in the freedom of though, expression and association.  This is my thinking, Mr Chairman, and therefore, I had hoped that hon. Members worth the salt, should adhere to the decency expected of such Members.  There are proper procedures of opposing Members’ opinions, and they ought to listen, Mr Chairman, to the reasons why I have advanced this Amendment.  

Mr Chairman, some of the people who are shouting rubbish are people who have proposed Amendments that the fee payable be UShs 500,000, you will get a thousand presidential candidates, Mr Chairman; and my Amendment is meant to deter those people who take our presidential elections for a ride, who think it is a joke to stand to be President of Uganda.  My Amendment is intended to identify those people who are serious about becoming presidents of this country; and my argument is that if a presidential candidate, and I am reminded there is one such aspirant in the gallery; if such a candidate cannot get between himself and his supporters UShs 20,000,000 then this candidate is unlikely to gather sufficient votes that would make him to be taken seriously.  

Therefore, Mr Chairman, my Amendment, as I have said, is to restrict the presidential election to as few people as we possibly can; it is going to cost this country a lot of money.  I do not what the Commission budgeted for it, but I am sure it will cost us scores and scores of millions of Uganda shillings to give services to these candidates.  

As I had said before my own view about this election is that the presidential candidates should as little of fundraising from other sources as they possibly can; because the moment you are a beggar you have a serious problem, and my hope was that after these candidates have paid some UShs 20,000,000 each then the Treasury would do everything possible to find all the money that we need and we fund these candidates as adequately as we possibly can, so that these candidates are in nobody’s pocket except the pocket of the people of Uganda before they are elected.  Mr Chairman, I beg to move the Amendment.  

MR KASAJJA:  Thank you very, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Amendment as proposed for the following reasons:  One, the time for the members who are going to vote the presidential candidate is precious; therefore, in order to restrict as many people as possible to waste people’s time, we should at least make a figure which is going to be prohibitive.  Secondly, Mr Chairman, if a person aspires to be a President that person should show the qualities of being a President.  We are not going to have a person who a pauper to come here and start, maybe, interfering with government resources.  Therefore, if a person comes to a presidency when he is poor he is going to be a problem to this nation.  

Lastly, I think we should go away from this thinking that anybody can stand.  Not anybody can stand - you see we have to have somebody with qualities, right from the beginning to show that that person is serious in order to stand for a presidency.  

With those reasons, I support the Amendment that the Professor has brought that 20,000 dollars, the equivalent of UShs 20 million is not too much money for a presidential candidate.

MR KAHERU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Now, I would like to plead with the hon. Members to go to the fundamentals.  We are trying to get good candidates for presidencies; we are not trying to get one of the money magnets to stand for this.  If you presume that these presidential candidates are good people, they are offering themselves to serve the people of Uganda, not to go and loot the government Treasury, you should really make it possible for a person, say a person who is just a simple professor, like Prof. Kagonyera, to be able to stand!  But to ask for Shs.20 million will really make it ridiculous.  Secondly, Mr Chairman, I would like to propose that these really be deposits, and will still deter none serious candidates -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to take note of the concerns which have been raised by hon. Prof. Kagonyera, but I think he has gone beyond the level I think, that he is deterring the people who would be joking and he has become a little punitive to the interested candidates.  I would like to agree that this deposit be non-refundable; in other words, that the presidential candidate does contribute to the exercise and shows that he cares about the resources of the country over which he has the hopes to preside.  

In view of this, but also in view of the fact that I would like to say that UShs 500,000 is, I think, too small, I would like to go with a proposal that has already been vetted by the committee of UShs 8,000,000 non-refundable money to the Treasury.  

So, if my Colleague and friend does not find it very difficult, I would like to request him to withdraw that very high figure of Shs.20 million. 

We discussed our proposed amendments; had they been kind enough they should have been polite people who had moved their amendments to their committee so that they be informed about the democratic decisions taken.  (Interruption)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  I wish to inform hon. Kagonyera who is my friend, that there was an announcement on the air when we adjourned last, that on Monday we meet all those people who had moved Amendments, that they should come and appear before the committee.  We did that, hon. Kagonyera, through you, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, really I hope hon. Butagira realises that hon. Members of this House do not receive or take instructions from radios; because these announcements can be made by anybody, and quite often they are erroneous in content, like I heard someone mentioning that a certain meeting was going to take place in a different place than actually was proposed.  So, really there should be proper methods of communication with Members of this House.  However, notwithstanding wise council dictates that I accept a decision arrived at by the committee of this House, and therefore, Mr Chairman, I withdraw my Amendment.

DR MAGEZI:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to move an Amendment on clause 4, subsection 7(c) by deleting the words ‘a deposit of UShs 2,000,000’ and inserting the words, ‘a non-refundable deposit of UShs 8,000,000 payable to the Uganda administration in cash or bank draft and...’  

Many of the reasons for arriving at this figure have been expressed of late by hon. Kagonyera and those who supported him, and as well as those who did not support him.  I would not like to labour very much on this matter, therefore, except to say that to be a presidential candidate in Uganda is a big sacrifice; to lead this country of 18 million people, and we must agree that much as it is a right to contest to be a President it is not something every Tom, Dick and Harry should aspire to be.  You can only reach where you touch, and we should consider the economic involved, we should consider the possible facilitations involved, we must also consider speculators who want to be also the run for the Office of the President.  Given this scenario, people should take this as a very serious decision and because of the funding that is going to be provided by the tax payer, the candidates must be seen to be contributing to that facilitation, that is why I am proposing that it should be non-refundable.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman. 

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am in total agreement with the Amendment, but I am seeking the indulgence of hon. Magezi; instead of calling it now a deposit, since it is non-refundable we call it a fee.  That is the only small addition I wanted to add.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, before we go to sub-clause 8, I think there is a necessary subsequential Amendment on 7, to remove the clause which was talking about refunding after 25 per cent, that must be –(Interruption)

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, sorry to have to move the House a little backwards to sub-clause 7(b).  Mr Chairman -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  No, no, we are on 7(d); okay, go ahead.

MR MAYENGO:  Mr Chairman, I am standing on 7(b).  Sub-clause 7(b) requires a candidate to state assets, his income and his liabilities, at the time when he is being nominated.  Mr Chairman, I propose that we delete that.  The aim of deleting it is that it is moved forward so that after he wins then he tells us all this, which will be in compliance with the Leadership Code; after he has been elected, I am proposing that then he will tell us, and that is what the Leadership Code also calls for.  But at the time of being nominated, I see no reason for having the candidate state his assets, his income, his liabilities and so many other things.  It looks to me that we are just wasting paper here.  It would be more reasonable to require that once elected, the President elect then must tell this country his assets.  It is for that reason, that I am proposing that we delete it.  

Another reason is that we never a set a minimum standard of wealth so that we could say it is necessary before the election takes place, that we know what is worth, when we know what is worth we then tell that he has reached the minimum standard of wealth that a candidate should have.  

MR MWONDHA:  Mr Chairman, I oppose hon. Mayengo’s proposal.  My first reason is that up to now we have no managed to implement the Leadership Code; the second reason is that if hon. Mayengo was proposing that we amend this subsection in order to provide for the successful candidate to declare his assets in the manner in which we have, actually, spelt out here, that I would have understood, but once a person becomes a President and there is no provision in this law to require him to declare his assets and liabilities, it will be extremely difficult later to get to know what his assets and liabilities are, and it is very important at the very beginning for everybody - for us to have a record of what the President has so that subsequently there is no accusation that perhaps he did this one or that one in order to make himself wealth.  Therefore, I oppose the proposal by hon. Mayengo.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I also oppose hon. Mayengo’s proposed Amendment.  We are going to use your declarations as part of the weapons in our campaigns.  If we think hon. Mayengo is worth a billion shillings and he only declares Shs.1 million, we shall know he is a dishonest man, and we shall not vote for him and we tell the people not to vote for him.  Equally so, if we knew from what you do that you ought to be worth almost nothing and you tell the world that you own ten million dollars we will wonder whether than money has come from drugs or whatever.  Therefore, the information you give to the people of Uganda in your declarations is a reflection on your character and, therefore, it will be useful to the people when they are passing judgement on you when they vote.  Therefore, Mr Chairman, I oppose the Amendment.

MR NTIMBA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I stand to support the Amendment by hon. Mayengo.  If you look at the Third Schedule, you will find that there is considerable detailed information that is required to be submitted by the presidential candidates, and I do not know whether the commission will have a machinery of being able to verify and find out whether the figures being furnished are really accurate.  If you look at the land, buildings, farms - I suppose people want to know how many heads of cattle a perspective candidate has, how many coffee trees he has and so forth and so on; and I am not sure whether the commission or whoever is responsible is going to have the time to verify and ascertain whether the information given is true or not.  I fully support the idea that let the person be elected and once he or she has been elected, let the law require him or her declare his assets as stipulated in the Code of Conduct.  I support hon. Mayengo’s Amendment.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I am sorry that I stand to oppose the Amendment moved by hon. Mayengo.  Mr Chairman, my main worry is once you have elected a person in the Office of the President that person becomes untouchable by law, and then how are you going to get him to come back to give this information; and if he does not give it there is no law that would make it possible for you to bring this man to declare his assets.  So, I would strongly suggest that the man declares his assets and liability now before he is elected.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you very much, Sir.  I add my voice to hon. Members who oppose this Motion.  Mr Chairman, this is a very good provision in light of the politics we are trying to establish in this country, the politics that emphasizes transparency and open methods of work, and I think, it is important for the population to know what kind of person they are proposing to send to this highest office of the country.  

The worry that the commission may not have the capacity, to me is not a very big problem, because, Sir, once this nomination paper is filed, it becomes a public document; even an individual who has interests in finding out the information can have access to it and if there is anything wrong then that should be brought out so that we know well in advance before election are conducted.  I want to appeal to hon. member to reject hon. Mayengo’s Amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that sub-clause 9, be amended by deleting the words appearing therein, starting with ‘ten qualified persons’ to the end; and thereto substitute the following words ‘one hundred qualified persons who gave their support to the candidate’s nomination in accordance with paragraph (a) of subsection 2, of this section’.  The effect of the amendment would be that the clause would now read that:  “Where one or more of the person who signed the nomination paper of a candidate or one of more of the persons who gave their support to the candidate under subsection 2 of this section are not qualified, the nomination shall not be taken to be invalid if there are, at least, one hundred qualified persons who gave their support to candidate’s nomination in accordance with paragraph (a) of subsection 2 of this section.”  I beg to move, Sir.  

Now, the reason is that this would be a good provision first of all to encourage all the candidates to make sure that they have some additional qualified people in stock, just in case the need arose.  This will remind them so that they collect these supporters more than the bear minimum required here, and as long as from the other district, the deficiency can be cured, it avoids nullifying the election and helps us to organise the election once and for all.  

It is also arguable that even if a member wanted to have the 120 from any particular district, that would be encouraged by this kind of provision so that if there is any excess as above the Constitution he can draw on that in order to supply any deficiencies they may have and I am arguing this way and proposing the Amendment in light of the principle behind this clause which is merely to ensure that candidates are candidates of a national character.  I beg to move, Sir.

MR NKALUBO WASSWA:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am just looking at Schedule One, where there is a list form; I would like to know whether this is, actually, the designed form -under Schedule One, this is page 13.  I would like to know whether the Minister is proposing to extend - you know, he say if there could be more than ten; now under that schedule whether he is going to put there an extra column, that it is not only ten, but, maybe, he gives a line of about 15 people on this one.  

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, because of Amendments we have made which affect this schedule, I propose when we come to the schedule to effect appropriate Amendments.

MR ONGOM:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Before the Minister made his Amendment on section 9, I had submitted a proposal that the whole thing be deleted.  Now, he has improved a bit, but even then I see no reason really why this should appear at all!  Because to me that is a waste of space, because already you require a hundred people to support, and you presume that they are all qualified; now, you are saying if 102 did support but the two are wrong, it still stands.  

Now, what is the reason really?  I do not see any reason whatsoever why that section should be there at all to waste our paper.  I think, in view of what the Minister has explained, it is even better to delete it altogether; it makes no difference now that he has agreed that at least the hundred must be valid.  Originally he said if two of the hundred were not valid then it will stand; that I opposed because the candidate has all the facilities to check, to make sure that whoever supports him is qualified to support him.  

Now, the Minister is saying that it is wrong anyway; this provision is unnecessary, anyway.  Let us make it appear more plausible; I do not think it is necessary, Mr Chairman.  I support that a hundred must be valid, and that is enough; there is no reason to include that anything extra if they are extra and there are some which are wrong, the thing still remains valid.  I do not see any rationale at all in it. 

MR RWAKAKOOKO:  Mr Chairman, I pick the impression that the hon. Minister is thinking loud here when, in fact, it should be very definite what he wants this clause to convey.  I am saying so because, I think, at that time of registration of these names, the agents would have verified who qualifies to sign these papers, and therefore, probably the only technical error would be by signature or whatever, but not the substance.  So, therefore, I think that the Minister is looking for effective tens here, and they do not change by merely having different lines; you can just put number ten, if the line is spoilt.  Therefore, I support the fact that there is no need to change here, because you ought to have prepared yourself, if you are not prepared then that is one of the ways to get disqualified.

MR KAVUMA:  Sir, I would appeal to the hon. Members to accommodate this Amendment; it is an improvement on the original text, and it can be found to be very useful, Mr Chairman.  Because these people who are going to be administering this law, they need to have a law that is clear and simple as they go about the administration, this is a very sensitive matter so that they do not go into areas where they can cause confusion to themselves and to the electorate and eventually to the country.  Sir, it is not true that this provision will make the Bill, very, very big; this is a very small Bill and just accommodating this Amendment will not make it any more bigger, it will cause untold additional expenses.  I request the hon. Members to accommodate this Amendment for it will be very useful in practical terms, and it does not do any harm otherwise.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 4, subsection 9 be amended as proposed by the Mover of this Bill.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR WAPAKABULO:  In view of your ruling, Sir, now how do we proceed on this provision?

MR ONGOM:  May I now move that clause 4, section 9, be deleted.  I have already explained when I was opposing the Minister’s Amendment, the reason why I think it is unnecessary.  I do not think I have to explain it again, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 4, as amended agreed to.

Clause 5

MR WAPAKABULO:  Clause 5 will have to be revisited by way of consequential Amendments, arising from the fact that we changed clause 7(c) by saying that the eight million paid will be a fee, and it is not refundable.  So, 5.1; should now be amended by replacing the word ‘deposit’ with the word ‘fee’ and then 5.1(a) and  5.1(b); also be amended by changing those words appearing as deposit to a fee so that you have  issue a general receipt in respect of the fee be delivered to the Secretary to the Treasury then to the consolidated fund and in two we delete 2.
(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 5, as amended agreed to.

Clause 6

MR WAPAKABULO:  Mr Chairman, I have got a proposed amendment on clause 6.3; I wish to move that clause 6; sub-clause 3; be deleted -(Interruption)

MR ONGOM: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman I submitted an amendment to clause 6.1; I had wanted that we insert between 269 and ‘of’ another phrase reading an article 29; so that the clause reads, subject to article 269 and article 29 of the constitution - then it reads; every candidate may hold individual public campaign meetings in any part of Uganda in accordance with any existing law, in other words I am adding article 29 of the constitution.  

The reasoning here is that article 29; deals with the fundamental of the citizen and I am proposing that every candidate who is going to contest for presidential post should not be denied any fundamental right that the constitution gives him, that is the effect of my amendment.  I have seen the submission by the sub-committee which says that my amendment contradicts the transitional provisional in the constitution.  Mr Chairman, I give that note in any way affect that - well we will have time where it affect because all I am saying is that a Ugandan who is standing for any post whether presidential or Parliamentary should not be prohibited all his freedom must be allowed to him and I do not know how Member would oppose this at all -(Interruption)

DR TIBERONDWA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, in case hon. Ongom does not know, I would like to inform him that the fundamental human rights he is talking about which is written in article 29; of the constitution have been withdrawn for the next five years, that is really what it means.  It is unfortunate, but we should be able to understand that this fundamental freedoms have been withdrawn from Ugandans for the next five years.

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, the hon. Tiberondwa is again taking us back.  We did discuss the question as to the effect of 269 in relation to 29; 29 (e); Sir, gives the people of Uganda the right of association which include the freedom to form and join associations or unions including trade unions, political and other organisations.  Then 269; is not talking about a restriction on the right of association generally, but it narrowed down to restriction of certain activities of the bodies called political parties when they have been formed as association.  

In other words under 29 as it is today, there is no absolute denial of the right of association including the rights to form alliance between political parties -(Laughter)   

That is absolute; my brother Bakabulindi was here, but I think he has walked out, there is no restriction on information on information of Trade Unions which are also forms of association.  There is no restriction on the right to form other civic organisation or economic organisations such Co-operative Societies and companies all that right is guaranteed here, 269 is in a narrow sense, saying while you have got the right to do so, that right does not give you the right to cause blenches of the peace in the streets of Uganda as it was the case before, and societies can, therefore, choose to say, while you are free to form yourselves into associations please for the time being do not do certain things, do not begin create situation which might slide us back.  

That is all 269 is saying. It is a result if you do remember from the report of the Odoki Commission, that certain things were found from the inquiry of the people that they do not think that it was opportune at this time for time to come to allow certain activities to take place, but that does not in itself restrict the right to form associations and as I said the right in to create alliances which are forms of association between political parties and this is going on without any hindrance whatsoever, the manifesto was declared yesterday and in the papers today you saw who was present.  Thank you very much.

MR ONGOM: Mr Chairman, precisely because of what hon. Wapakabulo explained that included article 29; article 269 restricts certain activities of political parties, but here were are talking about presidential candidates.  I am saying that even restricted from doing certain things under 269, we should not also at the same time be restricted to do other things which are allowed under 29; that is all I an saying, Mr Chairman, so that the two should be read together, my amendment is not at all contradictory, Mr Chairman.


MR KAVUMA: Thank you, Sir.  Mr Chairman, I am provoked to come because of the last statement made by hon. Ongom when he says, his amendment is not in contradiction with any provision in the law.  Sir, as he explained, 29 guarantees some rights and activities, 269 in effect limits some of those rights.  Now, when you come and say now, subject 269 and 29; you are combining two opposing contradicting provisions and it is going to cause a lot of confusing both to the administrators and the interpreters of the law so as a House which is experienced in legislating we should avoid legislating for obvious contradictions and I request that Members reject hon. Ongom’s amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, 6.1 ends with these words, “in accordance with any existing law.”  Mr Chairman, I do propose that we delete the words “in accordance with existing laws” because, Mr chairman, what we have now is a law, if it was in accordance with this law it would make sense, but I think we are extending this one to a level where all the other existing laws may even be mis-used.  We have an electoral law for the president, we have got also electoral laws for the Members of Parliament, I think we should restrict all the matters to this law so that if you break any other law surely you do not have to write it here, you will be dealt with under that particular law.  

This law is about the election of the President and we should make sure that we deal this law in - there so many laws which are being broken all the time and you do not write them in every other law that you put there, if you break a law you are always punished according to that law and you do not have to put it here.  I think this kind of gives an impression that we can arrest you under this law, under the Police Act, under this one and that one, when, Mr Chairman, if you break any law you can be punished under that law without writing it here.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I have one little worry about this provision.  I think when you read article 269 (c); which says, “at the commencement of this constitution and until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political organisations in accordance with article 73; of this constitution, political activities my continue except (c) holding public rallies”. Now, here, we are providing for holding individual public campaigns, what will happen is, that the police will want to implement the constitution and yet we as Parliament have passed a law to provide for presidential candidates and their agents to hold public campaigns.  My fear is that, there is going to be a problem of interpretation and the Police may get mixed up and even have running battles with the public which will not be in our interest.  I raised this matter last time, but I thought the Minister was going to clarify it in his reply, but I think it remains to be an area which is a gray area, Mr Chairman.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very, Mr Chairman, for a change in heart - (Laughter)- the point which hon. Mwandha is raising is very important, because, the Police Act 1994 specifies what should be done in order for a person to hold meetings.  Now, Mr Chairman, unless this is amended so that article 269; fill this the individual presidential candidate the opportunity to campaign freely the Police may require that a permit be given first in advance and, therefore, even if people are clamouring that it’s being the right thing we are dwelling article 29 and, therefore, it is not going to be democratic in accordance with what we envisaged in article 29.  

So, I pray that this House deletes sub-clause 1; and sub-clause 3; so that it is fair and democratic.  

I said, over here that unless we want to get, may be, the United nations to supervise our elections, we may say, who no, no, without doing this, but we have seen, it is we Ugandans when we get in power we do wrong thing of past regimes and we want to stay in power.  So, I want it to go on record in saying that, we should do the right thing and if need be we get the United Nations to supervise our elections.  

Mr Chairman, I still have the Floor, I want these people who are shouting not to de-power me -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order, hon. Wanendeya please; use Parliamentary language please.

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, I would like in connection with subsection 1; also for subsection 3; to be completely deleted, Mr Chairman, I pray that Members agree to this as one of the things that should be done.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR WAPAKABULO: I thank you, Mr chairman, again for giving me the chance to see if I can help my brother on this one.  Let us really look at the Motion which has been moved and also now the comments made starting with hon. Mwandha and now taken on by my Member of NRC for Budadiri. 29 gives the rights, 269; says, “those rights once exercised they should never the less be subject of some limitation in the public good” and that is limited to political organisations as I said earlier and so 29 says,  “there will be no public rallies organised by political parties, during that period until Parliament has made a law.  There will be no sponsoring or offering platforms by political parties to any candidate for public elections such as presidential elections”.  Now, if you look at these two, c and d of 269; and then you look at 6.1; it is saying,”2(c); is recognising the 269; does not apply to individuals because the constitution says, in another provision that, “the elections for president and elections to parliament immediately will be coming into force or following the coming into force of this constitution shall be held under the Movement system, i.e. personal merit system”.  So, they are saying,” a candidate must recognise that there is in this constitution a requirement that do not seek sponsorship from political organisations to hold rallies, do not seek to be offered a platform by a political party in order to hold your rally.  If you want to hold your rally, hold your rally as an individual who has nominated for a candidate of president of Uganda”.  

That is what 6.1 is saying; once you have been nominated you are supposed through individual merit to conduct your campaign and, in fact, this one is recognising the rights of any Ugandan to nominate and campaign for presidency, but while you are doing so, that is what it says, subject to 269, please do not seek to be at a rally purportedly organised by political organisation or seek sponsorship on a platform organised by political organisation.  Otherwise you have all the freedom to organise your rallies, except you must take into account that there is a law which also, other laws which apply in Uganda.  

For instance, we have all the statute book laws relating to the matters say, ‘hafule’ i.e. fighting in public, do not organise a rally at which you actually organise a fight in public that is not here nor is it in the constitution here, but it is a law which actually common law, the law of ‘hafule’, if you fight in public they can arrest you.  so, they are saying when you organise you rallies take precautions to ensure that they do not turn into fights, we cannot write all that in this and, therefore, you simply say, you must conduct your campaign in accordance with any existing law, that law can be written or as you know, we will also apply the common law of Britain and most of it is unwritten and, therefore, we cannot say, the written law so and so, and unwritten law so and so.  

So, for drafting you say, you will conduct your campaign taking into account the restrictions of 269 of the constitution and also any requirements of any other law which, because we can not enumerate all of them we only make a general reference to say, you must conduct your campaign in accordance with any existing law.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR KAVUMA: Thank you very, Sir.  Sir, I seek to introduce a new two immediately after clause 1; to read “That the commission may after consultation with all the candidates organise one or more joint candidate’s campaign meetings for those candidates who consent to such a meeting.”  

Mr Chairman, as I said when I was winding up, it had raised some doubts in the minds of some people whether the law foresaw a situation or left a room open for where circumstances permit and resources available for a candidate’s meeting to be conducted.  So, we are putting it here, Sir, in this new provision so that they know that it is possible, but they must do it after consultation with all the candidates and secondly they must also have the consent of those candidates who want to go to that joint candidate’s meeting.  I beg to move, Sir.

PROF. KABWEGYERE: Thank you, Mr Chairman. I support the spirit of the amendment by the Minister, but I think we should not leave it to the candidates to choose, I think joint meetings if arranged by the commission all the candidates should attend -(Interjection)- because I think the purpose of these joint meetings is for the purposes of helping the citizens to make judgement of these candidates on the same platform.  If some candidates feel too shy to come to a jointly organised meeting then I think that should not be allowed by just the individuals choosing to do so.  Otherwise, if it is a question of may, or may not attend they would rather held their individual rallies and forget about the whole thing.  But, if we are saying, the commission can hold joint meetings for candidates then there should not be any choice of any of them to say, I am not coming unless he has good reasons like sickness or he has withdrawn.

CAPT. GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I beg to oppose the amendment in that it is neither a do or don’t, the commission may and the candidates dismay.  Either we ask the commission, that commission shall make a certain number of meetings arrange it and advise the candidates to come there to, of course, any or all the candidates may fail to turn up and it is, just judiciously the commission would consult with such candidates.  They can be advised; we can give them a week or two weeks’ notice so that the candidates attend themselves or we leave it out all together after all under the general principles the commission is understood that they may indeed and the candidates may indeed attend such meetings.  I do oppose the amendment.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I raise to support the amendment moved by the Minister.  We did consider this matter extensively in the committee and there were two views, either the joint meetings be made compulsory for everybody to attend or to be left to be done administratively and we thought that this formulation is the best.  Let the Commission organise a joint meeting it might be good for the country to see two presidential hopeful debating, I think this is good and healthy.  But, we say we are not going to compel you let the Commission consult you, you have your right to refuse, but those who consent if they are more than two then the Commission can organise a meeting for them and they conduct the meetings, I think this is really as far as democracy can go on this issue.

(Question put and agreed to.)
  
MR WAPAKABULO: Thank you, Mr Chairman, I wish to move that sub-clause 3 of clause 6; be deleted and substituted as follows to read,2; “A candidate shall not hold any public campaign meeting and sub-section 1; except in accordance with the programme of meetings submitted by the candidate to the Commission”.

MR KAVUMA: Point of procedure. Sir, when we discussed the new two then we forget to attend to what is substantively the two now on the statute and this should be disposed off before we go to the 3 and I have a small amendment to make, Sir.

Clause 2; in the Bill which will now be three I propose to amend that clause by immediately after the words ‘candidate’s agent’ inserting the following words, ‘authorised in writing by the candidate to do so,’ so that the whole clause will now read, “A candidate or candidate’s agent authorised in writing by the candidate to do so may hold a consultative meeting with the candidate’s campaign agents for the purpose of planning and organising the candidate’s election campaign”. 

Sir, because of the sensitivity of the matter of these meetings it is important that nobody goes out and just purport to be holding a consultative meeting on behalf of the candidate who may not even know.  It is, therefore, important that this requirement of written authority is put in the law in order to improve on it to avoid administrative problems and confusion that can arise out of that.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 3

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, I had already read out the proposition to replace the old sub-clause 3; which has now become 4; by deleting the present formulation and inserting in it’s place a formulation I read namely; “That a candidate shall not hold any public campaign meeting under sub-section 1; except in accordance with the programme of meetings submitted by the candidate to the commission”.  The point was that there was objection to the formulation as it stands now, and indeed even some of the requirements there were un necessary for instance that, if you organise your rally you must handle over to the Commission a programme for the meeting, i.e. indicating who will speak and so on and so forth for instance which is not necessary.  This one improves it in such a way that you require the candidate to submit a programme which could contain a series of meetings in advance and point being that somewhere we have said that the commission should facilitate by way of security the candidate.  

Now, if you give the programme then the commission can contact Police to arrange to cover that meeting so that there is peace, I think the argument was that the candidate should not go to the Police directly, but go to the Commission because that is better than appearing to go and bargaining with the Police about security at their meetings and so this formulation seek to do exactly that.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MWANDHA: Mr Chairman, I would like to support the amendment, I had myself proposed an amendment to delete that sub-clause altogether, but I think the reformulation of the clause suits my needs and, therefore, I wish to support it.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 6 put and agreed to.

Clause 7

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, clause 7.2; I have a slight amendment -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, if there is anybody who wants to move an amendment on one then you stand up, if you do not stand up we just move.  Proceed please.

MR BUTAGIRA:  On clause 7.2; I would like to make a slight amendment and the clause should read as follows: “The commission shall as soon as possible with the approval of the legislature signified by the resolution offer such facilities to candidates as the commission may consider appropriate”.  Mr Chairman, I have just underlined the words as soon possible; it is important that these facilities which we want to offer presidential candidates should be known as soon as possible so that they arrange their own funds in addition to whatever the State is offering.  But if we just leave it without urging the commission to put in place these facilities as soon as possible bring them to the Parliament for approval. Mr Chairman, I beg to move.

DR TIBERONDWA:  Mr Chairman, I had a more detailed amendment, but in view of the amendment presented by the Chairman of the Commission I simply want to add on a little improvement, because as soon as possible it is not enough some candidates may not decide to contest unless they know how they are going to be facilitated. (Laughter)  

Mr Chairman, in view of that, I would like to add the words at the end ‘before the nomination date’ so that before a candidate offers himself for nominations he knows what kind of logistics are available to him, we just add before the date of the nomination.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I accept the qualification by hon. Tiberondwa. 

(Question put and agreed to.)
  

PROF. KAGONYERA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I have an additional amendment to that clause 7;sub-section 2; at the end of the clause I would like to add an amendment, I would like it added to read that, and I want to bring to the notice of the Members that the clerical services we had were not very good and, therefore, my proposed amendment was not fully typed out, what it should read is this, any facilitate -(Interjection)- Mr Chairman, as I was saying before I came on the recording system, I was saying that the secretarial services we had missed out what I had actually put down as part of my amendment and I beg the indulgence of the Members to listen carefully to what my actual amendment reads like this: “Any facilitates offered by the commission and funds obtained for purposed of the election campaign shall be used exclusively for election purposes”.  

Mr Chairman, the reason why I am proposing this amendment, the whole world over this is the practice and I want the Members to know it.  People have gone to jail for diverting election campaign funds to other uses, we do not want people to go around correct money for purposes purportedly for an election only to divert those funds to enrich themselves.  The people of Uganda, or anybody if they contribute any moneys either through tax payers money or even private contributions , they have a right that these moneys be used for the purposes they are meant for.  
Mr Chairman, if I could be allowed to complete my submission.

THE CHAIRMAN: Continue please.

PROF. KAGONYERA: In every system when you propose that moneys be available for a certain purpose, Mr Chairman, can I be protected.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.

PROF. KAGONYERA: In any system, if monies are proposed to be spent on certain functions, those moneys should be spent on those functions and no other functions.  We do not want people collecting people’s money diverting it for their private use the money should be spent on the job for which this money is collected and that is elections.  

As a matter of fact I would further say, Mr Chairman, that if it transpires that a presidential candidate or any other candidate does not spend the money that they have received for election purposes that money should be declared and returned either to the treasury or to the people who contributed it.  Mr Chairman, we are demanding high accountability and honestly on the part of leadership. (Applause)

(Question put and agreed to.)


DR TIBERONDWA: Sub-section 3; Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Have we finished this one of the money?

DR TIBERONDWA: Yes.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay.

DR TIBERONDWA: I have supported hon. Kagonyera, Mr Chairman, because I thought his comments were very good. I want to propose an amendment on 7(3); which reads as follows; “Subject to this section a candidate may raise addition assistance for his or her campaigns”, then I want us to delete the words, “through lawful means “. We have been raising money for doing all sorts of things and we are supposed to do so lawfully, but to add it there, I do not really see the purpose if you steal the money you are going to be arrested by hon. Kiyonga’s team.  So, I think that these words, ‘through lawful means’ is simply scare crow it does not really mean anything, because if you break the law you will be dealt with.  So, I want to propose that we dealt through lawful means.

MISS KADAGA: Thank you, Mr chairman.  First of all I oppose the proposal by the presidential hopeful for two reasons.  Anyone aspiring to be a president in this country must conduct his business lawfully so I cannot be party to a situation where we legalise legal activities by presidential candidates.

Secondly, Mr chairman, the President of Columbia is facing impeachment at the moment because his campaign funds came from drug dealers.  The Koreans I think two of their presidents are in prison because of using money raised from drug dealers.  So, this provision, Sir, is very, important, I oppose the amendment.

(Question put and negatived.)

MR WAPAKABULO: Mr Chairman, there was a circulated amendment on sub-clause 3; of 7 by hon. Faith Mwondha who unfortunately is not here and has asked me to move it for her to delete sub-clause 3; in it’s present form and replace it with the following; “Subject to this section a candidate or a candidate’s agent may raise addition assistance for the candidate’s campaign through lawful means”. The additional there is authorising agents also to act on behalf of the candidate and I think this is only fair that you may not necessary have to be there yourself, but you can ask some other person to do it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I have also an amendment on sub-clause 3; I want to have it as it is, but at the end add the following words “ Clause 7(3); provided the total amount of money spent on campaign does not exceed three billion shillings.

I think it is necessary to make sure that we limit how much money we are going to spend on the campaign so that we do not have a situation where the person who is able to mobilize the maximum amount of money will win the day.  Even other countries including powerful countries like, United States of American even presidential candidates have a limit of the amount of money they should spend.  

The other day I was reading an article in the Press whereby somebody was saying, that Dr Tiberondwa would require 6 billion and they gave details of how the 6 billion shillings would be spent.  To me the shillings 6 billion when I looked at it as it was given I thought that, that was excessive and I feared people may raise even more than 6 billion.  

But I have also heard information of other presidential costs of African presidents who have recently been elected and the figure had been in that region of shillings 3 billion and that is why I am proposing that this Parliament puts a limit to the amount of money that should be spent and I think 3 billion is a reasonable amount of money.  It does not mean that you are going to spend up - you can spend less than 3 billion if you think you cannot raise three billion, but I think  it should be shillings 6 billion, Mr Chairman.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Order please, if I allow four people to talk at ago then I will not be what you are saying.  Take your seat.

Clause 7(4)

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on sub-clause 4; by adding at the end of it the following; “And for purposes of this clause a candidate may get the necessary information as prohibited for any governments, institutions, bodies, person from the commission”.

 Mr Chairman, there was a concern that the intending candidate may have a problem to know what organisations are prohibited and from which organisation he should not go and we are saying that this information will be supplied by the elector commission which is in charge of the electoral process.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Sir, I was a bit of I had an amendment by hon. Mwandha which could have come before that one, I do not know whether you do not allow me to move that, then we can consider the other one moved by hon. Butagira, because I wanted to introduced another paragraph to break up 4; into two paragraphs and then his could come at the end of that second paragraph.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR WAPAKABULO: Thank you.  My proposition on behalf of hon. Mwandha is to move an amendment to Clause 4, by deleting it first and then substituting it with the following.  Four, a candidate or candidate’s gent, it is just like introducing agent as well; shall not (a) ‘ obtain, solicit or receive any financial or other assistance for the purpose of his or her campaign from any foreign government, institution, body or person which or who has demonstrated an intention to overthrow the lawfully established government of Uganda or to endanger the security of Uganda.’ (b)’employ for the purposes of his or her campaign, any financial or other assistance from any government, institution, body or persons described in paragraph (a) of this subsection, whether the assistance was obtained before or after the commencement of the Statute.’  

The purpose, Mr Chairman is quite simple.  First, we extend the prohibition to the agents of candidates and (b) the second leg I have just read out is intended to cover a situation where, as we speak right now, someone maybe mobilising resources from unfriendly sources.  I am not saying that, any person has been kept in mind when I say this.  But assume that, someone maybe mobilising resources so that by the time the Statute comes into force, that money is not subject of (a), because you will have obtained during the coming into force of the Statute or after the coming into force.  

But we want to catch a situation where someone may have mobilised and of course done what now we are saying that, if that person has been so lucky to mobilise, it will be a windfall to him or her.  But of course they will be required to account for it.  But we intend just to cover that situation where by the time the law comes into force, someone may have gathered money and we are saying that, even if you have gathered it, please you do not deploy it for our election if it has come from an unfriendly source.  So that is a reason for the amendment. Thank you.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I wanted to bring it to the attention of the Mover that, the text which he has read is wrong.  Instead of saying his or her campaigns, we should substitute the candidate’s campaign.  Because both the candidate and the agents can now raise funds.

MR WAPAKABULO:  I accept that clarification of the situation.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR BUTAGIRA:  My amendment now will fall easily after 4(a); of hon. Mwondha’s amendment which I accepted.  I have already explained it.  I think it should be put to vote so that it comes automatically up to this.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Can you repeat hon. Butagira please.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I had moved an amendment to the effect that, those seeking information will go to the Electoral Commission and what hon. Faith Mwondha has done was to break four, and add paragraph (a); and paragraph (a) is exactly what is contained in paragraph 7(4) as it is.  So, I am taking the information now which hon. Mwondha has designated as (a), can now be obtained from the Electoral Commission. So, my amendment falls immediately after hers.  So, I move accordingly.

THE CHAIRMAN:  You move it accordingly?

MR BUTAGIRA: Yes Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR MWANDHA:  Mr Chairman, I realise that people are tied and in a hurry to leave.   Mr Chairman, my amendment I do not know where it now falls after hon. Wapakhabulo has added something at the beginning and added something at the end.  But my amend is really to delete part of subsection 4 and the section after we have deleted part of it, it would read as follows; ‘a candidate shall not obtain, solicit or receive any financial or other assistance for purposes of his or her campaigns, from any foreign government, institution, body or person.’  Mr Chairman, during the debate many Members supported judgement and put forward.  That it will be wrong to permit our Presidential Candidate to go out and get money on his behalf for purposes of coming to Uganda and campaign and become a President of this country.  

Mr Chairman, I think this will be extremely degrading and it should not appear in our laws that we are actually permitting the Presidential candidate to go and get money on his own behalf; not even on behalf of the government of Uganda; but on his own behalf to come and campaign and become president.  Mr Chairman, I therefore, move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  What you are saying hon. Mwandha has already been catered for by hon. Faith Mwondha’s amendment, which we have just passed.

MR ONGOM: Subsection 6; says ‘each candidate shall within 14 days after the election either come to the Commission for the facilitation given to him or her under subsection 2.’  I submitted an amendment, Mr Chairman, to substitute 14 days with 30 days.  I think that 14 days are too short particularly after an election and perhaps a lot of things would have taken place; people would have collected money from here and there.  You may take a bit of time to sort out the details.  Now to require them to submit within 14 days only may lead to a submission of a lot of mistakes.  So, to avoid this, Mr Chairman, I am suggesting that we increase a number of days to 30 days.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you.  Again I am moving on behalf of hon. Mwondha.  The amendment is on 8.  By deleting 8 as it is in its present form and substituting the following.  A candidate or a candidate agent who contravenes subsection 4 of this Section or a candidate who;

(a) Contravenes subsection 5 or 6 of this Section or refuses or neglects without lawful excuse to produce any record or information demanded by the Commission and subsection 7 or see for the purposes of subsection 6 or 7 of this Section makes a statement which he or she knows to be false in any material particular commits an offence.  The point here really Sir, is to separate the responsibility of the agent from that of the principle in relationship to the offence if we have introduced agents also as being persons who can mobilise money and other resources on behalf of the candidate.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 7, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, Clause 7, as amended do stand part of the Bill.

Clause 7, as amended agreed to.

Clause 8

DR MAGEZI:  Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on Clause 8(1), after the phrase ‘no candidate’, by inserting there, or his agents.  So that the statement should read as follows: ‘except as authorised under this Statute, no Candidate or his agent shall use public resources for the purpose of campaigning for elections.’  Limiting the candidate himself I think leaves a loophole and can be exploited no matter whether one is an incumbent, President or even an outsider.  You could find that, even a private person can use government resources through his agents.  So, I want to say that, unless it is in accordance with this Statute, the candidate or his agent must not access to government resources for the campaigns.  I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

MR GASATURA: Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to oppose the amendment in that, it will be very difficult to implement that amendment.  But I would consider to amend his amendment or to adjust his amendment so that should such a person be holding the office of President or any other public office, the facilities he uses are valued and would be reduced from any assistance the Commission would have otherwise rendered him.
DR MAGEZI: The hon. Member had cared to read what 8(2) says, they shall not withstand in subsection 1.  And when we come to that, we shall put there a candidate or his agent.  I still stand by the proposed amendment, Mr Chairman.

MR KADAGA: Point of clarification.  When we were holding meeting with the Minister, I was not satisfied with the definition of a candidate agent.  Now, we are seeking to describe the activities of some of these agents; I do not know whether you are talking about a candidate agent at the National level, at the Sub County, at the Parish level.  I want the Minister to define the candidate agent now before we proceed any further.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, first of all on hon. Kadaga’s clarification; I note in Section 2, which deals with the definition.  There is no definition of a candidate’s agent.  We only have seem defined in the other Statute and since we are saying some of these provisions in that Statute once passed could be applied to this.  Unless we go back to two now, that is where we would drive a definition to have it applied to this Statute.  Then on hon. Magezi’s amendment; Sir, I can see it is not affecting the provision in very material aspect or respect.  But it is going to involve us in further amendments in two; and I think we would be safer if we can agree, by leaving it out and we leave the reference to agents so that we avoid other consequential amendments that we may have to follow from it.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Mr Chairman, I would like to concur with the Minister.  Because when the Committee was meeting, they agreed that adding an agent was found not to be necessary.  So, I would call upon hon. Magezi to withdraw because it will have a lot of amendments as we go downwards.  Because it is not necessary and it is very difficult to implement practically.

DR MAGEZI:  Mr Chairman, this article has only got two subsections and that is where the amendment would have come in.  But due to the mood of the Members, I think they are tied and they want to go, so I withdraw the amendment.

MR OBWANGOR: Subclause 2.  We make that subclause because, it is almost impossible to see that it is done by government.  And I would like the Minister to pay attention to this.  The implementation of this will be impossible.  Subclause 2, of Clause 8; should be deleted.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 8

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, Clause 8 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 8, agreed to.

Clause 9

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, Clause 9, I would like to move an amendment on Clause 9(2); to delete the word at the end of that sub-clause reading ‘and only candidates who did not go through the first nomination process shall tender their nomination papers to the Returning Officer.’  Mr Chairman, those words are not necessary.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

Clause 9, as amended agreed to.

Clause 10

MR OBWANGOR: Three, delete the figure 48, and substitute by 24. The idea is this, it is quick for the counting of the votes so that no mistakes or other words would be made; the quicker the better.

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I wish hon. Obwangor had cared to read the information we circulated at the beginning of this Bill.  This provision is a Constitutional Provision, this is how it is in the Constitution and we cannot amend the Constitution through this Legislation.  So I oppose it.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 10

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that clause 10 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)


Clause 11

MR KAVUMA:  Clause 11, sub-clause 3; Sir, I propose to amend that Clause by replacing the word ‘field’ which appears at the end of that Clause, with the word ‘filed’.  This really was a printing mistake.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

Clause 11, as amended agreed to.

Clause 12

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I propose to amend as circulated, Clause 12, by deleting the entire Clause and substituting it with the following: To read; ‘subject to the Constitution and this Statute, the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections, Interim Provisions Act, 1996; which will come here anyway - as maybe necessary or practical, shall apply to the election of a President.’  This arises from the objections which were made by Members that power was being given to the Electoral Commission to change the law and now what has happened is that, it is a straight provision saying, the Statute will apply and those provisions which shall apply are those which are found to be necessary or practical to apply.  And that means that, should any provision seem to apply which is not necessary or practical, it shall be declared straight from the beginning not to be applicable without having to make it the job of the Electoral Commission, to modify a law passed by this House.  That is the reason.  And also to make it very, very clear in terms of drafting.  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)
 

DR TIBERONDWA: Mr Chairman, I wanted Clause 12(b); to read as follows: ‘That the election of the President and the Election of Members of Parliament shall be carried out concurrently.’

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

Clause 12, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Clause 12, as amended agreed to.)

Clause 13, agreed to.

Clause 14

MR KAVUMA:  On Clause 14, Sir, I beg to move that, that Clause be deleted and we insert the following new sub-clause.  And it reads ‘ no person shall use or attempt to us any political party colour or symbol or any political party tribe or religious affiliation or any other sectarian ground as a basis for the candidature of any person for election or in support of that person’s campaign.  Mr Chairman, this is really in compliance with Article 269 and there is nothing new introduced.  It is a matter of improving on the drafting.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Clause 14, as amended agreed to.)

Clause 15

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I am proposing that, Clause 15, be deleted for this reason.  Mr Chairman, the point over here is that -(interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order please.  Did you give us any amendment?  Did you supply your amendment?

MR WANENDEYA: Mr Chairman, when it comes to deleting, one does not have to submit the amendment in advance, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Okay, move it please.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, the point is that, as we are legislating this Bill, already some people offered bribe in form of provisions, in the form of appointment to Boards of Directors, in addition you find that there is Entandikwa in a form of bribery -(interruption) - Mr Chairman, it is mainly because of provisions, Boards of Directors, that this Clause must be deleted because it has already been implemented and, therefore, Mr Chairman, I beg to submit that, Members agree that this Clause be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Before you come to that, let us put the question.  I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

THE CHAIRMAN:  He was out of order, but you just leave him (Laughter)  I now put the question that, clause 15 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I would like to move an amendment on Clause 16, to read as follows: ’The Minister may with the approval of the Legislature and on the recommendation of the Commission by Statutory Instrument make regulations for giving effect to the provision of this Statute’.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 16, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question that, Clause 16, as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(Clause 16, as amended agreed to.)

The First Schedule

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the First Schedule which appears on page 12; we delete there from the words ‘ we the under signed’ up to the end of the list.  Sir, this is to bring it in line with the amendments we carried out as we were discussing the Clauses of the Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

First Schedule, as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that, the First Schedule as amended do stand part of the Bill.

(First Schedule, as amended agreed to)

The Second Schedule, agreed to.

The Third Schedule, agreed to.

The Title

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I only want to draw the attention of this House and your permission Sir, to the word which appears as annexure which should be deleted from that.  It is not part of it; it was a printing error Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(The Title as amended, agreed to.)

MR OBWANGOR: Mr Chairman, on the amendment of the Title, I handed my paper to the Chair, I a asking the House that we delete the term Interim Provisions.  Why?  The argument is set down Mr Minister.  The argument is since in the Constitution, nowhere is mentioned to be Interim and that Constitutionally we are now providing that there will always be under Article 98 of the Constitution; there will always be the President of Uganda. So, therefore, it is useless to have a term the Interim Provision.  It should be a National Constitutional which will save us in future.  Not again to have Houses to legislating.  It is here; I read it.  Therefore, I ought Mr Chairman, that we delete the word Interim Provision.  As simple as that. 

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, before I respond to hon. Obwangor’s Motion Sir, allow me to correct the date of 1995, appearing in the Bill, to 1996, because that is what it will be.  But Sir, to talk about hon. Obwangor’s amendment, again it is beyond a chronic problem with my Colleague hon. Obwangor, this is a Constitutional Provision which must appear in the law.  Because that is what the Constitution says in Article 264, so we cannot run away from it Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived.)

MOTION FOR THE COUNCIL TO RESUME

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Council do resume and the Committee of the whole House do report thereto.  I beg to move Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma): Mr Chairman, I beg to report that the Committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1996 and passed it with some amendments. I beg to move, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Report from the Committee of the whole House, be adopted.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to.)

BILLS
THIRD READING

THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS INTERIM PROVISIONS BILL, 1996

THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR CONSTITUTIONAL AFFAIRS (Mr Kavuma):  Mr Chairman, I beg to move that the Bill entitled the Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Bill, 1996 be read a Third Time and do pass.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Title settled and Bill passes. (Applause)

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE MINISTER FOR INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): I thank you, Mr Chairman.  It is with deepest regret that, I inform only Members of NRC that, an estimated 36 people were killed in the County of Manjia in Mbale District.  This tragedy occurred between Friday 19th and Sunday 21st of this month, this year.  Manjia County, Mr Chairman, comprises of five sub-counties and the deaths that I have reported occurred in three of them.  The distribution according to the sub counties is as follows; in Bubiita Sub-county, four people were killed; in Bushika Sub-county, four people were killed; and in Bulucheke 28 people were killed.  Most of these citizens were aged 50 years and above; a few of them were between the ages of 30 years and 50 years.  

The killings, hon. Colleagues were carried out by gangs of people who operated secretly at night.  They are said to be avenging the death of their clan mate said to have been killed by witchcraft.  The people killed are alleged to be practitioners of witchcraft.  The killings were carried out using pangas and stones‘; no guns were used.  Postmortem reports have been made by a medical officer.  

The District Civic and Police Leaders learnt of this tragedy on Saturday.  The Resident District Commissioner immediately moved to the area to address the population.  The Police have also be deployed deep in the Mountain areas of Manjia where these atrocities were committed.  I regret the fault that the Chiefs and Local Council Executives at level three downwards, have not been very helpful in this situation.  It is reported that those victims of these tragedies even when they made alarm, neighbours to these people did not come to their assistance.  

Hon. Members, I visited Bulucheke Sub-county Headquarters in the company of our Colleague hon. Kato yesterday, we addressed the population and expressed government regret and condolences to the bereaved families.  So far, about ten suspects have been held and the team from the Criminal Investigation Department have been deployed in the area, to carry out investigations.  Relatives of the deceased who are in hiding for fear of their lives are being sought out and I believe that with the Police presence in the mountains and the mobilisation being carried out by the office of a Resident District Commissioner, and the Chief Administrative Officer, investigations should move faster.

Lastly, hon. Colleagues, I wish to bring it to the attention of hon. Members that, the residents of Manjia County strongly believe in the art of witchcraft.  And they believe that, their poverty and misfortune are caused by witchcraft.  As the Police move in to re-establish Law and Order, it will be necessary to carry out mobilisation in this area and put in place special programmes to assist the people of Manjia develop a more possible attitude to life.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for the opportunity.

MR WAPAKABULO:  Thank you, Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to comment on this very sad occurrence.  I would like in my capacity as Member of the National Executive Committee for Mbale District, to send heart felt condolences to the families of those who have been victims of this trouble occurrences.  

First of all I would like to thank my Colleague the Minister for taking shift action to make sure that the situation is controlled.  Our population is still bedeviled by this backward belief, I am sure across the entire country.  And it is our responsibility as leaders to educate our people to get out of these beliefs.  As I said, the Police in my view although the information was scanty together with RDC Mbale acted quickly and this has helped to a very large degree, in fact more people would have died.  

I was in Bududa in Manjia County on Monday and I found the Police already in place going to the various areas. In the evening of Monday, I received together with my Colleague Dr Chebrot, we received briefing from the Regional Police Commander as to what measures were being taken and to the fact that reinforcements were coming in as far away as from Jinja, to make sure that the situation is put under control and I will end by; thanking my Colleague and the Police, for having taken shift action to make sure that the situation is brought under control and from now on, let us leave it to the Rule of the Law and the Machinery of Government to ensure that, those who take the law in their hands are punished.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR OBWANGOR:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman, this is really very sad; and I think the Minister for Internal Affairs should re-encourage to pressure the House on this very important and dangerous happenings.  Today we read in the papers, 11 people were killed by not other bush men or Kony and his people, but the same people, the LDUs in Kitgum; 11 of them, previously 7, which is 18 all together.  Mr Chairman, since the Minister for Internal Affairs is here and he represents us in the Cabinet, it is a pity we have neglected the National Executive Committee, of which I was a Chairman for Soroti District.  And I read the paper on a National Security, the government never answers. What is confronting us now, for me I come from the village because I am a farmer as well as a citizen in Kireka.  

It is very, very important, Mr Chairman, we should now make in a government among the Security Forces, we have got the army men here, we have people like hon. Ministers here who have been in the Security Forces.  Now, we have a plan to bring all the guns back to the Magazine, whether it is in Jinja, Amref.  So, therefore, it is very important that we take that thing to get all guns for safety and happens of Uganda, a plan to bring back all the guns from wrong hands.  Thank you.

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me this opportunity.  In the same tone like hon. Wapakabulo representing Mbale Municipality, I would like to send my condolence and that of the people of Budadiri, to the people of Manjia and I would like to thank the Minister for Internal Affairs for taking prompt action.  Mr Chairman, as I contributed when we were establishing, Traditional Rulers, I said that we should establish an institute for Art, Music and Culture.  And the reasons why I said so, Mr Chairman, is to teach our people to discuss some of the would be traditions which are not really in line with the modern times and not only that, but some of the beliefs which are really not good for the development of the people. (Applause)  

I appeal to government to make sure or at least take steps to establishing an institute of Culture, Music and Art.  Mr Chairman, if we were to do that, we could go a long way and I only hope that, Government would take some steps to address the culprits who do wrong things.  Because I did not want the government to have an opportunity to say that, because there is out right killings here and there, we should not hold elections.  So, I am urging government to take some steps well ahead of time.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: And with that we have come to the end of today’s Session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The council rose at 6.05 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 25 January 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)

 
