Monday, 25 January 2010

Parliament met at 12.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this special sitting occasioned by the sad news of the demise of our great friend, Samuel Byanagwa Rwamafa, Member of Parliament for Rukiga County in Kabale District.

The deceased is well known to all of us but God has decided to take him away from us. As you know, for that journey which all of us will take, you do not apply for the visa, the visa is just brought to you and you have to go.

It was on Saturday morning - as you know Uganda is hosting a Parliamentary Conference for OIC which started yesterday - I was receiving a delegation from Iran in the morning here when I received a telephone call from the daughter of the deceased telling me that hon. Byanagwa had passed away. That is why in the normal way I had to convene this special session, although we have been on recess, so that we can give him a proper send off.

I quite appreciate that others are not here and it is understood because they are on recess and in their constituencies. They could not gather here but I know they are with us in spirit. That is the purpose of this meeting.

Hon. Byanagwa has been a dedicated civil servant. Since his student days, even after completing his university studies in the University of Dar-es-Salaam where I was also, he has been serving the country to the level of acting secretary Makerere University and then he joined us in 2006 as the Member for Rukiga County. He has been serving on two committees; one on HIV and the other on Physical Infrastructure and he has made great contributions. We shall greatly miss him.

We convey our condolences to the family and people of Rukiga and Uganda as a whole for losing a great son. May his soul rest in eternal peace. I thank you for coming.

(Entrance of the late hon. Samuel Byanagwa Rwamafa)

National Anthem (one verse)

Laying of wreaths

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, I must regret that normally with this kind of function you are assisted by the Police band, however, the Police band was committed to provide music at State House where the ambassadors are presenting their credentials to His Excellency, the President. We tried the Prisons band but it had moved to Mbale for the ceremony tomorrow. We tried the Army band but it was not easy that is why the band is not with us and we sang the National Anthem without accompanying music from the band. I regret that but thank you because I have realised that you can sing the National Anthem.

In the distinguished strangers’ gallery are Editors of Hansard from various countries of the Commonwealth, Africa Region. They are here for the Fourth Commonwealth Hansard Editors Association Conference hosted by Parliament. The conference will end on 29 January 2009. Those present are from Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, the Kingdom of Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia, South Africa, Provincial Legislatures of South Africa: Eastern Cape, Free State, Kwazulu Natal, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, Botswana, East African Legislative Assembly and Uganda the hosts. You are welcome. (Applause)

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT TO PAY TRIBUTE TO THE LATE HONOURABLE SAMUEL BYANAGWA RWAMAFA, MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT FOR RUKIGA COUNTY, KABALE DISTRICT

THE SPEAKER: I have condolence messages which I think I should read. I have received two condolence messages. One is from the Hon. Deputy Speaker addressed to me: 

“Condolence message upon the death of Hon. Samuel Byanagwa of Rukiga County 

Death has in the space of three months robbed us of two Members of Parliament. It is a very traumatic experience as we say farewell to hon. Byanagwa. 

I offer my most sincere condolences to you, Mr Speaker, the NRM Party, the people of Rukiga County and the family of hon. Byanagwa that has lost a father, husband and friend. 

I am unable to attend the special session in his honour owing to the by-elections taking place today, 25 January 2010, to replace the late hon. Balikowa in Budiope Constituency, which I still represent as part of the greater Kamuli District.

I am also aware that owing to his ill health for some time he has not been able to actively participate in major Parliamentary activities. Please, accept my sincere condolences. 

Signed, Rebecca Kadaga, Deputy Speaker.” 

The second condolence message is also addressed to me: 

“Condolence Message: 

The Electoral Commission has learnt with profound shock and sorrow of the sudden death of the late hon. Samuel Byanagwa who passed away on Saturday, 23 January 2010 at Mulago Hospital. 

On behalf of the entire commission and on my own behalf, I wish to extend our heartfelt condolences to you on this great loss. However, we take consolation that it is God who gives and takes away. 

We pray that the Almighty God gives you sufficient strength and courage to endure this most trying moment. Please accept our heartfelt condolences and may the Almighty God rest the soul of the deceased in eternal peace. 

Signed, Eng. Badru Kiggundu.”    

12.48
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRIME MINISTER (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mrs Janat Mukwaya): Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, this is a motion for a resolution of Parliament to pay tribute to the late Hon. Sam Rwamafa Byanagwa, MP Rukiga County: 

“WHEREAS the country woke up on Saturday, 23 January 2010 to the shocking news of the death of hon. Samuel Byanagwa, the MP representing Rukiga County in the Eighth Parliament;

NOTING that hon. Sam Byanagwa has had a distinguished career as an administrator and has rendered exemplary public service to this county in various capacities;

FURTHER NOTING that hon. Samuel Byanagwa has been a level-headed politician, consensus builder and an ardent and loyal supporter of the NRM Government;

FURTHER NOTING the selfless and dedicated service hon. Sam Byanagwa has provided to the people of Rukiga County and the country in the course of his life;

FURTHER NOTING that the honourable MP has passed away at a time when his leadership was much needed by this country;

NOW, THEREFORE, be it resolved that this august House sitting today, 25 January 2010:

1.	Collectively conveys its deepest and sincere condolences to the members of the bereaved family of the late hon. Sam Byanagwa and the people of Rukiga County, friends, relatives and the entire nation.
2.	Parliament registers its admiration and gratitude for the services the late has, in the course of his life, rendered to this nation.
3.	That Parliament prays to the Almighty God to sustain the bereaved family and may He rest the soul of the late honourable Member of Parliament in eternal peace.” 

Mr Speaker and hon. Members, I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Yes; motion seconded. 

MRS MUKWAYA: Mr Speaker and hon. Members, today is another sad day for Parliament. We are paying tribute to another departed friend of ours. It is difficult to know who of us will be alive by the end of this Eighth Parliament. 

On Saturday, 23 January 2010, I received shocking news that hon. Sam Byanagwa had passed away at Mulago Hospital. It was shocking because I was not aware that Sam Byanagwa had been so sick as to die so soon. Nevertheless, we have to contend with reality, that is, we shall all die and it is only a question of time. The most important thing we have to think about is what legacy do we want to leave behind? 

It is in light of the foregoing that I want to pay tribute to hon. Sam Byanagwa. This is because hon. Sam Byanagwa had had a distinguished career as an administrator. He has been a quiet but level-headed politician; a leader who cherishes consensus and consultation and above all, a person who was an ardent and loyal supporter of the NRM Government and party. 

Hon. Sam Byanagwa joined Parliament in 2006, representing Rukiga County and it was his first time to compete in national politics. In Parliament, he served on the Budget Committee, the Social Services Committee and the Physical Infrastructure Committee. 

Before that, hon. Sam Byanagwa had served at Makerere University as an administrator from 1972 to 2005 when he retired at the level of acting University Secretary. He had, therefore, been associated with an academic institution for 33 years and that explains why Sam Byanagwa was a very sophisticated but social leader, steadfast, calculative and consensus builder. It is because he had had first hand experience and interaction with eminent statesmen and women that composed the University Council at various times at Makerere University that his approach to politics was unique.

Hon. Sam Byanagwa had his secondary education from Kigezi College Butobere and King’s College Buddo and his university education at the University of Dar-es-Salaam. It was through these prestigious schools that he was mentored into a respectable leader.

The NRM Government has lost a cadre; a loyal and ardent supporter. Sam Byanagwa had brought tranquillity to Rukiga County and was steadfast when lobbying government for the provision of social services to his constituency. 

His main agenda for the people of Rukiga consisted of four elements: education, mainly science laboratories, electricity, and infrastructure. He was pursuing, with government, the tarmacking of Muhanga-Kinkizi Road. 

And finally, he loved tree planting on top of the bare hills in his constituency. I, therefore, implore the NRM Government to fulfill the wishes of hon. Byanagwa.

To the wife and children, I want to implore you to remain firm and steadfast. Keep the family of Sam Byanagwa united and admired. Hon. Sam Byanagwa was a social man. He loved his children and wife and gave them the best education. Please, keep the legacy of hon. Byanagwa shining. I beg colleagues to support this motion. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

12.56
MR ABRAHAM BYANDALA (NRM, Katikamu County North, Luwero): Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, you have heard from the Speaker that today we are holding a by-election after the death of one of our colleagues, and today we are here to pay respects to one of us, the late hon. Sam Byanagwa. 

Hon. Sam Byanagwa has been a member of the Committee on Physical Infrastructure and we members of the committee are going to miss him a lot. 

Hon. Byanagwa has been a very strong member of the committee; a determined and trustworthy honourable member, reliable, available at all times when we are meeting, and if he would not be attending, he would have the courtesy of informing me. He was also a very experienced man and he was very valuable to the committee. Hon. Byanagwa knew what he wanted and could express it very clearly and he would always convince even the doubting Thomas’s. 

Mr Speaker, hon. Byanagwa will be remembered for the works he had been pursuing on the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana Road. He constantly reminded us of the progress on that road. He could articulate his views very clearly and the committee was always in the know of what was going on.

Last year my committee went to inspect those works but Sam Byanagwa could not go with us because he was ill. But before we went to inspect, hon. Byanagwa gave me notes that I went with. And from the notes, it was very clear that he knew what was going on and we could tell he was conversant with this road metre by metre. 

In those notes he would show where Members should focus special attention. He showed works done and he also gave us an insight of the contract management as the contract progressed. Those notes helped us ask relevant and incisive questions to the contractors, consultants and the ministry of works officials so as to ensure that the works were done well. It is a pity that he died before the conclusion of these works.

When government was taking over roads from districts, hon. Byanagwa played a very big role for those roads that had to be taken over in Kabale District. He advised us on the roads that should be taken over; at times you would think hon. Byanagwa was a transportation engineer. 

At times he talked as if he was a transport economist and at times he was very elaborate from the defence perspective, you could think he was a defence expert. 

His arguments on the daily traffic counts; his arguments on the cost-benefit-analysis, internal rate of return, travel time and accessibility of borders, the mode and link aspects, Mr Speaker, that is why you would conclude that this man was a transport engineer, transport economist or defence expert.

Those arguments by hon. Byanagwa bore fruit and a number of roads were taken over by the Ministry of Works and Transport. For those roads still under the Ministry of Works and Transport and the local authority of Kabale, hon. Byanagwa was always on phone talking to the chairman or the Ministry of Works to see to it that the roads were worked upon. 

He told me that he was doing all these to ensure that he reduces the operating costs of those using these roads in the district. He wanted to reduce on travel time; he wanted to ensure that the products from Kabale, the Irish potatoes, cabbages and apples, could reach the markets in Kampala on time. And of course when those roads are worked on, his people will get employment. 

As the chairman of the committee, I will miss him a lot. This is a member who would constantly come to my office, before and after the committee meetings to advise me. He would analyse the situation we were going to face and tip me on how to handle it as we go to the committee. And after the committee, he would make an analysis of what transpired and pave a way forward. I am going to miss him very much. He would come to my office and say, “Abraham,” he was fond of calling me Abraham, “You see what I told you; you see what is happening?” I gained a lot from his experience. 

During his tenure with the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, we had two controversial Bills: the Mortgage Bill and the Land (Amendment) Bill; both Bills demanded determination, patience, tolerance and stamina. The late Byanagwa had all those virtues. 

In addition to that, as you have already heard, he had work experience of 30 years. I know people claim to have five to 20 years’ of experience but in reality all of it is one year’s experience, repeated five or 20 times. In the case of hon. Byanagwa, it was 30 years experience and not one year repeated 30 times. As I was saying, those two Bills showed that hon. Byanagwa had an iron backbone.  

I once asked hon. Byanagwa why he joined the NRM. He told me that he joined NRM because it is a party with the capacity to disrupt, dismantle and destroy enemies. Political enemies can be handled by the NRM. Those who want to disrupt the political atmosphere or those enemies in the economic field who are dislocating our economy can be handled by the NRM. Religious enemies can be handled. Those disturbing unity in this country and those who are not nationalistic can also be handled. Hon. Byanagwa was convinced that the NRM could disrupt, dismantle and destroy. 

The NRM has lost a dedicated cadre and a tested combatant. This gentleman loved his country and party very much. He spoke his mind and what he said was what he meant. He was not a chameleon. 

To many youths, I am sure he has been a role model. They are going to miss him but I am sure they have learnt a lot from him. He was a down-to-earth man and as we heard, he could fit in all levels, but not float in the air. 

The death of hon. Sam Byanagwa reminds us that on this earth, all of us are temporary. One of these days, you and I will be in a coffin like Sam is –(Interjections)– let us utilise our short stay here well and profitably. Let us discuss, let us negotiate, let us reach consensus, and let us be tolerant. There is no need of encouraging or participating in riots; do not encourage wars, do not encourage intrigue. Life is short; let us be humble and use it profitably. 

To the people of Rukiga Constituency, it may be early, but pertinent to request you to vote back an NRM member as strong as the late Sam Byanagwa. I convey my condolences and those of my colleagues and the committee members, and the people of Katikamu North, to you the widow and the children, the members of parliament, the Speaker, and the entire Government, that we have lost a great man. May Sam Byanagwa’s soul rest in eternal peace! Thank you very much. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

1.08
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Mr Speaker, I rise to pay my sincere condolences to the family and relatives of hon. Sam Byanagwa and to the NRM as a party. I have known Hon. Sam Byanagwa way back when I was a child. Hon. Sam Byanagwa grew up at my father’s home and he was like a son to my dad. Hon. Sam Byanagwa has lived up to what he promised my father that, “I will take care of you as you took care of me.”

Hon. Sam Byanagwa was and he lived a humble life. I cannot explain to you the humble life he lived. His home is up on a hill and together with his father, they would trot down that hill to my father’s home and rest there with his suitcase, and get a bus to school the next morning. He promised that he would strive as much as he could to live a humble life and indeed he has done it. 

As I have already said, Sam Byanagwa grew up a humble person from a very humble home, and he has never forgotten the life that he went through, the peasantry life in which he was brought up, the community from which he was brought up and those that brought him to earth and those that he kept up to his time of passing. Personally, I grew up with him and together with his other brothers, he guided us. Even in his passing, I still respect him as one of my brothers and I want to say that he had done so much to ensure that he pays back the community and the humble life in which he grew up. He put up a community church in his home village for the people. He constructed the first road that goes to his home because his home was one of the areas that you could not even trace on the map of Kabale.

Hon. Sam Byanagwa was so developmental that because of his humble upbringing and education, he contributed a lot of scholastic materials to many schools in his constituency. He contributed towards building churches and towards many community development projects. He did not live the celebrity life of an MP; he lived a down-to-earth life. Whatever little money he got, he shared it out. He brought up his dear family as you see there, in a humble way. Everybody in his home village and in his constituency had respect for him. Not only have we lost an MP, but the nation and the party have lost somebody who treasured working together, consulting and peace. He was so peaceful that he did not like struggles. He would call me aside and say, “My sister, why are you struggling so much in the constituency. What is all this? Are you sick?” I would then say, “I will think about it.” 

Hon. Sam Byanagwa. You have lived your life, you have walked your journey, and you have joined those that will celebrate a humble life. You will be missed by many, especially Mzee Yonasani Bangirana and family. You will be remembered wherever you are. We shall live your example to be humble. To my sister-in-law and the children, you have our support. I pass on the condolences of my father. He is with you and he will stay with you in his aging time. All those who associated with you have asked me to assure you that you will be remembered and you are still part of the family and you remain with us. May the soul of hon. Sam Byanagwa rest in eternal peace! 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, honourable member from Kabale District - 

1.14
THE MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE, ANIMAL INDUSTRY & FISHERIES (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like first of all to thank you for the good and exemplary leadership in this august House. I want to thank you for being considerate; for being selfless and having the kind heart of a parent. 

When I learnt of hon. Sam Byanagwa’s death on Saturday, I called you at around 12.00 noon. You were in a meeting with the OIC delegates who are in this country. I asked you whether it was possible to accord hon. Sam Byanagwa a befitting farewell that we are giving him today. You said that Parliament is on recess and that you are having that very important conference, but you told me to go and think about it such that we discuss later.

I sat with hon. Pereza and we put our heads together. At about 5.00 O’clock, when I called, we suggested we could have the body lay in state this morning and have a session. You graciously accepted. I wanted to put that on record and thank you very much for that gesture.

I would like to thank Members of Parliament - we are on recess but I was touched when from the time of death, Members kept calling yesterday., They were in church and here you are today. I know this is a very difficult time, when all of us are vote-hunting, but thank you for being here to give hon. Sam Byanagwa a befitting send off.

I would like to put on record, thanks to the President, on behalf of the people of Kabale District, whom I represent, and on behalf of Rukiga County where I come from. I would like to thank him for coming to send off, in a befitting manner, our colleague hon. Byanagwa.

I support the motion of paying tribute to hon. Sam Byanagwa who has been my MP for Rukiga County. For us in Rukiga County, it is a very big loss. Hon. Byanagwa was a mature politician; he was reliable and very loyal to his party, the NRM.
 
For those of us who represent districts and, therefore, overlap with other constituencies, sometimes it is not easy. I would like to testify before this august House that I worked hand-in-hand with hon. Byanagwa in Rukiga Constituency. Hon. Byanagwa was calm and he was not a loud politician. Sometimes you may think that those of us who are loud are better politicians, but I can assure you that hon. Byanagwa did his work in the constituency with calmness and firmness. As a result, he has achieved a lot, ranging from developmental projects which hon. Anifa has talked about. He left a mark in Rukiga County. Unfortunately, this was his first term in Parliament; I am inclined to believe that had he had more time, he would leave yet a bigger mark in the constituency.

I would like to extend my condolences to the Republic of Uganda, to Parliament, to the people of Kabale and to the family of hon. Byanagwa, and to request my sister Dina Byanagwa, to be firm and trust in God. He is the one who gives and takes away, may his soul rest in eternal peace.

1.20
THE MINISTER, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (SECURITY) (Mr Amama Mbabazi): I rise in support of the motion and my short intervention will be mainly in two capacities: One, as the Secretary General of the party that he represented in this Parliament; and two, as his neighbour in the villages where we were born.

I bring the condolences of the leadership of the party, the national chairman, the members of the central executive committee and the entire leadership of NRM, to this august House, to the country and to the family of the late Sam Byanagwa on the loss of this comrade who had served his people and his family so well and for so long.

As you heard, he had had a distinguished service, mainly from Makerere University, from where he retired, having served many decades. Although we are neighbouring villagers, I actually had not met him until he came to work in Makerere in 1972 where I was a student at the time. I have known him since then.

He died aged 65 years. Is this the right age to die? Maybe we do not know. Death reminds us that life and death are two sides of the same coin; where there is life there is death. We try very much to live as long as possible. I intend to live for a very long time myself, but it is not for how long that you live on this earth that really counts; but it is what you do in the time you live that matters. I mean the legacy that is talked about in the motion. What legacy do you leave as a leader? What have you done that touches the lives of other people for which they will remember you forever even in death? What things can make people keep saying: “Yes, he was a great leader. He brought about positive change in my life.” That is a great question. Many people live for a very long time, but nobody remembers them. Although I would like to live long, I would not like to live for long, not to be remembered after 100 years of life on earth!

Sam Byanagwa has died at the age of 65 years. I think it is not a particularly old age, but it is a time that he has used positively and profitably for his family and his community. I said I am speaking in the capacity of a person from a neighbouring village. I was born in a village called Kyokyezo, which borders the late hon. Byanagwa’s village called Buchundura. So, those of you who thought that I was born in Kinkizi, please be informed today that I am just a mufuruki in Kinkizi. 

Where I was born, like the late’s village as hon. Anifa Kawooya said, is a mountainous area. I was born at an altitude of about 900ft above sea level. There were no roads; there were no schools. It was a village in a state of nature as God created it and so was Buchundura where the late was born, and where we are going to bury him.

Mr Speaker, in 1959, my parents decided to shift – I was still a young man going to school. At that time, it was not possible for you to move without carrying your luggage on your head because there were no roads. Many years later, I tried to take Dr Rugunda, by helicopter, to my birth place, but we failed to land because of the hills. That also meant that we could not attend the function because it was too late and there were no cars for us to use. At the same time, we could not walk and arrive in time. This is the kind of area that we were born and grew up in.

As you have heard, the late Hon. Sam Byanagwa has tremendously contributed to the transformation of his village. He invested in education – one of the primary schools in Buchundura, we had testimony yesterday, is one of the best performing schools in PLE, thanks to the interventions of the late Sam Byanagwa. You can now hear of Buchundura, thanks to the leadership of people like the late hon. Byanagwa and of the Movement. True, it has been a long journey, but a journey of change; a journey that has lasting impact on the lives of the people there.

So, in paying tribute to the late comrade, I would like to say that he has left behind a great legacy of leadership that has brought change to the lives of many.

He has been in this Parliament for a short time, but as others said of him before, he has left a legacy in the party because he was exemplary in his support for the party by exhibiting discipline. I said it yesterday and I would like to repeat it today that the late Hon. Sam Byanagwa represented the true character of a Mukiga - truthful, dependable, hard working and well meaning. That is what a true Mukiga is. 

While transacting business in Parliament, he truly stuck to the principle of representation. He understood that he was in this Parliament on behalf of his party, the NRM; he stuck to the discipline of the party by taking its position without any change or hesitation. True, he did not always agree with everything that was being done, but he used the correct fora to bring about consensus within the party; he was a consensus builder as the motion says. 

Therefore, Mr Speaker, we in the NRM party believe that the greatest tribute we can pay to this fallen comrade is to continue struggling for what he believed in - bringing about transformation in our society; bringing change for the better of our people and the country as a whole. I believe if we did that, if all of us emulate his example, we will achieve that objective without doubt. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, let us have the acting Leader of Opposition.

1.30
MS CHRISTINE BAKO (FDC, Woman Representative, Arua): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Leader of Opposition and on my own behalf, I rise to support the motion. When I was walking into Parliament this afternoon, I met my uncle exiting the building. So, I asked, “Uncle, what brings you here? I have not seen you in a while.” He told me he had come to pay tribute to his long time friend. I asked, “Sam was your friend?” He said, “Yes.” 

Like hon. Amama Mbabazi has said that the hon. Sam Byanagwa represented the whole truth of what a Mukiga is, I always thought he was an extended version of a Lugbara in Kabale. (Laughter)

Mr Speaker, it is true that the late Sam Byanagwa was a quiet person. I had an opportunity to share Golden Hotel in Accra with him for almost a week. One day, I saw him spangling his eyes. When he saw me, he said, “Your eyes are so investigative.”  Then I asked him, “If there were two choices for you to make on earth, what would those be?” He told me he had lived a longer life to make only two choices. I found him an exceedingly intelligent and a hilarious man at that.

At a personal level, if I had any stress to displace, the first person I would look out for was the late Sam Byanagwa, because as an individual, right from the time we were in Accra together, he had always told me that I had a long life ahead of me and that the best I had to do was to make less enemies and more friends. He always told me that I had joined politics while I was too young. We kept talking whenever we met. That is how I got to realise that he was a dedicated member of the NRM regime.

When I asked him why he really believed in the yellow movement, he told he had no option. That the only way he could get Jack Sabiiti out of the regime was to be with the yellow card. I also asked him whether he would consider reverting to the blue colour. He asked why? And in a joking manner, I told him that blue is the primary colour; yellow is only secondary. We all joked about it that way. But from the interaction I had with the late, I can say it again that he was a quiet, but an exceedingly intelligent person. I actually associate his calmness to the extreme brilliance that many times we are not able to exhibit in this Parliament.

As a distinguished administrator at Makerere University – I was talking to a few of my colleagues this morning - as the acting university secretary, he never made any single enemy in an institution that was crippled by corruption at that point in time. It is all clear that he ensured there was sanity in the management of the university resources.

Mr Speaker, it is not easy to talk about the late Sam Byanagwa. All the things you have said, from the time he built the infrastructure for his home village, to building schools, one would ask, if he strained that far, where was Government? To the extent that he had to be likened to a school! Very intelligent concern for the people, but one thing we would ask is why and where was Government looking at that point in time?

On the disturbing indicators, we have been joking around with my colleagues who support the NRM, 95 percent vote excellence! But if you visited some of those constituencies, you will realise they are the most wanting. At times we used to ask why this exceeding support does not translate itself into infrastructure development. Kabale is one district where NRM has got extreme support, but by the time you come to have an individual trying on his own to make an access road to his village or trying to put up a church on the other side or trying to be the social sector, then that spells doom for the regime. But thanks to the late Sam Byanagwa; he had a heart for his people.

The late Sam Byanagwa had dedicated his life to the plight of the HIV positive people in this country. I recall him telling me one time that it disturbed him that Antiretrovirals can expire from government stores yet people are dying of HIV/AIDS. I saw some deep sense of pain in him. He said that it could not be happening to us in the 21st Century and in a country where we had sacrificed so much that HIV/AIDS patients would die due to lack of medication when Antiretrovirals are expiring from the medical stores in Entebbe. That should task our Government. 

I am told he passed on due to cancer related causes. But, if you visited the Cancer Institute at Mulago, you would ask where our priorities are, as a nation. It is very disturbing to realise that even in our regional referral hospitals, you can hardly get anything to treat the basic ailments. And when it comes to cancer, it is even more wanting. When you see some of the pictures, you will ask what we are doing as a nation.

Many times when someone is diagnosed with cancer, they will have to rearrange their thinking on whether they will have salvation with their Creator. This is because 98 percent chances are that you are on your way to meeting your Creator. So, how do we invest as a nation? Where are our budget priorities? When shall we take human beings as the principal actors in development? When shall we ever realise, as a nation, that unless we have a health population, we are unable to use the other factors of production for development?

Mr Speaker, on behalf of the entire Opposition fraternity, I wish to express my sincere condolences to the family, the people of Kabale and Parliament of Uganda - but before I conclude, to you, the widow and the children, I have one message. Many times, when a father, the household head passes on, lots of risks creep in. People begin splitting over what they should not own. And in many cases, the extended family comes to say he was their brother so that the widow divests her interests from the assets.

However, I would like to say that Mrs Byanagwa, as a woman, you have every right to all the property that your husband owned and now that you have grown-up children, you will know what to do. Let nobody shake you on that. I am saying this because I know that in our African context, before your husband is even buried, people are already dividing what he owned – things they never worked for. 

As for Sam, you did all your best for the 65 years of service to this nation. May all those who called you enemy forgive you; may all those who called you friend mourn you and pray for you, and may all those whom you cared for find harmony in defining their own lives. May your soul rest in eternal peace! 

THE SPEAKER: Let us agree on five minutes; I think that will help. 

1.43
MR CHARLES GUTOMOI (Independent, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I am rising to pay tribute to my late colleague, Sam Byanagwa. I want to first of all thank hon. Bahati for sending me a message on Saturday about the demise of our beloved colleague. 

Mr Speaker, I met this man at Makerere University, and he was a family friend to my brother, Prof. Dr Tom Otiti, who is mourning him seriously. They were great friends and his character matched with that of my brother. When I got the message, I called him immediately and he came and expressed concern and interest to go and bury his late friend. 

Today, we have witnessed yet another big loss to the nation and to the family and constituency. I want to say that His Excellency the President was very honest when paying his tribute in saying that he did not learn about the sickness of the hon. Member of Parliament. Even some of us here did not hear about it; even the Secretary-General told us that he visited the late in hospital once or twice. So, just like His Excellency the President did not hear about the sickness of our late colleague, I too did not learn about his sickness or even his being admitted to Mulago Hospital. So, my question is: what is wrong? Even now, I have no knowledge of the cause of his death, except that I heard the Leader of the Opposition talking about cancer.

So, may I get clarification if our late colleague fell because of cancer? And if it is so, I think the best option is – since the late Dr Okullo Epak died of cancer and many others have died of cancer in this House - I propose that all honourable members of Parliament be checked for cancer. 

At the Mulago Hospital Cancer Institute – we are soon getting a report about it and their machines - there are problems, which we need to address immediately. We would have wanted to know the cause of our late friend’s death. This is causing fear in some of us, if not all of us. How sure are you that you are not the next victim of cancer? And how long does the patient struggle with the disease before he/she departs? (Member timed out_)

01.47
MAJ. GEN. JIM MUHWEZI (NRM, Rujumbura County, Rukungiri): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I also rise to support the motion and to pay tribute to my honourable colleague, the late Sam Byanagwa. Hon. Sam Byanagwa comes from Kabale, which is part of the former Kigezi, and I happened to be the chairperson of the Kigezi Parliamentary Association. 

So, on behalf of the members of Parliament from Kigezi – these are the districts of Kisoro, Kanungu, Kabale and Rukungiri - and on behalf of my own constituency, the people of Rujumbura, we would like to convey our heartfelt condolences to the family, to you, Mr Speaker, to Parliament, to the chairman of the Movement and to the Government of Uganda in general on the loss of hon. Byanagwa. 

Hon. Byanagwa was a very serious man. He calculated everything he said and he could not make any mistakes. He was very principled and very mature in all his dealings. I did not know him before he came to Parliament but ever since I knew him, and through discussions, I found him very reliable, very principled and I am sure very dependable.  

Of course, when we go into politics, so many things come into play and very few people keep calm and sane. People get excited; they get influenced and compromised but hon. Byanagwa was not among such people. So, we pray to the Almighty God to give strength to the family, the people of Rukiga and Kigezi in general, and the people of Uganda as a whole. 

And we thank the family for allowing him to come to Parliament so that we share in those values and virtues he had. May his soul, rest in eternal peace. 

01.51
MR FRED OMACH (NRM, Jonam County, Nebbi): Thank you, Mr Speaker and hon. Members. On behalf of the West Nile Parliamentary Group, I wish to convey our heartfelt condolences to Parliament, Government and the people of Kigezi. 

When we were in Church yesterday, the first reading was from Psalm 23 and it says, “The Lord is my Shepherd and I shall not want ….” We were very much delighted to hear that six months ago, our brother, Sam gave his life to the Lord. So we are confident that he is now with the Lord. It is my prayer that this Parliament turns this Psalm 23 into one which says: “The Lord is my Shepherd and that is all I shall want.” (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: This Parliament has turned many people into pastors. (Laughter) 

MR OMACH: The second issue is that a number of people who die and are put in caskets have their caskets covered but I am happy that the casket of our brother Sam is not covered and this is the transparent character that he exhibited when he was alive. Sam was a very transparent person, very honest and diligent. And that is not only for the Bakiga, but it is also for the others like the Jonam. 

Before Sam died, he prayed that leaders should know their health status; they should get checked on a regular basis and I am happy that my colleague has echoed this. Sam was diagnosed late and if he had been diagnosed early enough, maybe he would still be with us. So, it is also my prayer that as leaders, we should get the opportunity to have regular checks of our health status so that we can be helped medically before it is too late.

Sam loved his family very much and this is a testimony that was given in Church yesterday and we would like to thank him for having been a family person. We pray that the good Lord will see the family through, even when our brother, Sam is now with Him. May his soul rest in eternal peace! 

01.55
MR DAVID BAHATI (NRM, Ndorwa County West, Kabale):  Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to extend our condolences to the wife, Dina, the children and the people of Rukiga County. 

Sam was a scout leader from 1961 to 1964 and here in Parliament he also continued to support the Uganda Parliamentary Scouts Union. As the Chairperson of the Uganda Scouts Association, I also convey my condolences to you, Dina and the children. 

As you were reminded yesterday in Church, and this is also relevant to all of us, death is not an endless hope but a source of endless hope. And I think that this should be comforting to all of us. 

Sam provided counsel to us when we joined the university where he was working in the 1990s and we want to thank him for the counsel he gave us as students. Sam was a brother as well as a colleague. And in the politics of our home district, Kabale, Sam was above politics of pettiness, politics of intrigue, self-seeking politics that continue to distract the development debate in that district but also as you know, across the country. He believed in politics of openness and non confrontation. And we want to thank you for the kind of example that you showed us as leaders not only from that district but of this country as a whole. 
 
Among the many characteristics that Sam had was that of humour and you would not leave him without smiling. For example, during the campaigns, he stood with Jack Sabiti who was a member of the Forum for Democratic Change and he used to tell us as NRM leaders jokingly, that if we did not look for votes, Jack Sabiti would defeat us. And because of that, he was not only able to galvanize the support of NRM leaders but also that of the people and indeed he worked as a gateway to help us defeat the candidate of the Forum for Democratic Change. 

When I moved a motion to seek leave to propose the Anti-homosexuality Bill, 2009, Sam called and he was encouraging me. He said, “Young man, I support you and I think this is something that we should support.” Then jokingly, he said, “By the way, what do men do in men’s bums?” Again jokingly we laughed. That was him and his humour. He was a great leader to us and a man that could give a smile to many of us and we will miss him.

Yesterday at the funeral service, one of his representatives said that Sam reminded all of us, especially men that we should go and check for prostate cancer because although he fell sick in 2001, it was later discovered in 2005 that he had cancer. So as Chris will be speaking, he succumbed to cancer.

A few months ago, he called all of us from the district informing us about his sickness. We were very worried because he was telling us that, “In case something happens, I just wanted to let you know.” We prayed with him and encouraged him.

As Christine said, we have a policy that looks after HIV/AIDS patients but what is government doing to help people who have terminal illnesses? Can’t we invest in this so that if someone is in his last days, at least he is comforted from government?

Hon. Janat Mukwaya said that we do not know who will finish this Eighth Parliament term because it has been very frustrating for many of us. Two months down the road after the death of Henry Balikoowa, we now have hon. Sam Byanagwa before us. However, as life gets shorter, I think we need to stop and check ourselves, our friendships, our relationships because for sure, no one has tomorrow in his hands. May God rest Sam’s soul in eternal peace!

02.01
MR DEUSDEDIT BIKWASIZEHI (NRM, Buhweju County, Bushenyi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Hon. Colleagues, I stand to support the motion to pay tribute to our colleague, the late hon. Sam Byanagwa. I did not know Sam until 2006 when he came to Parliament. As we interacted and he learnt that I came from Buhweju, we became closer. He told me that his father had produced very many children and a number of them had migrated to Buhweju, among other areas. This is a fact and I would like to tell the people of Kigezi that in Buhweju County, the population of migrants from Kigezi is about 50 percent so I do not represent only Banyankole but all the people there.

When he learnt that I had spent here five years as a Member of Parliament, he said, “What kind of programmes do you carry out in your constituency that help your people?” I told him I carry out a number of programmes but the biggest challenge I have in my area is education. I have been focusing on education particularly the primary level because it is the foundation. He asked me how I go about it. I told him how I organise annual competitions to reward people who pass primary seven, motivate the schools by giving them prizes and through mobilisation. He said that is the right thing to be done. 

I remember he arranged a lunch and as we chatted, he said, “I am also going to start the same thing.” I think the year before last, before he was bed-ridden, he started giving prizes. Whereas I only organise one day, he told me he was going to go to every school that had excelled. I organised and got him people who can make him certificates and trophies and he set off. Hardly a month later, I saw hon. Byanagwa in the press handing over prizes to the different schools.

This is a characteristic of a leader who wants to make a difference. He was determined to make a difference in his area, among other tings.

As indicated, in the short time I interacted with him, I learnt a lot. For example, he was one of the most punctual people in this House. He could not understand how a Member of Parliament can come and not attend a committee meeting or fail to come to Parliament in time. Whenever he did not have committee work here, he would have his lunch at home but by 2.00 p.m., he would be in this House. He was very punctual and there is a lot to learn from him in that respect.

From what has been described by the Secretary-General and others, for a man of his type to have come from Buchundura and go to Buddo - I must admit that he was a genius. Not everybody goes to King’s College Buddo. For example, I did not go there. (Laughter) Actually, when we were paying tribute to the late Suleiman Kiggundu, I remember he talked here and he was on that side. That is when I learnt more about him.

A lot has been said about Sam and there are a lot of lessons to learn from him. Of course he was very humorous as my colleagues have been saying. He was also very humble and I must admit that my character and his were almost the same. (Laughter) This is because we have been meeting our colleagues here and they used to tell us that I and him are not in the right place because we do not shout a lot as politicians should. I have really lost a colleague.

I would like to thank his family that did all that they could. Your father has not died in vain and I want you to be comforted and know that your father was a great man. You have lost a great man and I thank you for what you did for him. All that he did for you should comfort you and the best thing you can do for him is to follow in his footsteps so that when we meet you, we meet a son or daughter of the late Sam Byanagwa, the way your father was. May his soul rest in eternal peace!

02.07
DR FRANCIS EPETAIT (FDC, Ngora County, Kumi): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. On Saturday afternoon, when I got an SMS from hon. Bahati, I was addressing a meeting in the constituency. After reading it, my voice turned and I started to stutter. One of the participants in the meeting cracked a joke that “Honourable, is your voice controlled by the phone?” I had to read the message verbatim and they wondered what had become of the Eighth Parliament. This is because the death toll has become extremely worrying. 

On behalf of the people of Ngora County and on my own behalf, I would like to extend my sincere condolences to the family of my late colleague, Sam, and the people of Rukiga and Kigezi in general upon the demise of. 

Before hon. Byanagwa joined the Committee on Physical Infrastructure, he was a member of the Social Services Committee where I belong. We also happened to be members of the HIV/AIDS Committee so we have had a number of interactions for that matter. In committee meetings, hon. Byanagwa would always put life where there appeared to be heated situations. He would try to cool down situations. He would even say that sometimes we need to get rid of stress by laughing. Those of you who do not know that laughing helps relieve stress, please try to smile and laugh during certain moments. I can see that some Members have already been relieved a bit. 

Hon. Byanagwa was an educationist. This has been attested to by many colleagues. On the Social Services Committee, whenever we would draw field programmes for oversight functions on education, hon. Byanagwa would always remind us that the programme should not interfere with the holiday programme or the time children are going back to school. He said, “Some of you still have young children who go to school. You should not draw a programme that coincides with the time when the children are supposed to go back to school.” He always gave us guidance that enabled the committee do its work well.

We are reliably informed that hon. Byanagwa died of prostate cancer. It reminds me that in this Eighth Parliament, we have lost a number of colleagues: hon. Kibirige Ssebunya, hon. Omwony Ojok, hon. Mugara Kabagambe, hon. Dr Okulo Epak and they all have something in common. For that reason, I would not like to appeal for only members of Parliament to be routinely checked - there is a big problem in the health sector. I propose that affirmative action be taken for the health sector to make screening – I am glad something is being done about cervical cancer. We need to give maximum support to our citizenry in health service delivery. 

I am begging you, Mr Speaker, to allocate a day for discussing health matters. If it were possible - I know we have a congested programme to cover immediately we return from recess – I pray that you allocate a day for discussing health matters. Many times, we discuss health matters in this House in a hurry. There are so many issues that have gone wrong in the health sector whose details I do not want to dwell on now due to limited time. 

I have been to a number of hospitals, regional, health centre IVs and IIIs and there are so many things that have gone wrong. Therefore, I would be extremely happy if that request is considered positively by your office so that we come up with a plan for improving the health sector.

To the family, I encourage you to turn to the Lord. When you pray to Him, He will always listen to your cries.

I would also like to echo the counsel my acting Leader of the Opposition has just given that “Cursed are those who may attempt to make the life of a widow or an orphan more difficult.” (Interjections)

THE SPEAKER: To respond to what you have said; many times I have advised committees – I do not think that time for talking about your ministries is only during the passing of the budgets. Committees are free to request for space on the Order Paper if they have a topic to discuss. We shall accord them the space. It may not be easy for the Speaker to just assent and say: “We are going to talk about education,” unless there is a request from the committee. The committee should have a topic to discuss so that we accommodate them on the Order Paper. 

You are talking about health. Is it general or is it about cancer? It is up to you to choose the topic and let us know; let the Clerk know and we shall oblige.

02.15
MR GEOFFREY EKANYA (FDC, Tororo County, Tororo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker, for giving me this opportunity. My brother, Sam, you are gone in body, but the wisdom you passed on to some of us will stand the test of time until our time to join you comes.

As it has been stated, sometimes when we pass on, people do not say the truth; they say something to mean what they wished. However, our brother lying in front of us here was indeed an honest leader who guided some of us. 

Many of you know the challenge I am facing on behalf of my people of Tororo County; that is the issue of the district. Among the people whom I had time to discuss with was hon. Sam Byanagwa. 

The first time he came here, he told me: “I have joined you.” At Makerere University, I was a leader and he knew me.

I lobbied him like I have lobbied some of you and he kept on encouraging me. He said: “Young man, do not give up pursuing the needs and the interests of your people. Continue lobbying, be persistent, get them more documents and continue sharing with the Members.” I followed his advice. I have got the documents on this matter and I am continuing with my research. 

When hon. David Bahati sent us a message – I want to thank hon. Bahati for that - I do not know how his phone works because it was a rapid and instant message to all of us from his phone. I had heard that Byanagwa was sick. I was told by members of his constituency, but I am disappointed by some members of our constituencies. If they do not support you, they say: “Ekanya is about to die; we are going to replace him.” I want to tell the citizens of this country that nobody knows the number of years we are supposed to live. You may be 80 years today and your days are cut short. You may be 10 years old and your days are cut short. Nobody should celebrate when a colleague is sick and nobody should celebrate when a colleague dies. 

I want to thank him because he did not abandon what hon. Jack Sabiiti did. Sometimes when we become new MPs, we abandon what other MPs have done. As it has been stated here, hon. Jack Sabiiti also promoted education in that place. Hon. Sam Byanagwa has been here for hardly five years and there is no way he would have built a primary school to attain primary seven level. so he had to build on what Hon. Jack Sabiiti had done. How did he do this? He did not antagonise those who supported him and those who did not support him. He brought them together and that is why we see the results happening today.

I want to call upon ourselves and especially the Secretary General of NRM; we need unity and we need peace. If people want to demonstrate, allow them demonstrate; do not antagonise people. Hon. Sam Byanagwa did not antagonise the supporters of FDC in his constituency. He worked with them and that is why we see the good results. I can assure you if he was to live, it was going to be very hard for some in the Opposition to win votes in that place because he was a man of unity. He was simple, honest and humble and won some of our hearts. As we say, when we leave this earth we need to leave a legacy, so let us borrow from what we are talking about.

Finally, today one journalist said, “You MPs, every time your colleague dies, you lament”. We have put money into the Cancer Institute, but there is still a problem. It is unfortunate that the Minister of Health is not here, but the chairperson of the Budget Committee visited the Cancer Institute and saw how bad the situation is, even with all the money.

Last month, hon. Kakooza sent me to the National Medical Stores to pick medicine and I realised that we should take blame as MPs. The entire budget for drugs in this country is Shs 120 billion. I costed drugs for health centre IIIs - I have the costing – and a health centre III gets Shs 4.5 million for a whole year. While we think about ourselves, if you follow that rough estimate I was using, every citizen of this country gets about Shs 100 for health in terms of drugs in this country. Therefore, I hope - I am talking about money for drugs - that in the coming budget, the Ministry of Health will come here with a serious plan so that the health sector gets more money than we give ourselves here in Parliament. 

The cost of public administration - the President’s office and other sectors -(Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: This is what I am going to do so that we prepare ourselves: Hon. Byanagwa worked in the university for 30 years, so I think the Minister of Education should say something. A lot has been said about health, so I think it is fair to call in the doctor. Meanwhile, let me think about what else to do. I have seen different interests but I have already said the minister will come in. Let it be five minutes because I have been asked to release them to go to Kabale.

2.22
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I too bring condolences from the constituency of Rubanda County West. 

The late hon. Sam Byanagwa was my friend. I came to know him before I came to Parliament at a rally when we had escorted hon. Sabiiti. It was on that day when hon. Sabiiti introduced Mr Sam Byanagwa to the population of Rukiga and he said, “When I am gone; when I am no longer a Member of Parliament…” Actually he said, “This is the man to take care of this constituency”. And indeed, in this Eighth Parliament, hon. Sam Byanagwa came.

One very important point and attribute about hon. Sam Byanagwa was the parental guidance which he always gave us, especially we the young members of parliament from Kabale. He would always give parental guidance. You know, some of us are splinters on some issues and hon. Sam Byanagwa would always say, “Go slow, young men”. 

In his own wisdom, using his methods of work, he would lobby for the things we would be asking for in our own way such as the roads. Indeed when some of the roads were taken by the district, it was Sam Byanagwa who informed us and brought the list and distributed it to us. I want to remind the Minister of Works, represented here by hon. Byabagambi, that I am sure Hon. Sam Byanagwa will go to heaven. There is no doubt about that. He was such a good man. Up in heaven, he will be asking hon. Byabagambi, “When are you starting those roads that hon. Sam Byanagwa lobbied for and were granted to the central Government?” Hon. Omach, who was preaching to us here, sometimes we are told that he has not released the funds to do those roads. In heaven there, be ready to answer to his question.

He was such a humble man that the President made a comment that, “Why did hon. Sam Byanagwa join these politicians?” He was pointing in front where Hon. Hope Mwesigye was sitting. I said, “Does he mean those ones? He certainly does not mean me, because I am a humble man”.

Hon. Sam Byanagwa never antagonised anybody in Kabale and even here in Parliament. He was a down-to-earth man and very humorous. One time when we had a rally, he was called to invite the President to speak. In his humorous way, he called the President and said “OB, ija ogambire abantu beitu” and we all laughed, and Sam Byanagwa said, “Yes, he is my OB”. That was Hon. Sam Byanagwa; so humorous.

In the interest of time so that my brothers and sisters and mummy take the body of late hon. Sam Byanagwa; my brothers and sisters over there, we shall be there with you. We did not have a chance to interact with you because his time in Parliament was a bit short and we did have much to meet with your family. He was such a nice man. I hope we shall have that chance. 

Hon. Sam Byanagwa was such a friendly man to the extent that when he was sick and was attending chemotherapy and my mother had also been diagnosed with cancer, he had become so friendly to my mother. The other day when I was told that hon. Sam Byanagwa had died - I was in the constituency together with hon. Nuwagaba and we returned just last night - when I told my brother to tell my mother that her friend has died, my brother said, “Uh, she is going to be traumatised.”

THE SPEAKER: Well, a lot has been said about roads. I think I will also allow the Minister of Education and Sports to say something.

2.28
THE MINISTER OF EDUCATION AND SPORTS (Mrs Namirembe Bitamazire): I thank you. I want to thank those Members who have found time to come and pay their last respects to our fallen colleague and friend – 

THE SPEAKER: You will excuse me. Honourable members, I heard you singing the National Anthem and I told you that we did not have a band. You should sing a certain tune when our friend is leaving so that we substitute the band. You could maybe sing “God be with you until we meet.” Something like that would be okay. You stretch your throats for that one.      

MRS BITAMAZIRE: I thank you. Let me start by sending condolences to the family of the late Byanagwa. I want to tell them that the entire education fraternity will remember hon. Sam Byanagwa and we do pray for his soul and the family. 

I am happy that my colleagues have mentioned Sam Byanagwa in the area of education. I met the late Sam Byanagwa in Makerere University at different levels of service, and we all know that he was promoted up to the level when he resigned to come and join politics. What I want to articulate and put on the record is that the late Sam Byanagwa was very articulate and analytical. Uganda knows that we have had some problems with universities in this country, especially at Makerere, but whenever we went to analyse the issues at Makerere, Sam Byanagwa would come with well presented documents which would guide council and the ministry to come to a consensus regarding what action to take next. 

He lived a life of a role model to the young people who were at the university through his calmness, thoroughness and that posture which he always had. He gave a lot of inspiration to the young people there. I want to put it on record that Sam Byanagwa was one of the Ugandans who internalised the challenges this country is likely to face when we go into mass education. He always came to my office to say, “Madam, we see what you are doing. We are trying as a government, but we are likely to face difficulties because we are getting large numbers for which we may not have the facilities or the funds we need.” He always told me that I should mobilise people to continue supporting education especially mass education programmes of UPE and USE. 

I am happy to learn from this meeting that people who have been living with him are giving testimony to what he has been doing as a responsible citizen to support these programmes where Uganda is offering mass education to our people. He has always approached the ministry on what guidance can be given from the ministry, and I am happy that the MP from Buhweju has really given some details on that. That is what Byanagwa has been. He has not been criticising education, UPE or USE, but he has been trying to find out where he can help. I believe that is a very good lesson which many of our people can learn from. 

Finally, he has been generously giving his ideas. As the Minister of Education and Sports, I receive a lot of my colleagues, friends and leaders in this country, but many of them do not give you as much. However, for him, after the social services committee meetings, he would come to my office and say, “But when you were answering that question, you should have given a little bit more information to make the committee realise your position in this regard.” 

I think that generosity will last as a legacy for the late Sam Byanagwa. We are losing a patriotic Ugandan who realised that through education, we can promote development in this country. I am happy that through his efforts, there are some legacies and improvements that have been made in his constituency. We shall miss him and may his soul rest in peace. I thank you so much.

2.34
DR CHRIS BARYOMUNSI (NRM, Kinkizi County East, Kanungu): I thank you very much. I also rise to support the motion. A lot of things have been said about the character and life of hon. Byanagwa and I will not repeat the issues which have been raised. 

Hon. Byanagwa has been closely known to me particularly when we came to Parliament. We sat together on the social services committee and he also used to be my neighbour in Parliament. When we were not speaking on the microphone, we would share a lot of wisdom. I would, therefore, want to confirm that he was honest, humble, generous and simple but a very intelligent man. 

There are things he loved and others he hated, some of which have been said. One issue was late coming. We used to appear for the social services committee meetings and we would be there with Prof. Anokbonggo and sit waiting for up to 30 minutes or an hour and he would complain, “What kind of Members of Parliament are these? We have a meeting at 10 but they come at 11.” 

He also hated people who speak in Parliament and fail to make a point. I would challenge him to rise and contribute and he would say, “But you hear what people are saying; I can only speak when I have a serious point to raise.” He was a very serious man and I think for us as young politicians, particularly from the Kigezi region, we had a lot to learn from him. 

Like my colleagues have said, in the politics of our area, he was a stabilizing factor. He was older than us and he used to guide and advise us on a number of things which made him be able to achieve a lot in his constituency in the short time he has been in Parliament. When he switched from the social services committee to that of infrastructure, I asked him, “Why have you left our committee?” He said, “I have been able to lobby for a number of services and programmes and I now want to turn to infrastructure to address the issue of roads.” So, hon. Byabagambi, you must take the points raised by hon. Banyenzaki seriously because the issue of roads in Kigezi is a very serious issue today. Most of our community roads are impassable and, therefore, it is an important point.

Lastly, I just want to comment on some of the issues raised with regard to health. Yes, like some of the colleagues have said, he has died of cancer of the prostate and, therefore, it is wrong to accuse Government or anybody by saying that he did not get treatment. 

I think the problem with cancer is that in most cases we are not able to have it detected early, like in his case. So, I think the issues should be two. One, the health seeking behaviour of us, individuals, must improve so that we go for early screening and some of these illnesses like cancer can then be detected early. Once it is detected early, it can be addressed either through surgical intervention or through chemotherapy. However, in most cases, like in his case, it was detected late when it had already spread from the prostate and affected his bones and that is why he was walking using a walking stick. The bones had been affected by what we call metastases or when the cancer spreads from the primary site to affect other organs. 

Also, the point is being raised that we must improve our health facilities so that they have capacity to diagnose and have this early detection done. I think it is a challenge. Even when you want to have diagnosis done early, most of our facilities do not have that capacity and, therefore, the point that we must improve our health services is very crucial.

Also, there is the point that was raised by hon. Bahati that some of these illnesses like cancer present at the terminal stage when very little can be done, but you can give supportive care to individuals. I think that kind of service must be integrated within our health care system. At the moment, palliative care services for cancer and other terminal illnesses are provided by Hospice Uganda, which is a non-governmental organisation. Our public health facilities do not have adequate services for palliative care. The Ministry of Health and Government should look at this as something very serious. All of us are potential candidates for cancer and, therefore, it must be addressed as soon as possible. 

We have lost a very distinguished colleague who was very helpful to all of us as Parliament and the country. We want to convey our condolences to the family, the NRM party and the entire population of Kabale and Rukiga. I want to confirm what Hon. Amama Mbabazi said, that Hon. Sam Byanagwa was a true Mukiga - (Member timed out.)

2.39
MS MABEL BAKEINE (NRM, Bugangaizi County, Kibaale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I rise to pay my tribute to our late comrade, Hon. Sam Byanagwa. I would have felt cheated if I did not speak today. 

Since I came to Parliament in 2006, I had been sitting next to Sam Byanagwa on this bench and in this past period we shared quite a lot. There are two values that I liked him for. One has been greatly echoed, that he was a very humble man; remember, the Bible says that blessed are the humble. Humility costs nothing. We shared quite a lot and we used to say that it was not by our power or might that we won the elections and we agreed that we should return the glory to God. As a colleague, he told me that he had a church project where he wanted to show his gratitude to God for what He had done for him. So, the construction of the church in his area was a token of appreciation to the Almighty God for His goodness to him and his family. 

Sam was a very humble man and whoever associated with him felt a lot of peace around him. Secondly, Sam was a very decent man. He was someone who never wanted to get involved with issues where controversies would arise. When you reflect on the many issues here in Parliament, Sam was one person who would say, “Please, do not get yourself entangled in this one because you will create controversies that will take you long to correct.” I appreciated him for that. He stayed focused on the reason why he was an NRM member, whether he believed in it or not, and he had to support his party. He was a great counsel to many of us. 

Sam was a man who was very time conscious. I remember we agreed that we should be exemplary in this area and we used to keep time. We would come very early. I remember in the days when he had a painful leg, he would still maintain that and ensure that after two hours, he goes back to rest.  

With those few words, I want to thank you, again, for allowing me to talk about our late comrade, hon. Sam Byanagwa. To his family, I want to say that we know you have lost a dear and loveable person. Sam loved his family so much and he used to talk about it. He would share with me quite a lot but God who has taken him away will fill the gap. May the Almighty God rest his soul in eternal peace.

2.55
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR WORKS AND TRANSPORT (WORKS) (Mr John Byabagambi): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion on behalf of the Ministry of Works and Transport and on behalf of the people of Ibanda South whom I represent in this august House. I want to extend my condolences to the family of the late hon. Sam Byanagwa. 

Man is born into this world without any programme, without any plan, without even knowing where he is born. The worst thing somebody can do is to get out of this world without making a mark or without leaving a legacy. Hon. Sam Byanagwa made a very big mark. He has left a beautiful family with beautiful children, and his tremendous contributions to the Committee of Infrastructure, the committee which oversees our ministry, were well known. 

I liked the resilience of Sam Byanagwa especially when he decided to take on a person of the character of Sabiiti who was a strong character. Sam, a humble man, said, “I am taking him on”, and he did that. I admired his resilience although he was a quiet man. 

Sam Byanagwa used to ring me almost every week about the roads, especially in the mountainous area of Kigezi, which is highly rugged. He wanted the government to do something about his roads and because of his determination, these are some of the reasons that our ministry decided to take over a lot of roads in his constituency. 

Sam has died demanding that the small portion from Kamwezi through Kyogo going to Muhanga must be added to the network. I promise that as long as I am there, I will make sure that his dream is fulfilled and that portion is added to the national network.

About six months ago, Sam Byanagwa came to the ministry again demanding that the road which passes through Rukiri in his constituency be taken over by the central Government. It connects Muhanga with Kabale Town. We have been considering this option and we are in advanced stages of taking over this road. I promise this august House that I will work hard to make sure that his dream of having that road taken over by the government is fulfilled.

I have been a frequent visitor to his constituency. My beautiful wife comes from his constituency and I usually go there to see my in-laws. He has been my muko. He usually called me muko. Sam Byanagwa, in his humility, liked everybody regardless of religion or tribe. I used to find him in the Catholic Church and in the Protestant Church and he used to contribute equally and generously. Therefore, the people of Kigezi as a whole and Rukiga have lost a very precious person. 

I usually ask God questions - I am a very good believer. Why are those of us in the third world countries, in the third world countries? How come we die earlier than those in the first world countries? Are we created by you, the same God? How come they have got all the resources and we have got almost nothing? How come they are advanced and we are not? Mr Speaker, I have never got any reply from Him and I will continue asking until maybe I leave this world.

Again, I extend my condolences to the family. May the soul of hon. Sam Byanagwa rest in eternal peace. 

2.49
MS WINIFRED MASIKO (NRM, Woman Representative, Rukungiri): Mr Speaker, I would like to thank you for giving me this opportunity to talk. The reason why I have been struggling to talk about Sam Byanagwa is that I come from Nyarushangye which neighbours his home. We lived in the same locality and we have worked together on several issues. I, therefore, thought it was befitting for me at this time to at least say three things that hon. Sam Byanagwa has done for the people of Rukiga and which should go in the Hansard.

Before I raise those three issues, I would like to say that I agree with many people who have talked about Hon. Sam Byanagwa because of his simplicity. He used to call me his in-law because he was my brother-in-law. He never called me by name since he came to this House and so, I accord a lot of respect to him. I know he has performed very well in this House as others have already said. 

One of the issues that brought me close to Hon. Sam Byanagwa is the support he had for the poor students that hailed from Rukiga. I supported Sam’s students up to S.6 and I could not afford the university fees. He took on three of them and paid their fees at the university and they all went through the university successfully. I thought this was something we should talk about. 

In this regard, I thank the family. I am sure they have never been alone in that family because Sam always looked for the poor bright students from Rukiga and supported them as members of the family. So, I really want to thank the members of the family for all that they went through for the sake of the citizens and the children of Rukiga.

Another issue that I wanted to talk about is that he vehemently supported the people of Rukiga especially in the use of wetlands. His argument was that we should have sustainable development and use of wetlands. That is an area that we interfaced with him especially on the Committee on Natural Resources. 

There is a time when NEMA had come in to tell people to leave that very area and yet this wetland has been supporting the people of Rukiga especially as far as potatoes and cabbages are concerned. That is where they get their livelihood. So, he came and reasoned with us and said, “You can use the wetland sustainably” and it was proved true. He always said that he was going to use his leadership capacity to stop them from encroaching on that very delicate ecosystem in the wetland that leads to the waters that supply the hydroelectricity at Kisizi Hospital. So, he was very concerned and I think this is something we should remember him for.

Another issue is that when I was chairing the Uganda Women Parliamentary Association and we were pushing for gender sensitive pieces of legislation, hon. Byanagwa attended our meetings. We used to invite many people but few would come. He would never miss the meetings we invited him to. I am glad that his efforts have been realised and at least now, most of the pieces of legislation have been made into law and others are coming on board. So, I really want to thank him for what he did in that regard; for the zeal and the interest he showed in these gender sensitive pieces of legislation; and I know he must be happy that we have gone this far to achieve them. 

May hon. Sam Byanagwa rest in peace and for us who are staying behind, I pray we realise that we need to be humble in order to succeed. I thank you.

2.55
MR SILVER BAHANE (NRM, Bufumbira County North, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity to debate on this tragedy of our fallen comrade. I came to know of the late Sam Byanagwa when we met here in 2006. He looked for me and when I got to him he told me that, “I am your mulamu”. Apparently, he married from my constituency and since then we have been friends. 

As Shakespeare put it, “Death comes for us all”; even at the time of birth, it does stand aside and lets us grow, only to come and bend us so low in our old age. It has happened to our comrade, Sam Byanagwa.

So much has been said about our fallen colleague, but I would want to stress that the late Sam was a peacemaker. He hated intrigue and controversy. He was a team player and a legislator who would not just open his mouth. He was fond of consulting first before he stood on the Floor of this House to make any contribution. He would never hesitate to consult from either the junior or senior colleagues. 

In every aspect of life, there are missed opportunities. Where he married from, that is, between Kirundo sub-county and Busanza, there isn’t any access road. At one time, he came to me and said, “Mulamu, let’s put our heads together and see whether we can have a road connecting that stretch.” It is a stretch of about 12 kms, and that was when he had gone to the Physical Infrastructure Committee. I am glad to report that we have the money to work on the road, but unfortunately he has passed on before that road is complete. I hope the road will be completed.

The late Byanagwa was a social man. He wore a consistent smile. As a colleague said, we do not need to frown all the time. It is important that we keep smiling and that way, we may live longer.

To hon. John Byabagambi, the Minister of State for Works, the roads in that part of the country are in a terrible state. Only yesterday morning, I gave a lift to a lady from Nteko, about 48 kms from Kisoro - the lady was pregnant and had a breached birth. On our way, we found that the road had collapsed. We could not get to the hospital on time. Unfortunately, the child died, but we were lucky to save the mother’s life. We need to be helped with these roads. 

The other issue is the state of our health services. On Saturday, I met some health workers in my constituency. They disclosed to me that since the beginning of the financial year, they had not received the little money hon. Ekanya was talking about. It is absurd. I do not know what is happening but something needs to be done if we are to save the lives of Ugandans. 

I thank you, Mr Speaker. May the soul of the fallen comrade rest in peace.

3.00
COL. (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo)): Thank you, Mr Speaker, for this opportunity. I extend the condolences of Toro Parliamentary Group to the family of hon. Byanagwa, his constituency, and the people of Kigezi region.

I saw him at the last NEC meeting. During break time, he went outside and then came back, stood in front of the room and he did not know where to go. He was very weak. I actually wondered why he had come to the NEC meeting at all because he looked very weak and did not know whether to go left or right. I then realised that some people can be very committed to their party and I felt very impressed. I was only surprised to hear, while I was in my constituency, that he had passed away, hardly two to three weeks after the NEC meeting of the NRM. 

People have said that he was very quiet. He was very quiet because he had seen a lot of things in this country. Having been to Dar-es-Salaam University; having worked at Makerere University; and having heard many things from people; he was quiet and he always reserved his answers because he knew more than those who were talking. That is why he was quiet like some of us. We do not speak so much because we keep a lot of answers to ourselves. 

I also pay condolences to you, Mr Speaker, because of the speed with which you are losing your members of Parliament. It is not a long time ago when we bade farewell to one of the young members of Parliament. Today, this one is senior, but as you know, there is nobody that can say that let the seniors go because the one that we lost the other time was a junior; and, therefore, I do not want to point at anybody who will be next. But I hope that everybody will be around when our term of five years ends. 

I wish to advise members of Parliament to keep courage. Do not get the impression that everybody is dying away. There is no programme and we all have to fight on. The decision is not ours; it is God’s decision. I thank you, Mr Speaker. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. 

3.03
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mr Pereza Ahabwe): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I support the Motion of paying tribute to the late hon. Sam Byanagwa. He passed away on Saturday at 10.30 a.m. after a protracted struggle with cancer. As you have heard, the cancer had been detected a bit late in 2004 although he had become weak in 2001 and about one year ago, it became acute.

We must give credit where it is due. Doctors at Mulago Hospital were with him both in the hospital whenever he would go there and at home in his bedroom. At one time, I was there for two hours with him and within that short time, three doctors had come from Mulago Hospital to check on him. He had a number of nurses who were attending to him and an organisation called Hospice Uganda was full-time with him. If he were to live because of being attended to, he would have lived. So, I want to allay fears that possibly he could have been mistreated by our systems. As hon. Baryomunsi rightly says, this is a disease that all of us know has taken people - even from this House - in the best hospitals outside Uganda. 

I had a lot to say about him but I am mindful of the time that we have to travel to Kabale. I will only mention two things that his friends mentioned in Church yesterday, and also one thing that he told me about a number of times on phone and even at his bedside. The first thing he said has already been alluded to, that he did not take a medical check-up in time. By the time he was diagnosed, it was late and he was aware that he was not going to be cured and he implored all of us the males who are approaching or who have gone beyond the age of 50 to take a thorough medical check up for this disease. 

The second thing that he told me and which he was always praying for is that Rukiga County Constituency should never be allowed to slip out of the NRM hands. He told me that many times on phone and he told me that at his home in his bedroom. Therefore, those of you who have heard those last wishes of his should work very hard to make sure that they are realised. 

Like hon. Hope Mwesigye has already commended Parliament and you in particular, on behalf of the family which cannot qualify to stand here and talk, it was amazing how Parliament swung into action from 11 O’clock when Sam’s body was still at Mulago Hospital. The Speaker’s Office and the Office of the Clerk quickly coordinated with the directorate of finance and administration, with the procurement office, and with the service providers on a weekend. It is amazing when I hear people talk about the institution of Parliament. I personally witnessed it and by 3 O’clock on Saturday, we had all the requirements from Parliament, which Parliament has to offer to a fallen Member. We thank you, Mr Speaker, for agreeing to convene a session in memory of our colleague.

Hon. Byanagwa who has just gone was extremely exemplary. It is very rare for parents to have six children - three boys and three girls - all educated and brought up in a very strict Christian environment; they have all got degrees and if you consider their ages, it is not easy for every parent to succeed in that direction. For those of us who are still young parents, we have a lot to learn from the late hon. Sam Byanagwa.

The late Byanagwa was trying to use his Constituency Development Fund to connect a community road through his home to one of my villages called Nyakatare, so that I could also construct one to meet his somewhere, for the people to easily traverse that hilly area. Let me say that hon. Byanagwa even went to the extent of accounting for CDF in the Kabale District Council to convince them that the money we get here was being used properly. That is the degree of honesty of the gentleman we are talking about.

Mr Speaker, maybe after we have disposed of the Motion, you will give me another opportunity to inform Members of the next programme from here. I want to beg that you put the question such that we travel early enough to Kabale.

THE SPEAKER: Before I put the question, there is a message from the East African Legislative Assembly delivered by hon. Lydia Wanyoto Mutende. 

It reads: “I extend my heart felt condolences to the bereaved family of the late Hon. Sam Byanagwa Rwamafa who has been our colleague from Rukiga County, Kabale District. In moments like this, the only wise option is to humble ourselves and pledge to support the bereaved family with prayer. May the Almighty God take you through this time and may his soul rest in eternal peace and God bless you all.”

With this, I put the question to the Motion moved by hon. Mukwaya and supported by hon. Byandala to which very many of you have made contributions.

(Question put and agreed to.)

3.14
MR PEREZA AHABWE: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Our expectation was that we would leave at 2.30 p.m. to go to Kabale and it is now about 3.15 p.m. but I think God will lead us safely. The whole of tomorrow, the people of Rukiga County will have the opportunity to pay their last respects to their late Member of Parliament, and on Wednesday at 11 O’clock, we shall have a service at his local Church. I want to emphasise to Members that this is a Church that hon. Byanagwa built for the people, not after he became Member of Parliament, but long before. The burial is going to take place within that locality at a place called Bucundura at 3.00 p.m. The name of the local Church is Muhanga Church of Uganda. It is not at Muhanga as you go to Kabale, but another Muhanga now in a sub-county called Kashambya. When you reach Kashambya, then you can always get the direction to the place. The service starts at 11.00 a.m.

Honourable colleagues, we have not been able to organise parliamentary transport, but as we coordinate, we can always find a way of how to travel. Parliament has facilitated the travelling of the family so the family is catered for. For us we can always arrange in our own time.

THE SPEAKER: In lieu of the band not being here, I have requested the acting Leader of Opposition to lead us in a song that will accompany the body when it is leaving the Chamber.

(Exit of the late hon. Sam Byanagwa)

Once again, hon. Members, I would like to thank you for the time and the contributions. I know it was not easy for you to move from your various constituencies in Uganda to be here today, but you made it. We have done what we could, in the circumstances; to have a proper send off for our colleague who has now left us. 

The recess is still on until 2 February. We will start in the morning of that day with the Business Committee meeting to schedule the business and allocate time accordingly. 

We shall, in the same month, be hosting the East African Legislative Assembly, which will be using this Chamber from 9th to 18th February. Good enough, they will be sitting in the afternoon. So, because of too much business, we have decided that we will be sitting in the morning between 9.30 a.m. and 1.00 p.m. so that by the time they start their sitting at 2.30 p.m. the Chamber is free. 

We could not afford to wait for them to finish before we start because there is a lot to deal with, including considering the electoral reform Bills that were submitted to us. We should pass these laws at least within February or early March to help those organising elections for 2011 internalise and use them accordingly. I thank you very much. The House is adjourned until 2 February 2010 at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 3.21 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 February 2010 at 2.00 p.m.) 


