Tuesday, 30 January 2007

(Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in the first place I want to inform you that in the august House we have, Mr Mark Summer, who has been facilitating the ICT Committee to purchase laptop computers for MPs.  You are most welcome!  

Honourable members, I wish to welcome you back from the Christmas recess and congratulate you for having gone through 2006 and for all the successes you were able to achieve during the year. In particular, I wish to congratulate you for your good performance during the year as far as parliamentary work is concerned. I wish you a prosperous 2007 and may the Almighty God bless you.

Honourable members, when we adjourned last year there were some issues pertaining to your welfare. I wish to report to you that these issues are now in the proper territory and they are being handled positively and soon you will see the results.  You are most welcome.  (Applause)

2.52
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Prof. Ogenga-Latigo): Mr Speaker, I would like, first of all, to thank you for according me this opportunity to make a brief statement. I would like also to welcome all my colleagues from the recess that has been very trying for all of us. I do appreciate, hon. Speaker, that you have been tasked with the responsibility of leading a House that has sometimes been so badly misunderstood and that has therefore faced the wrath of the people.

Mr Speaker, a lot of things happened when we were on recess, one of which became a matter of grave concern to us. Over the weekend, I took the liberty to avail written information to all the members of Parliament to appreciate the gravity of the problems that we face.  Late last week we were in court and certain Ugandans who had been granted bail were required to be produced.  

Mr Speaker, this was the fourth time that a request to produce these members was given to the Prisons Authority.  At the first request when court convened, nobody came to even represent the Prisons Authority. At the second request by the Registrar of the High Court, a Prisons officer came and said that he was carrying out instructions and that it was not possible to produce these Ugandans and furthermore that the court should find the reasons to explain to the Daily Monitor why they couldn’t produce them that day.  

The court exercised maximum patience and asked the Prisons officer to produce these suspects the next day and in fact the court issued a summon to the Commissioner-General of Prisons to appear in person. That day an officer of Prisons came with a letter saying that the Commissioner-General of Prisons could not come because he was on leave. The lawyers representing these Ugandans asked whether the court should not charge these people for contempt.  

The court again exercised maximum patience and set a new date for these people to be produced, which was Wednesday last week.  We duly went to court but the Prisons officers were not there and instead other proceedings were commenced in total disregard of the fact that there was a session for the production of these people and that the court needed an explanation for its record.

Following that particular event, very strong statements emerged from the President of the Uganda Law Society- I think yesterday- these were reported in today’s newspapers concerning two Justices of our honourable courts.  

Honourable Speaker, we have had two days of discussion over this matter.  It is something that pains us not only the people involved and affected; it pains us because many of us even when some are opposed politically to this government did not expect that a situation such as this would again be witnessed in this country.  We know that there are excesses of individuals and we accept them. 

In the last Parliament, hon. Speaker, I, with five other colleagues, soldiers beat us. I carry a scar on my shoulder and forehead - I do. I am available in Parliament for inspection -(Laughter)- the procedures of this honourable House don’t allow me to remove my shirt but those who doubt me can come to my office and see for themselves.

The point I am making is this, that even when that happened we could understand. First of all, where we come from it is very easy to incite the military. So if they beat us maybe because we wanted to show them that we were MPs that could be understood. But when court issues orders to the Commissioner of Prisons to produce the accused before it and the Commissioner defies it, this is a new standard. 

In fact the Principle Judge said that even during the times of those whose hands were seeping with blood, they would still produce you in court, and when the court releases you they would re-arrest you and go and deal with you in the way they wanted. But there have been no incidents when the court ordered Prisons authorities to produce those committed to them by the court and they defied it. 

We find that this is reaching dangerous territory and we thought that Members are made aware of this and that the country is made aware as well. That is why, hon. Speaker, we came to you. We came to you because we know that as Parliament people are looking to us as to what we will do about it. We came to you also so that you know that in whatever we are doing, you enjoy our full confidence as our Speaker and the respect of every Member of us. 

But as members of Parliament, sent to this Parliament by people who expect us to abide by what the Constitution demands of us that is that we defend it, we are under obligation to act in the way we deem fit. We did not want a decision that was made in the several meetings, we had to be your burden because we know we are in a country where if something happened on the floor they would even go and blame the Speaker that why did you allow this. And so we have made a decision, which decision we made with very heavy hearts that we must show our maximum displeasure and contempt for what has been happening in regard to the orders of this court.

Therefore, hon. Speaker, I regret to inform you that we have decided that for an appropriate period of time and until we resolve some of the things that we have planned to do we shall withdraw our services from this House. It is a decision, which we make with deep regret but that is the decision. I thank you for the opportunity and we are sorry that we have to leave the House. Thank you very much.

The Honourable Members of the Opposition thereupon withdrew from the Chamber.

THE SPEAKER: Well I don’t know. It was a statement by the Leader of the Opposition. What I can say is that it is regrettable that our colleagues have left us when we are transacting parliamentary business. We have noted the contents of the statement but I think the fault is not with Parliament and therefore I don’t know what we can do. 

I am surprised because the fault is not ours. If it was ours and for instance we declined to handle what we were suppose to handle then there would be a protest in as far as Parliament is concerned. This is the first day we have come back and somebody is reporting to us when we are not party to what is happening. I regret that they have walked out but I do not understand why there was this move but we respect their decision. 

3.05
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR JUSTICE (Mr Fred Ruhindi): Mr Speaker, this morning the Attorney-General appeared before the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. He brought to our attention that there was a pending application in High Court which is going to be heard tomorrow and that he was also preparing to brief Cabinet tomorrow in order to have a collective position on this matter. 

Therefore discussing in the committee matters, which would in a way pre-empt what may take place between now and tomorrow really is not essential. It is a question of one day. I would certainly have expected some patience from the opposition and it is unfortunate that they went out even before this kind of brief statement could be made. But in my view, since there is a pending application in court, we need to be patient and see how it is disposed of and then we see what next can be done.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

3.06
THE MINISTER OF INTERNAL AFFAIRS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to reinforce the statement made by the Deputy Attorney-General that the Attorney-General this morning and myself appeared before the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Committee and we had very useful and mutually beneficial discussions over this same subject. 

The Attorney-General in particular and I to some extent did emphasise to the parliamentary committee the unequivocal commitment of government to the rule of law and constitutionalism, and did emphasise the fact that government as such has not in any way defied court orders and government has no intentions whatsoever to defy any court orders because of its an equivocal commitment to the rule of law.

The Attorney-General did in fact inform the committee, again as Deputy Attorney- General has said that tomorrow Cabinet will be discussing the matter and a more substantive statement would be made both to the committee and Parliament explaining the situation. 

He also did point out the fact that since the matter is before court, one was limited as to how much one can say over the matter without jeopardising, influencing or affecting the proceedings in court. 

So, Mr Speaker, government is doing what it can. Government is ready to cooperate in every way. Two ministers led by the Attorney-General will go to the committee of Parliament and appropriate statements will be made in this House after due consideration of this important matter by Cabinet. I thank you, Sir.

THE SPEAKER: I want to thank the Deputy Attorney-General and the Minister of Internal Affairs for the brief statements they have made. And from their account, it is very clear that Parliamentary system has even been working on this matter in the name of the Legal and Parliamentary Affairs committee, which has been handling it. 

So, this clears Parliament from whatever is happening. Whether it is wrong or right, we are not a party and we are trying to do our work. Therefore, I thank you for this brief statement. And I think this concludes this issue. 

But before I proceed, I had very good news, which I should have given you first. One of our honourable members, hon. Hajat Nalule Jjuko contributed to the increase of our population some two weeks ago -(Laughter)- She rung me and said she is well. We wish her and the baby good life. Thank you very much.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA Thank you, Mr Speaker. Basing on the gravity of the matter, I would love, if we can have a commitment, to know when we are expecting the statement, because it is unusual for Parliament to proceed like this. So, could we be assured that the report would be read by Thursday?

THE SPEAKER: No. You see, as far as Parliament is concerned, from the account given by the minister, we have done our work and they will report to us. We are more concerned with our system. The other system, the Executive, they will come back and make a statement as the minister has said. We are not the ones who asked when they were going to make the statement. They are the ones who told us on their own accord that they are preparing a statement and we hope it will come as soon as possible in view of what has happened today in Parliament.

03.11
MR ALEX NDEEZI (NRM, PWD Central Region): Mr Speaker, on behalf of the Legal Committee, I want to confirm that it is true that this morning we had a meeting to deliberate on this matter. Our conclusion was that the Legal Committee should draft a report and also a resolution for presentation in this august House for debate. But our hands are now tied. We need your guidance to know if we could do it tomorrow?

THE SPEAKER: Okay, you draft your report as soon as possible. I will be able to accommodate you on the Order Paper of tomorrow if the report is ready. It is an important matter, which we have to dispose of. (Applause)

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

UGANDA NATIONAL CULTURE POLICY
03.12
THE MINISTER OF GENDER, LABOUR AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT (Mrs Syda Bbumba): Mr Speaker, hon. colleagues, I wish to lay on Table the Uganda National Culture Policy. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. Let the document be handled by the appropriate committee of Parliament and then subsequently report to us.

LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (PUBLIC PROCUREMENT AND DISPOSAL OF PUBLIC ASSETS) REGULATIONS, 2006 BEFORE PARLIAMENT

03.13
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT (Mrs Hope Mwesigye): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The provisions of the Local Governments Act relating to local government tender boards were amended by the Local Governments (Amendment) Act No.2 of 2006 in order to harmonise the procurement function in local governments with those in the Central Government. 

The Local Governments (Amendment) Act, 2006 abolished the local governments tender boards and replaced them with a contracts committees, which are to carry out the same functions like those in central government ministries and departments. The contract committees in districts and municipalities have been duly established. 

The regulations before us namely, the Local Government (Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assents) Regulations, shall guide and regulate local government councils, administrative units and other entities using public funds in functions and operations relating to the procurement of goods, services, works and disposal of public assets under the Local Governments Act read together with the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets Act, 2003.

Mr Speaker, the Minister of Local Government issued the Local Governments (Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets) Regulations, 2006 under Statutory Instrument No.39 under section 175 of the Local Governments Act and this was gazetted on the 4 August 2006. 

Section 175(3) of the Local Governments Act, Chapter 243, requires the minister responsible for local government to lay before Parliament any instrument made under that section.

Mr Speaker, upon that background, I now wish to lay before Parliament the Local Governments (Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets) Regulations, 2006 Statutory Instrument No.39.  I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. minister. Well, I must point out that from the papers, I have realised that there is confusion about the roles of these two committees. There is a committee called the Local Government Accounts Committee. Its work is to deal with the accounts of the local governments. But there is also sessional committee- I think it is public service or local government, which should be handling matters pertaining to local government issues other than the Local Government Accounts Committee. 

So for this particular work, the Sessional Committee on Local Government should examine the regulations. I do not know whether you realised the confusion, but I hope I have cleared it.

capitalisation of the Housing Finance Company of Uganda limited

03.16
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE  (GENERAL DUTIES) (Mr Fred Omach):
Mr Speaker, I beg to lay on Table a paper on the capitalisation of the Housing Finance Company of Uganda limited.  I beg to lay.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. So this is capitalisation of Housing Finance Company of Uganda. So, let the Committee on Infrastructure examine the document then report to us. 

MR OMACH: Mr Speaker, I beg that the Committee on Finance should examine it because the capitalisation of the housing finance company is to enable it to give out mortgage loans to the people of Uganda.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, so it is the Committee on Finance.

03.18
MRS RUTH TUMA (NRM, District Woman Representative, Jinja): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would like to wish the House a happy New Year. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you.

MRS TUMA: Mr Speaker and honourable members of Parliament, allow me to observe that one of the important activities, which were undertaken in the Seventh Parliament was to launch the Uganda Parliament Children’s Forum, an activity, which you, the hon. speaker kindly performed on 15 July 2005. 

Mr Speaker, I am pleased to report that in the Eight Parliament, I assumed leadership of the Uganda Parliamentary Forum for Children. I further led a delegation to Northern Uganda and I would also like to mention that since the beginning of the Eight Parliament, indeed the Seventh Parliament as the founder of the forum has continued to blossom. This is a result of the active support for which the forum is very grateful to your office, Parliament and also to our partners Save the Children in Uganda.  

The activities we have been able to do include: recruitment of new members and I am glad to report that we now have a membership of over 100 members of Parliament. And it is a forum, which is embracing all parties; it is an all-party forum cutting across all issues concerning children.

One of the other activities we performed in the Seventh Parliament was to launch a children’s manifesto, which among other things has helped us to focus on children in the North. I would like to believe that the honourable members of Parliament have been able to get some copies of our report. In our different discussion groups we focusing on the plight of children and we continue to hold other meetings with other fora to improve on the situation of the children.

Mr Speaker, the entire party mission to the North was alarmed when we got there.  The forum was able to visit different groups; we were able to hold discussions with the leadership of the North, the religious leaders, the children, the political leaders and the traditional leaders of the North.  

The issue we were to address was to access the children’s’ situation in the North; what has happened, what is not happening, what we think we can put in place and putting all those issues on the agenda of Parliament.  

This is the report that I am tabling for discussion by this House. It is our appreciation that this Parliament will step forward to give back to the children in northern Uganda what they have lost in the period of insurgency; that is love during their childhood. They would love to have food, to be loved, have security, shelter, education, healthcare and many other things.  

Mr Speaker, I would like to urge members of the Eighth Parliament to read this report, internalise it and be in a position to debate it in the interests of improving the conditions of the children in northern Uganda. 

Mr Speaker, I would like to lay this report on Table for members to digest.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairperson and members of the committee for this concern. 

Members, please read the report, and at an appropriate time we may have to discuss and see what we can do. Thank you very much.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

3.23
THE FIRST DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER/MINISTER IN CHARGE OF EAST AFRICAN AFFAIRS (Mr Eriya Kategaya): Mr Speaker, mine is a report to the whole House, of what has been going on in the process of integrating East Africa.  

Mr Speaker, last year I briefed the Committee of the Whole House on the final affairs on this issue. Before we went for the Christmas recess I had circulated my statement to the Members of the House and this morning we had to produce more copies. I hope each Member has got a copy.  

Also, to accompany my statement, we issued a report of the Committee of East Africa, of fast tracking the East African Federation. It was compiled by hon. Wako, the Attorney-General of Kenya. I hope the Members also have the copies, because we gave out about 360 copies of this report.  

Hon. Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament, it is a great honour for me to address and update you on an issue of great importance in our region. As you may be aware, there is a growing momentum in East Africa for integration with the ultimate goal of an East African political federation. You are also aware of our contribution to mobilising support to the idea of the East African Federation based on our conviction, vision and commitment towards a united, peaceful and prosperous Africa.  

Article 5(2) of the treaty establishing the East African Community sets out a broad vision for the eventual unification of the East African partner states by stating, and I quote:

“The partner states undertake to establish among themselves, in accordance with the provisions of this treaty, a customs union, a common market, subsequently a monetary union and ultimately a political federation in order to strengthen and regulate the industrial, commercial, infrastructural, cultural, social, political and other relations with the partner states, to the end that there shall be accelerated, harmonious and balanced development and expansion of economic activities, the benefit of which shall be equally shared.” 

The Treaty hence provides for a step-by-step process towards integration of the three East African countries. 

Mr Speaker, let me add that here now the countries are five because the Republic of Burundi and the Republic of Rwanda were admitted in November last year. But as you are also aware, our three heads of state met in Nairobi on August 28th and 29th 2004, and took a broad view of the status of the great East African Federation process, and examined ways and means of deepening and accelerating the process.  

Our President, as you know, has been arguing for a long time that economic integration of the East African countries is not enough, especially given the strategic security of the African people, and there is, therefore, an urgent need to accelerate political integration to provide impetus to economic integration for the benefit of the present and the future generation of Africa. This is due to the following factors:

1.	The tendency for economic integration to be slow in the absence of political integration.
2.	The tendency for the benefits of integration under pure economic integration to take longer to spread around the community evenly.  
3.	The weaker negotiating positions of countries when they act as individuals rather than a block. This is evident in case of WTO, AGOA, et cetera.
4.	The duplication of effort resulting in waste of resources when countries act individually in competing for investment in similar sectors.
5.	The inconveniences to communities arising from drawn colonial boundaries in the contest of families as well as their cultural units being split.
6.	People’s consciousness also being split as a result of colonial boundaries as for instance, they continue to act as Kenyans, Ugandans and Tanzanians instead of acting as East Africans.
7.	The borders incapacitating us from giving each other support on account of sovereignty ropes that tie us into different political entities.
8.	Difficulties of achieving integrated use of natural resources for a common good.
9.	The elimination of our individual countries lacking serious capacity to develop defence industries and advanced military technology.
10.	The fact that land locked countries such as Uganda are held hostage by these national boundaries.
11.	The glaring evidence of misuse of common natural resources due to lack of a common policy to exploit them for the common good.
12.	The danger that Africans are misled to hate each other and taught at the same time to love their enemies.

Accordingly, the President has proposed the following integration goals that honourable members may wish to refresh their minds with:

Political Integration: This should facilitate achievement of a certain degree of cultural homogeneity, or at least compatibility, including linguistic similarities and possibly share the historic and institutional experiences. It is with this in mind that we have the proposal to fast track the political federation for East Africa, given that our countries have demonstrated common or shared historical, cultural, linguistic and administrative linkages and share the past experiences.

Economic Integration: The aim is to strengthen the African economic community and to forge deeper economic integration. The achievement of this goal requires: 

i)	Harmonisation and rationalisation of existing regional economic communities.

ii)	Infrastructure development within and among states.

iii)	Harmonisation of regulations, policies and laws to facilitate free movement of goods, capital, services and people.

iv)	Investment in human resource development including skills, technology development, and centres of excellence to ensure Africa’s competitiveness and bridging of the digital divide.

v)	Application of science and technology for transformation of African economies.

vi)	Strengthening Pan-African institutions such as AU, the Pan-African Parliament, etc.

Shared Defence and Security: the emphasis here is on the need to critically analyse the importance of defence and security, given the inherent danger associated with weak, fragile and fragmented political and economic entities, failed states leading to regional conflicts and threats from terrorism. It is important to examine suitable regional and continental defence and security arrangements and to worry about and oppose those who, for partisan interests, threaten our fundamental interests. 

Mr Speaker and honourable members, it is within this context that the three heads of state felt it imperative to meet in Nairobi in August 2004 to re-examine our regional integration process in East Africa. In the context of the communiqué, which was adopted at the Summit, it was resolved to expedite and compress the process of integration so that the ultimate goal of a political federation is achieved through a fast–track mechanism. A committee to this effect was established to immediately develop and recommend a roadmap for fast tracking a political federation. The committee comprised the following six eminent representatives of our three partner states:

1)	Hon Amos Wako, Attorney-General of Kenya.
2)	Prof. Haidari Amani, an Executive Director from Tanzania.
3)	Dr Ezra Suruma, who is now Minister of Finance but by then was in the Secretariat as Director of Economic Affairs and he was secretary to the committee.
4)	Margaret Chemengich from Kenya. She is a retired Permanent Secretary.
5)	Mohammed Fakih Mohammed from Tanzania, a member.
6)	Prof. Turyamuhika, who is also from Uganda.

Terms of reference for the committee:

The Wako Committee was asked to examine ways and means of expediting and compressing the process on integration of the East African Community. To this end, it was to:

(i)	Evaluate the implementation of decisions already made by the Summit, Council of Ministers and the various organs of the Community and identify hurdles and obstacles that have hindered their efficient and effective implementation.

(ii)	Examine whether the five-year period for the establishment of the Customs Union, from the coming forth of the Protocol on the Establishment of the East African Customs Union, can be compressed.

(iii)	To determine an appropriate timeframe for the operationalisation of a common market and monetary union in accordance with the provisions of the East African Community Treaty.

(iv)	Determine an appropriate mechanism and time frame for the realisation of the East African political federation within the shortest possible time.

The Wako Committee delivered its report in November 2004. I recommend that honourable members, who have not yet done so, take time to read the report of the Committee on the Fast-tracking of the East African Political Federation, which my ministry has already dispatched to the Clerk of this Parliament. 

You will note that the report brings out clearly the historical context of the East African integration. The main highlights on that particular point being:

a)	Past integration efforts:

(i)	The late Mwalimu Julius Nyerere’s proposal in 1960 that the independence of Tanganyika be delayed until both Uganda and Kenya were independent so that the three East African countries could form a federation.
(ii)	The Nairobi Declaration of 5th June 1963 by the leaders of the three East African states, to the effect that an East African Federation was to be established before the end of 1964.
(iii)	The East African Community between 1967 and 1977 showed benefits that East Africa yielded to the people of the community.

b)	The revival of East African Community:

(i)	East African Community countries negotiated and signed a mediation agreement in 1984 under which there was provision for possible future pursuit of co-operation. Mr Speaker, if I may explain, the mediation agreement was there to distribute the leftovers when the community was broken up in 1977. 
(ii)	In October 1991, on the sidelines of the Commonwealth Heads of State Meeting in Harare, Zimbabwe, the three partner states agreed to revive the East African co-operation - Mr Speaker, Dr Rugunda was whispering something in my ear.
(iii)	In November 1991 in Nairobi, the heads of state issued a formal communiqué to revive the co-operation and set up a committee of Ministers of Foreign Affairs.
(iv)	30th November 1993, the three partner states signed an agreement on East African co-operation thereby establishing the Tripartite Commission to steer the process for the new corporation.
(v)	On 14th March 1996, the establishment of the Secretariat. 
(vi)	The three heads of state signed the Treaty for the Establishment of the East African Community on 30 November 1999. The Treaty came into force on 07 July 2000. 

Honourable members will also note that under chapter three of the Wako Committee Report, entitled “the East African Community 1999 to present”, the committee reviewed the status of implementation of the programme and projects of the Community, highlighted the obstacles and identified outstanding elements of integration for urgent implementation. 

Appendix V of the report gives the summary of key decisions and status of implementation of decisions of the Summit, the Council and other institutions of the Community since 1999.

Under the title, “Status of the East African Integration”, the Wako Report summarises very well the status of the four key stages of integration as follows:

a) Customs Union:

The Protocol for the Establishment of the Customs Union was signed on 02 March 2004 and came into effect on 01 January 2005. As honourable members know, the Customs Union entails free movement of goods. In order to facilitate the smooth operation of the Customs Union, harmonisation of policies, programmes and projects to achieve convergence continues to be vigorously pursued. 

b) Common Market:

Honourable members also know that the smooth functioning of a common market entails enhanced macro-economic policy harmonisation and coordination particularly with regard to fiscal regimes.

While the Treaty provides for a gradual and progressive stage by stage implementation of the various phases of integration, in practice, however, all the phases have been administratively and progressively implemented. This is despite the fact that the heads of state only recently, at their seventh ordinary summit held in Arusha on 05 April 2006, directed the start of formal negotiations for a protocol on the common market from 01 July 2006.

It is envisaged that the protocol should be in operation by January 2010. Under that protocol, the issues to be addressed would be free movement within the East African region of factors of production, that is to say, labour and capital, services and right of residence. 

c) Monetary Union:

Our three partner states have adopted similar policy reform programmes leading to convergence in macro-economic policies. For example, the three countries have achieved currency convertibility. We now need to pay closer attention to the macro-economic policy convergence criteria. We also need to give priority to the harmonization of macro-economic policies, with particular regard to exchange rates, interest rates, monetary and fiscal policies.

d) Political Federation:

As honourable members are aware, the East African Community has already established some institutions, which is a basis for political federation, such as the East African Court of Justice and the East African Legislative Assembly. In addition, there are memoranda of understanding guiding cooperation in defence, security and foreign policy.

I am also happy to note that regarding the trade facilitation, investment and support services, the report highlights that the development agenda requires a more focused approach towards trade facilitation, investment in infrastructure as well as in the provision of support services. 

As the report notes, indeed a number of trade facilitation measures and instruments have been signed and ratified, such as: 

•	The Tripartite Agreement on Road Transport, which aims at enhancing efficiency in all transportation in the region. 

•	Protocol on Standardisation, Quality Assurance, Meteorology and Testing. 

Furthermore, a number of sectoral programmes have been implemented in agriculture, social sector, environment and natural resources, tourism and wildlife management. These are critical in the integration process, with the potential to create a strong foundation for political federation.

Huddles and Obstacles to Integration:

The above achievements notwithstanding, the momentum for the East African Community integration efforts towards a single market and investment area has been slow. This has been occasioned by a number of huddles and obstacles as identified by the committee, notably:

(i)	Governance and institutional constraints.
(ii)	Budgetary constraints
(iii)	Lack of enforcement machinery and sanction mechanisms.
(iv)	Lengthy decision-making processes.
(v)	Legal and administrative handicaps.
(vi)	Capacity constraints.

In my view, these constraints are surmountable if we act together as East Africa. 

It is good that the committee carried out consultations with stakeholders because we want the process of the East African integration to be people-led so that our people own it, advance it and sustain it. When you read chapter four of the Wako Committee’s report, you will be able to see the findings from the stakeholders’ consultations. 

Highlighted under this chapter are the expectations and fears on the federation. It is pleasing to note that during consultations by the committee, it emerged that the majority of people of East Africa are united in their quest for the federation. The only difference is on how and when. It is also reported that East African people have called for a people-centred federation, which is in accordance with the new treaty.

You will, however, also note from the report that a few of our people expressed some misgivings over the federation citing issues such as trade and development imbalances among partner states, fear of loss of sovereignty, loss of jobs, loss of revenue, loss of land. To me, these concerns, important as they may be, cannot outweigh the benefits of our coming together and acting together. Certainly, our integration is the solution to many of these problems. 

For instance, the question of sovereignty which people talk about, sovereignty is the ability to make your decisions without being interfered with. Somewhere it means what you will decide is respected. When we act individually as a country, sovereignty is compromised. Normally, our decision would be looked at but not quite respected, but if we act as East Africa, as a block, our sovereignty actually is enhanced because our voice will be heard and respected in international communities. 

Certainly, our integration is a solution to many of these problems, yes. Besides, details would be worked out to address those fears, such as the principle of “subsidiarity” that is already incorporated in the Treaty. 

And the question of land, for example, we could leave land as a territorial matter, not for this federal matter. Here, for example, we say land belongs to the people and each local community controls land. No problem about it. 

I understand internationally, there is also noticeable uneasiness over the creation of a new and a bigger East African Community Federation. As the committee pointed out in its report, the uneasiness arises from the potential strategic military and security tilt in the balance of power in Africa and internally as a result of the creation of this new nation, with total population of almost 100 million people, covering a surface area of 1,778,547 square kilometres and controlling the second largest fresh water lake in the world, Lake Victoria with a total surface area of 116,647 square kilometres with all its immense natural resources. That is their problem. Besides, this fear is over exaggerated because bigger though we may be in geographical size and population, our combined GDP per capita will be approximately US $300 and we will still be within the least developed countries category. Our interest is to pool our resources together, to build a reasonable force capable of protecting and promoting the people and wealth of East Africa. 

The Wako Report also mentions the concern of proliferation of membership by our countries to various regional and international organisations. Tanzania, for instance, is a member of SADC while Kenya and Uganda are members of COMESA. We are cognisant of this issue and we agree that practical problems arise from multiple memberships to various regional and international organisations. Besides, in the context of negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements with the European Union (EU-EPA), Uganda and Kenya are configured under Eastern and Southern Africa while Tanzania is configured under SADC.  

The Customs Union envisages a common East African external trade policy for the three East African partner states. However, the implication of the current configuration is that Kenya and Uganda will adopt a different external policy from that of Tanzania when the EU-EPAs are concluded.

In the context of WTO, Uganda and Tanzania are under the least developed countries while Kenya is considered a developing country. It is necessary for the three countries to rationalise and harmonise their configuration under the EU-EPA process and to be treated under the same group under WTO in order to achieve a common external trade policy. Honourable members, our three countries are in the process of addressing this issue. 

Now let us examine the options for East African Community integration as explored by the Wako Committee, which we set up. The following are the options they looked at:  

1. Compression of the current stages of integration: this option entails undertaking the integration process progressively through a step-by-step approach. It involves a systematic movement from customs union, common market, monetary union and ultimately a political federation. However, it means shortening the period of attainment of each of the integration processes. Members would like to note that these processes are not in time frames, apart from the customs union.

Advantage: I agree with the committee’s observation that compressing the four stages enables a political federation to be achieved sooner.

Limitations: Honourable members, you will also note the limitations of this option, which the committee brought to our attention, namely:

(i)	No time frames are spelt out in the Treaty for moving from one integration stage to another.
(ii)	Time frames will depend on the political will of partner states and the flow of tangible benefits to the general public and other interested groups.
(iii)	Pressures to beat deadlines are generated and these in turn may create tension and delays in implementation of decisions.  
(iv)	It is difficult to achieve across-the-board tangible benefits for each stage.  
(v)	The option ignores the role of integration stages acting as building blocks for a political federation.

2. Overlapped and parallel process: this option is similar to option one except for the possibility of overlapping some aspects of the integration stages.

Among the advantages that the committee identified is that parallel activities can be undertaken simultaneously. Honourable members, you must have observed that this is already ongoing although in a manner, which is unplanned and segmented. In order for honourable members to appreciate this point, I will recommend that you read sections 306 through to 312 of the report, which summarises various milestones that the East African Community has attained at each stage of the integration process as well as outstanding issues to be addressed.  

Limitation: as a limitation, the Wako Committee cautioned that speed of integration depends on benefits realised and how they are shared among partner states.

3. Immediate establishment of an East African Federation: this option entails political federation preceding economic integration. This means partner states will agree to immediately cede the bulk of their sovereign authority to the supranational body, that is, the East African Community. Accordingly, the executive arm of the supranational body immediately takes control of the monetary and financial policies, defence and foreign affairs. The EAC organs, namely, the Summit, Council, sectoral committees and the Secretariat share executive powers while the East African Legislative Assembly and the East African Court of Justice have federal legislative and judicial powers respectively.

This option has many advantages as spelt out by the Wako Committee, notably: 

(i)	Desired economic and monetary policies are accelerated and hence the faster economic process.  
(ii)	Avoids or minimises the current divided loyalty between national and regional interests when negotiating and implementing economic integration processes.  
(iii)	Cost effective management of shared natural resources, for example the Lake Victoria basin, from member states.  
(iv)	Increased levels of political stability and greater regional security due to the formation of a single military and security body hence an enabling environment for investments and sustainable development.

Limitations:  I also note the limitations mentioned by the Wako Committee, such as: 

(i)	Political federation depends on the extent partner states are willing to cede sovereignty.  
(ii)	There is a need for economic, financial and organisational capacity to effectively handle the necessary preparatory benchmarks for a federation within a short period of time.  
(iii)	The existence of constitutional review processes among the member states that do not take into account the political federation.

Given the dire condition in which our continent and countries are in and keeping in mind some of the reasons for integration cited earlier, some of us would prefer this option, but I am also aware that there are some forces that are sceptical about this fast tracking. 

Let us first look at what the committee identified as the conditions for creating a sustainable political federation. Honourable members will note that the report emphasises that the issue is not just establishing political federation but rather to put in place a sustainable political federation. The committee went ahead to emphasise the following conditions to achieve this:

(i)	Strong economic integration;
(ii)	Common political interest and vision;
(iii)	Similar political valuation systems and preferences;
(iv)	Similar identity and feeling of solidarity;
(v)	Need to sustain political will and public support for the community on the basis of equal flow of benefits to the partner states;
(vi)	Provision of necessary resources to finance the community organs, projects and programmes; and
(vii)	Harmonisation of national and regional policies supportive of regional integration including federation.

Honourable members will note that based on the above recommendations, the Wako Committee has recommended option (B) namely overlapped and parallel process. I personally have no problem with this option though, as I have said above, I would have preferred option (C) which is the immediate establishment of the East African Federation because of the said merits pointed out in the report of the committee. 

I am happy that the committee did not recommend a lengthy process, which would go stage by stage, and delay our progress because of unnecessary diplomatic procedures. I hope honourable members will accept the option that will accelerate our integration for faster achievement taking advantage of a clear political will and commitment on the part of the top leadership with the partner states. For achieving that goal, the desire by various state and non-state actors in East Africa for: a political federation, the importance of the involvement of honourable people of East Africa as central actors in the process towards a political federation, a recognition of substantial progress achieved in terms of initiating, strengthening and deepening the integration process.

Honourable members may be aware that there will be need for key strategic interventions required for fast tracking the East Africa Federation. They are well brought out in chapter 6 of the committee’s report. The guiding principle for this chapter is that the establishment of a political federation should not wait for all the expectations of the East African integration to be realised. 

Rather the preparatory and traditional stages should focus on those areas considered necessary and sufficient for establishing the federation. To me this is a sound argument in favour of expediting the process of integration. 

Honourable members, you will also note that the period towards political federation falls under three phases namely: the preparatory phase; a transitional phase for a federation focusing on implementation of recommended strategic areas; and a consolidated phase for the federation. This leads to a fully-fledged federation with institutions including an elected executive order, legislation and a duly constituted federal judiciary. 

During the preparatory phase, we should be able to address the institutional framework and financial inputs needed to manage the transitional stage. The transitional stage should include the implementation of the customs union, common market and monetary union. Successful positioning of these stages of economic integration would be a foundation for a strong political federation. 

Other components are: the development agenda, constitutional issues and finance. The consolidation phase will finalise the process towards the establishment of an electoral system ready for the election of a federal government. 

This phase, however, will come after the federal government has been established as per the Constitution to be formulated and agreed upon. 

Honourable members, can I also look at the key features of the proposed institutional framework including: 

(1) 	An East African Federation Advisory Council to be chaired by a prominent East African statesman. The East African Federation Council would advice the summit on issues related to the implementation process leading to the federation.

(2) 	The East African Court and East African Legislative Assembly to be structurally linked from the secretariat and strengthened as self-accounting organ. The three East African ministries to be created, each to be headed by a minister under the following portfolios: Finance and Administration; Common Markets; and Planning and Development. 

	A deputy secretary-general will be assigned to a ministry as a permanent or principal secretary.

(3) We have a constitutional commission, task forces, information, communication and publicity departments. The entire secretariat is to be headed by a secretary-general who would also serve as a secretary to the East African Federation Council. 

The current East African secretariat will be completely restructured to serve the recommended East African structure.

Establishment of a resource centre for the community:

One other important aspect the honourable members should note is the financing of the transition towards the East African Federation. Given the expanded mandate of the community, the report affirms that the traditional method of accessing partner states to finance the activities of the community is neither adequate nor sustainable. The report recommends for a more assured and timely funding.  In that regard the following sources of funding are proposed:

Customs revenue levy where each partner state contributes to the community either one percent of her customs revenue or 0.0025 percent of her external imports.

Foreign exchange tax of between 0.0044 percent and one percent on all foreign exchange purchases in East Africa.

Lake Victoria conservation tax of six percent of the value on all the fish and fish products or fish factories that process fish from the lake.

You may also wish to look at the road map of action for the East African Federation as proposed by the committee under chapter 7 of their report. I agree with the observations made by the committee that while these recommendations may appear ambitious, they are realistic and implementable. If they are accepted and implemented, they would achieve the objective of having an East African Federation within the time framework stipulated.

Honourable Speaker and honourable members, the report that I have taken you through was presented to the heads of state at the sixth ordinary summit on 26 November 2004. I wish to report that the heads of state commended the good work and the deep analysis contained therein. They also observed that it provided a realistic plan of implementation towards the fast tracking approach towards the East African Federation. The summit also noted the strong desire of the people of East Africa for a full federation and to be at the centre stage of the process towards the establishment of the federation. 

The report was further deliberated upon at the third extraordinary meeting of the heads of state held in Dar-es-Salaam from May 29th to 30th 2005. In their communiqué, the heads of state among others reaffirmed their commitment to the East African Federation. They called for the establishment of national consultative mechanisms in the three partner states to work in consultation and obtain views and comments from all key stakeholders on the best way forward towards the East African political federation.

At the seventh summit held in Arusha on 05 April 2006, the Heads of State further reiterated their support for the road map proposed in the 2004 report of the committee on fast tracking of the East African Federation and they appointed hon. Beatrice Kiraso, whom all of you recall was a Member of this house, Deputy Secretary General to oversee and coordinate the process of fast tracking of the East African Political Federation. 

Honourable members, you may also recall the decision of the heads of state to create ministries to be responsible for East African Community affairs, which by the second summit meeting of 5 April 2006, Kenya and Tanzania had already implemented. The Uganda implemented the decision when His Excellency, the president, appointed me in May 2006 to take charge of the Ministry of East African Community Affairs.

Having three ministers responsible for East African Community affairs in place further boosted the quest for East African federation agent. A lot of progress has been made in the fast tracking of the East African Political Federation. Honourable members, you may recall that on 13 October 2006, the three heads of state simultaneously launched national consultative mechanisms in their capitals for fast tracking of the East African Political Federation. 

The National Consultative Committees (NCC) appointed in each partner state began their work in November 2006, which is expected to go through April, May and June 2007. 

In Uganda, Cabinet approved the appointment of 18 persons on the national committee to coordinate national consultation of the fast tracking of the federation. Dr Steven Akabway heads the committee, which is representative of all the strata and segments of our population. The members of the NCC are not present in the house today, Mr Speaker, because they are in the field outside Kampala gathering information from the wanainchi. But the list of the members is given here – I don’t think I have to read all of it –(Interruption)   

THE SPEAKER: Maybe for record, please. 

MR KATEGAYA: Alright, Mr Speaker. The National Coordinator is Dr Steven Akabway; the Deputy National Coordinator is hon. Nshimye Sebutulo. Other members are: 

•	Hon. Bintu Lukumu Jalia
•	Hon. Ovonji Odida
•	Hon. Yonah Kanyomozi
•	Hon. Michael Sebalu
•	Hon. Zachary Olum
•	Hon. Rose Munyira Wabwire
•	Hon Rosemary Najjemba
•	Mr L.O. Ongaba
•	Mr Joseph Okwakwor
•	Mr Kintu Nyago
•	Eng. Dagada Watala
•	Mr Hillary Obonyo
•	Prof J. Kwesiga
•	Dr Elijah Mushemeza and
•	Mr Henry Makmot.

 The following are their terms of reference:

1)	To coordinate the national consultation in fast tracking the East African Political Federation.

2)	Using the instruments that have been developed by the East African Secretariat for information dissemination and collection of views, organising meeting, workshops and other forum, as may be deemed necessary for the efficient and effective completion of this assignment.

3)	Disseminating information to the public about the East African Community in general and national through TV, radio, print and electronic media.

4)	Enlighten the general populace of the regional cooperation/integration through educating people on the benefits, risks and fears of integration and explain the structure of the federation, functions and responsibility within the federation and the roadmap of establishing the political federation through rallies, meetings, seminars and workshops.

5)	To widely consult with and collect views and comments of all key stakeholders in the political federation process in the East African Federation Community.

6)	Generate public debate with the view to harmonise opinions and comments.

7)	Compile and analyse the views and opinions collected during the consultation process.

8)	Prepare and present the findings to both Cabinet and Parliament before being forwarded to the East African Council of Ministers for submission to the summit in July 2007.

The nation consultative mechanism is to utilise the government and local authorities structures, especially the districts and sub-county levels in order to sensitise stakeholders up to the grass root level and quote their views in an effective and most efficient manner. 

The National Consultative Committee (NCC) has been facilitated with office space, secretarial and auxiliary staff as well as computers and Internet services so that the committee works in an enabling environment. 

My ministry is developing a website, which will be ready next month. The NCC is housed on 3rd Floor Post Office Building Yusuf Lule road, but we are moving to second floor in maybe two-week time. The NCC has been covering Kampala and is due to move upcountry after Christmas. As I talk now, they are in the eastern and Buganda region. 

Mr Speaker, it is with this overall context that government is consulting widely with all stakeholders including Members of Parliament and others. I, therefore, wish to request you, as the elected representatives of our people, to take note of the report of the work committee appointed by the three heads of state on the fast tracking of the East African Federation. 

Take note of the appointment of the Uganda National Consultative Committee, which is now gathering the views of all stakeholders up to grass root level; it is also soliciting your views on the fast tracking of the federation. We request for your support to the work of the national consultative committee when they visit your constituencies. And lastly, to support the recommendations of the report the national consultative committee will have prepared at the end of the work.

Mr Speaker, I thank you very much and the honourable members for listening to me when presenting this “short report”. (Laughter) 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, Minister, for that report. Honourable members, that is the report by the minister and according to our rules, which are subject for review, it does not attract debate. However, I think the committee is looking into this, to see what to do. You can only ask questions. As you note, it is a very long report. The minister has ably read it over a period of time and has referred you to the report, which was made by the committee chaired by Hon. Wako, the Attorney General of Kenya. Although it does not attract debate, maybe after you have read the two documents and internalised this statement and you have also read the report, you will be in position to have a meaningful debate. 

The complaint I have heard is that, it is only the Parliament of Uganda that has not made a comment on the fast-tracking report. The other two Parliaments, Tanzania and Kenya, have already done so. I think this is the opportunity for us, having received this statement, to do the needful. I do not know how we will do it. Should we commission our committee relevant to East Africa to study this report and make a report and then when they present it we can make our contributions? I think we can do that so that we can meaningfully handle it.

MR KATEGAYA: Mr Speaker, as you rightly said, I think there is a need for the Parliament to have a full debate on this process. Now there are a number of documents. As I have said, there is the treaty itself then there is the Wako report and now there is my statement today. I would suggest that these be availed to the Committee on Foreign Affairs, that is where I had reported before, and then they prepare something, which we could come and debate as a House. As a Minister, I would be comfortable if I knew that the House supports the process. It will be important. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Is that agreeable?

MR ONYANGO KAKOBA: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I thank the Rt hon. Deputy Prime Minister for the statement. On behalf of the committee, I would like to report that I had a discussion with the Rt hon. First Deputy Prime Minister when we were in Arusha for the summit and when we came back. We had agreed that we would come to the committee, discuss and then present a report in this House, which will be debated.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, then it is agreed. Let us take that as our decision for the time being.

MINISTERIAL STATEMENT

THE SPEAKER: Is there another statement? You see, this was the original Order Paper but the minister made his so, I do not think there is another statement by the Minister of Foreign Affairs.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO INTRODUCE A PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL
4.15
MR CHARLES NGABIRANO (NRM, Rwampara County, Mbarara): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When this new Order Paper was made, I was not consulted. But before we broke off for leave, I had told this House that the Bill was in process. For purposes of harmony, I was advised to consult with the relevant ministry and also my political party. That process is still pertaining. So, it is prudent that this motion be put as “Business to follow” and I also fast track it to ensure that it comes in due course. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: Okay.

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES

THE SPEAKER: Well, this is a report to be presented by hon. Odit because he is the chairman and he has to be from the Opposition. Unfortunately, you know what has happened. We shall look into this matter so that they join us as soon as possible. I think we cannot handle it. 

MR TOM BUTIME: Mr Speaker, the report is ready but we have been disorganised by our chairman being a Member of the Opposition. We have agreed that tomorrow we will be ready to present this report. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Thank you very much. 

PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF SOCIAL SERVICES ON THE MAKERERE UNIVERSITY STRIKE

THE SPEAKER: Do you have the copies of the report?

4.17
THE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL SERVICES (Mr James Kubeketerya): Mr Speaker, the report is being circulated. 

This is the long awaited report by the Sessional Committee on Social Services on the strike and closure of Makerere University.

Introduction:

The strike by the lecturers at Makerere University and the subsequent closure of the university has generated a lot of debate in the county. The Committee on Social Services, which is mandated with the oversight role of the education sector, was equally concerned. The committee was concerned about the public outcry and that called for the intervention of Parliament. 

Mr Speaker, before I proceed, I want to say that this report has taken long and it has been overtaken by events. But for record purposes, we have to present it.

I am pleased to inform this House that when I approached the Speaker over the matter, he accepted to call the Committee on Social Services from recess to meet and discuss the closure of the university and make an input on the way forward.

Methodology:

The committee invited stakeholders to a joint meeting and these included:

a)	The Ministry of Education and Sports
b)	The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
c)	Makerere University Council
d)	The Makerere University Academic Staff Association (MUASA) Executive
e)	National Organisation of Trade Unions and
f)	Non-teaching staff of Makerere University.

The Chairperson and Members of the Committee on Gender, Labour and Social Development participated in these meetings.

Issues of concern to the committee:

Honourable members, the Committee on Social Services, in preparation to discuss the Makerere University strike, outlined the following issues as pertinent in order to guide the committee in establishing the way forward:

a)	To establish the gap of each category: salary paid by government and the desired salary level of remuneration by the lecturers.

b)	To establish the funding gap; that is what the university finances from the appropriation-in-aid and what government finances as subvention.

c)	Establish the exact collections from appropriation-in-aid and how the funds are utilised.

d)	Establish the outcome of the discussion between government (that is His Excellency, the President, the ministries of Education and Sports, Public Service and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development) and Makerere University Academic Staff Association (MUASA).

Background: 

The demands by Makerere University lecturers for a better pay go as far back as 1988. But the current crisis emanates from 2004, when the lecturers were promised a salary enhancement by the government. In April 2004, MUASA resolved to lay down their tools due to poor remuneration. 

On 13 April 2004, His Excellency, the President met all the academic staff of Makerere University at the then International Conference Centre, now Kampala Serena Hotel. The teaching staff from all public universities also attended this meeting. The committee was informed that at this meeting, the Makerere University staff presented their grievance of poor remuneration and requested that a professor, the highest paid among the academic staff, be paid a basic salary of Shs 2.8 million and also submitted basic salary proposals for the other levels of staff.   

The President is reported to have accepted the amount proposed and undertook that government would pay this amount in the financial years 2004/05 and 2005/06. Following the meeting with the President, the Prime Minister on 13 April 2004 wrote to the then chairperson of MUASA (see Appendix 1) indicating government commitment to pay them as promised by the President. 

On 18th June 2004, the Prime Minister followed the above-mentioned letter with other letters (Appendix 2) addressed to the vice-chancellors of all public universities and the Principal of Makerere University Business School indicating that the President accepted the proposals for salary increases as presented by MUASA. 

On 16 October 2006, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote to the Minister of Education and Sports indicating that the enhanced salary increase for the academic staff was gross. MUASA interpreted this to imply that government had changed position on its earlier pledge of paying the proposed salary enhancement as basic salary. MUASA sought clarification from the Ministry of Education and Sports and that of Finance, Planning and Economic Development but the government explanation that the salary enhancement was gross rather than basic did not satisfy MUASA and the lecturers therefore resolved to lay down their tools which marked the beginning of the strike. 

The academic staff subsequently held meetings with the chancellor and the President respectively both of whom clarified that the salary enhancement was gross. They appealed to the academic staff to call off the strike but the latter did not heed and continued with the strike.

The Makerere University students later joined the strike and some students got involved in acts of indiscipline. The University Council subsequently temporarily closed the university on 6 November 2006. 

The committee was informed that government had appointed an inter-ministerial/departmental committee to look into the issues of financing public universities and was supposed to have reported on 10 November 2006 when this report was written. 

Committee findings:

i) Purpose of the private sponsorship scheme: 

MUASA maintains that the private scheme at Makerere University was initiated mainly to improve the welfare of the lecturers. But the expenditure priorities for the internally generated funds have since changed and they demand that their welfare should be made a priority.

ii) Government position:

On 10 October 2006, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development wrote a letter (Appendix 3) to the Minister of Education and Sports and gave a copy to MUASA. This letter indicates that the government would enhance the salary payment for a professor to Shs 2.8 million as gross salary. MUASA submitted to the committee that this is a total shift from the original agreement where Shs 2.8 million would be a basic pay. This was the cause of the last strike at the university. 

iii) Lecturers outstanding demands:

The lecturers demand a basic salary of Shs 2.8 million per month for a professor with arrears beginning from July 2006. Appendix 4 indicates the salary structure of academic staff of Makerere University for financial years 2002/03, 2003/04, 2004/05 and 2005/06 and the proposed salary by MUASA. It should be noted from the appendix that government has progressively increased the salaries of lecturers since 2002/03.

iv) Makerere University administration operations:
The committee also noted that there is a communication gap between the university administration and MUASA despite MUASA being represented on the university council. The lecturers are not adequately aware of how much is received from the Consolidated Fund and appropriation-in-aid. 

Sources of funding to the university: 

(a) Appropriation-in-aid:

The committee established that all the fees collected from private students are spent at source (that is at the university) and you can look at Appendix 5 in a breakdown of the annual fees in total per year collected from the years 2002/03, 2003/04, 2004/05 and 2005/06.

(b) Government subvention to the university: 

The committee noted that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development does not release the budgeted funds as appropriated by Parliament to the university on time. Currently, the funds provided within the mid-term expenditure framework only cover the salary component of the teaching and non-teaching staff. 

Like all other public universities, Makerere University continues to grapple with funding deficits and from the financial year 2005/06, a supplementary budget of Shs 5.0 billion was provided to enable it complete the financial year but even then, only Shs 1.5 billion was released. 

During the financial year 2006/07, Makerere University tried to fulfil the presidential pledge of increasing academic staff salaries and during the financial year 2005/06, a professor had a take home of Shs 2.4 million. However, this increased the arrears since the university could not meet the other recurrent expenditures.

Appointment of a special committee:

The committee noted that government had instituted an inter-ministerial committee to consider the Makerere University strike and make recommendations. A report was expected by the 10th of December 2006 and the committee appreciates this quick action by government.

The committee also noted that when the strike started, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development released Shs 460 million to Makerere University to cover the arrears of lecturers since July 2006.

Recommendations:

1.	The committee appreciates the creation of the inter-ministerial/departmental committee by government to handle this issue of staff salary enhancement and harmonisation in public universities. We recommend that this committee should expedite its work and its findings and proposals should be made available to Parliament at the earliest.

2.	Makerere University Council should review the priorities (refer to Appendix 6) of the expenditure of the appropriation-in-aid. We propose that priority be given to the welfare of the university staff.

3.	The inter-ministerial committee established by government should, among others, look into the issues of welfare of the non-teaching staff in the public universities.

4.	In view of the above, the committee appeals to MUASA to call off the strike as government addresses the pertinent issues raised by the lecturers and the committee would like to strongly assure the public that Parliament will follow up this matter with government up to its final conclusion.

Mr Speaker, I would like to report that the university opened some three weeks ago. I beg to report.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much chairman and Members of the committee for this report. As you see from the cover, this report is dated December 2006 and apparently as the chairperson has reported, there have been positive changes at Makerere in respect of the subject of this report, which we can discuss. 

But in view of what has happened, it appears that we can meaningfully debate this report if we get the statement from the minister informing us about the new developments. Maybe some of the things commented on here have been resolved or others are pending. I think it is better that if the minister is in position to give us that statement then we combine the two. We will then be able to meaningfully handle this subject. 

4.34
THE MINISTER OF STATE (HIGHER EDUCATION)(Mr Gabriel Opio): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I would like to thank the Sessional Committee on Social Services for the good report they have presented to us. As the chairperson of the committee has stated, Makerere University is functioning now. The university opened on the 6th of January and lectures began on the 8th of January and presently the students are doing their exams. 

It is so good that we started early enough because we had complaints from the parents of the students that are paying their tuition fees. If we had not opened the university this semester, it would have meant that the parents would have again paid the next semester. But starting within the semester has helped to remove that problem from the parents and students. So, the semester is continuing and we are going to end without again asking for tuition fees from the parents. Right now the exams are running smoothly. The registration, which was causing some problems, was done and we have not had complaints from the students about the registration processes.

Mr Speaker, the causes of the strike were many but the major one was the salary enhancement of the lecturers and professors inclusive. The council during that time deliberated and came out with some ways of enhancing the salaries of the academic staff. However, we had already set up an inter-ministerial committee headed by the able leadership of the Minister of State for Public Service, hon. Seezi Mbaguta and she has worked around the clock. Even during the strike, she did a lot of work behind the scenes including talking to various stakeholders and that softened the ground, which made the strike to be called off. 

Before she reports, I would like to take this opportunity to thank her as a ministry and government for her tireless efforts during that time which required a lot of input. Her report that is coming out soon will be debated here and it is good that the committee has also come up with findings before the final report is written. We would like to urge the minister, who is the chairperson, to take these recommendations into account when the final report is made. These are the remarks we can make so far. Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you, honourable minister. You realise we are narrowing the issues that caused the strike and maybe we should find the solution for the better running of the university in future. We, therefore, need a combination of these before we can debate. I do not know whether you think you can debate without the report from hon. Mbaguta in the other statement. Should we wait for those statements?

4.38
MR JOHN ARIMPA KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): I would like just to make one request to the minister. Recently, there is a cry that there are forgeries of academic transcripts at Makerere University. This worries the public because our university is now international. I would like the minister to make a clarification on these allegations and put this country to rest because we are extremely worried about this situation. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Minister, are you in position to answer or you will answer some time later?

MR OPIO: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Presently, we are waiting for the formal statement from the university and particularly the report of the head of the committee which did the investigation and which has led some action to take place. We would be in position to give an exhaustive answer when we get the formal report from the university.

THE SPEAKER: Can you indicate to us the time frame? 

MR OPIO: Within two weeks. Well, we hope the report is ready at the university and if we do not get it, we will come back here and ask for extension.

THE SPEAKER: This closes this matter for the time being until we get the report from hon. Mbaguta and then we shall debate the issue. We have exhausted the business for today but we have business tomorrow including that from the honourable Minister of Defence and others. And since tomorrow is a Cabinet day, we adjourn the House to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m.

(The House rose at 4.40 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 January 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)



