Wednesday 31st January, 2001

(Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala)

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Ayume Francis, in the Chair)

The House was called to order

BILLS
SECOND READING

The National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, before we adjourned the House yesterday, we were about to pronounce ourselves on the motion that the Bill entitled, “The National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999," be read the Second Time.  But for what I stated yesterday as technical reasons which purely is that we did not have the necessary quorum, we could not proceed, and again we have to ascertain if we have a necessary quorum to transact this business.

(Ascertainment of quorum)

THE SPEAKER: May I say this, if there are hon. Members outside the Chamber and in the Lobby, please, this is where you are supposed to be at this time, and I notice the hon. Minister of State for Internal Affairs is seated somewhere.  

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Speaker, having been aware that we usually run into technical problems, I was wondering whether the Business Committee would re-arrange the programme in such a way that, we proceed to Item 10 of the Order Paper. Today, we can just proceed with the general debate, and when the House gathers momentum, then may go back to areas which require technicalities.  I was just seeking guidance.  Thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Business Committee or you mean the Chair?  Your point is taken.  We still have no necessary quorum. I will suspend the proceedings for 15 minutes because we are only 73 members.  So, the proceedings are suspended for 15 minutes.

(The proceedings were suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: The hon. Members who are still in the Lobby, please, come into the Chambers so that we can ascertain whether we have a quorum or not.

(Ascertainment of quorum)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members, we are still under quorum.  Now, let me say this, I do certainly appreciate that many hon. Members are not within this Chamber mainly due to national duties.  But I must say we have a duty to perform our legislative responsibility for the development of the Country.  I imagine that those who are out there, probably, would have wished to be here. 

In the light of what is going on, if the situation continues to be as it is, and we cannot raise a quorum to transact business. I am likely to be persuaded to take seriously action to allow you a bit of time to deal with those matters you consider more important than the matters of this House. Iam giving you one more opportunity, which is tomorrow. So, I am therefore, appealing to hon. Members not to make us go into that kind of situation.  All we need are 93 Members of Parliament in order to transact business.  So, unless we do something about it, I am going to proceed in the manner that I have been contemplating.  

MR. WACHA: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.  I am sure we are having a problem in respect to Items 8 and 9 on the Order Paper.  But I also notice that the House could handle Items 10 and 11 as we are now, if the owners of the Bills are ready.  May be instead of going home, we could consider proceeding along those lines.

THE SPEAKER: I am told the chairperson, deputy chairperson and the Minister are not available. As regards to another Item, the chairperson of the committee is here but the Minister is not available.  Do you know that we only need one person?  Now one is leaving - (Laughter) - Hon. Members I have been advised that we have managed to make a quorum - (Applause) 

BILLS
SECOND READING.

The National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999

THE SPEAKER: As I was saying earlier on that we had reached this Item and completed the debate but what was left was to put the question on the motion "National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999" to be read the second time.  I will therefore proceed to do the same. 

(Question put and agreed to)

BILLS
COMMITTEE STAGE.

THE NATIONAL HONOURS AND AWARDS BILL, 1999

Clause 1

MR. EGOU CHARLES: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move an amendment on the heading of Part 1 by inserting the word "National" immediately before the word "Presidential".  It is therefore proposed that the new heading of part one should read as follows:  'Part 1, National Presidential Awards Committee'.

 The justification for this is that while the committee recognises that under Clause 89 of the Constitution, it is the President who bestows the awards on behalf of the Nation.  The insertion of the word "National" in the committee's view is to emphasise the national character of the words to be bestowed by the respective beneficiaries.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, are you dealing with Clause 1 or - why can't we do it later?  

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman this is the beginning of the Clause, it is Part 1.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, my impression is that if this is part of the title, then we will deal with it later but if it is a Clause then we could handle it.  But I think it is - (Interruption)

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I can take your advice.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question that Clause 1 stands part of the Bill - yes hon. Dick Nyai

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman the committee is seeking that the Presidential Awards Committee is now denominated "National Presidential Awards Committee".  Is the President not national, Mr. Chairman?  Then if the awards committee is a presidential committee, is it not a national committee?

THE CHAIRMAN: You are complaining about which amendment? We will come to that later on.  Let us go Clause by Clause.

MR. Nyai:  Mr. Speaker, where I sound a little confused is the amendment the Committee chairman wishes to introduce, that is the "National Presidential Awards Committee".  It is not the title of the Bill; it is the heading of the Bill that should be debated.  Is it a Presidential Awards Committee?  And is the Presidential Awards Committee not national in character?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us first of all agree on how to proceed before we deal with this matter.  I think if we take it as "Presidential Awards Committee", that is to do with Part 1 of the statute, I would consider it not a title. So you are against the amendment.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman I am not persuaded by any reason that we need an amendment to the presidential committee, which considers national awards.  I think a presidential committee by the very nature of the presidency it is a national committee.  I think being the boss is not really part of our law making. I oppose this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question - (Interruption) 

MR. WACHA: Sorry Mr. Speaker, maybe the chairman could tell me if Part 1 deals with National Presidential Awards Committee? Is there any other part, which deals with local Presidential Awards committee?  

MR. EGOU:  There is only one national awards committee, which is being proposed by this Bill.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and negatived)

Clause 1

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

 Clause 2.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I wish to move an amendment to insert immediately after the definition of chairperson a new definition of Chancery to read as follows: "Chancellor" means the Chancellor referred to in section 15 of this Act.  The justification being that the term Chancellor is used in the Bill without being defined.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move another amendment on clause 2, whose effect is to amend the definition of Chancellor by substituting the word "referred to" for the word "established" in the clause.  The amendment should be read in full as follows: "Chancery" means a "Chancery" referred to in section 10 of this Act.  The justification being that, section 10 of the Act covers the definition of Chancery in detail and it is standard legislative drafting practice to make reference to a section where detailed information is inserted.  I beg to move.

 THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an additional amendment on clause 2 whose effect is to amend the definition of "title of honour" by inserting the word "medal" immediately after the words "decoration". Before the amendment, it reads as follows:  
"Title of honour means a decoration, medal, an order or any other dignity specified in the second schedule to this Act.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

 CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 2 as amended stands part of the Bill)

Clause 3

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete Clause 3(2) by inserting the words "this act and their descriptions and incidents." The new sub-clause reads as follows:  "(2) The Titles of honour to be conferred under this Act and their descriptions and incidents are those specified in the second schedule to this act."  
The justification being that it is standard legislative practice that where there are any descriptions and incidents their only rightful place is in the schedule.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN:  I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

(Clause 3 as amended stands part of the Bill.)

Clause 4.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on clause 4 whose effect is to amend sub-clause 2(b) to read as follows: "Six other members, including members of disciplined of forces, all of whom shall be appointed by the President from among persons of high moral character and proven integrity."  The justification being that the different interest groups are best suited as experts to give advice in their respective fields and more so amongst the disciplined forces.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

MR. WACHA:  Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to know whether if this sub-clause was left as it was, it could not have catered for members of the disciplined forces.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, it was the committee’s view to take into account the historical aspect of this Bill, that ever emphasis should be laid on the membership of the committee to have members of the disciplined forces.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I wanted to find out from the chairperson of the committee, whether this law is being made only for historical purposes or for our total future of the nation. This is because if we start including members of the disciplined forces, it means that the disciplined forces are a section outside this nation; and we would be introducing sectarian tendencies, which I do not believe is the purpose of Bill.  I would ask the chairman to reconsider, and I oppose this amendment.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman if one talks about disciplined forces, it is important for us to know what disciplined forces mean.  What does it mean?  What does it imply in law?  The taxpayer I represent would like to know who are the blessed disciplined people we are referring to?

CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairperson, the hon. Member would like to know the meaning of disciplined forces, before he supports you? 

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I tend to agree with hon. Okullo Epak. I think that if the discretion is left upon the President to appoint members, it is up to him to consult the necessary stakeholders in this matter, which in this case will include the authorities from the disciplined forces.  
. 
DR. OKULO EPAK: Mr. Chairman, before I can support this amendment, I would like to be convinced or clarified as to whether a discretion to the President would not serve the purpose?  This is because the President in his
Wisdom, if he thinks that the greater proportion of people who are going to be honoured will be coming from the scientific community, obviously, he will make sure that those who are knowledgeable in that field constitute the membership. Can he really clarify to me if it does not really prejudice the purpose of this Bill? I think to isolate this particular group would prejudice the purpose of this Bill. 

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I tend to agree with hon. Okulo Epak because I think that if the discretion is left upon the President to appoint members, it is up to him to consult the necessary stakeholders on this matter. Which in this case includes authorities from the disciplined forces. So I will concede and not move this amendment.

MRS MUSUMBA: Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want to move an amendment on the membership. This morning there was a big team of members from the civil society, who feel that the membership of this committee should be widened to accommodated different interest groups.  So I am moving an amendment that we add two more people on the committee. 

THE CHAIRMAN: It is eight and then the chairperson, which makes it nine.

MRS MUSUMBA: Yes that is what I want to move Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: So you are saying the committee shall consist of the chairperson and eight other members– is that your amendment hon. Member?

MRS MUSUMBA: Yes Mr. Chairman, eight other members.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where is the Minister?  I am sorry.  You are right in front of me, but the problem is that you recently changed portfolio.  I am not used to that yet.  Proceed.  There is an amendment by hon. Salaamu Musumba that instead of six other members, she would wish to have eight other members.  

MR. MURULI MUKASA:  Mr. Chairman, I have no objection.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to).

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to insert a new clause 3 to come immediately after sub-clause 2(b) to read as follows: "The committee may where necessary co-opt any person with expert knowledge to guide it in its deliberations."  
The justification being that this would enable or give room to a situation where the eight members of the committee don't have expert knowledge in assessing a particular field under consideration for recognition.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. DICK NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I would plead with the committee chairman that it is a perfectly good amendment but the words where absolutely extraneous.  The committee may co-opt any person with expert knowledge to guide it in its deliberations.  I would move if the chairman agrees kindly that we delete the words where necessary.  

MR. EGOU:  But in principle, I have no objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: Actually, what the hon. Member is saying, is that the word is permissive. But can we really agree on principle? The idea is that the committee should have discretion to co-opt anybody.  Those in favour of this amendment subject to refinement –(Interruption)- hon. Lukyamuzi, let us be orderly.  Let me just finish and then I will give you an opportunity.  Otherwise we shall be talking like we are in a market place.  Shall I put the question?  The draftsman will refine those in favour of the amendment by the chairman.

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move an amendment that the members co-opted shall be ex-official.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi, what do you mean by ex-official in this context?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  They should not have voting rights.

THE CHIARMAN: But that is not my understanding.  Yes I will put the question to hon. Lukyamuzi’s amendment that this co-opted member should not have voting rights.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I wanted to inform hon. Lukyamuzi that in area where a member is co-opted, a member is not a permanent member, he is just somebody co-opted to participate in a discussion, so this person cannot vote and is not a member.  That is the information I wanted to give to hon. Lukyamuzi.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to hon. Lukyamuzi’s amendment.

(Question put and negatived)

(Clause 4 as amended put and agreed to)

(Clause 5 put and agreed to)

Clause 6:

MR MURULI MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 6 be amended as follows:  "The chancellor shall be the secretary to the committee."  Mr. Chairman, this is just in line with normal practice in many of the civil service organisations.  I beg to move.

(Question on the amendment put and agreed to)

(Clause 6 as amended put and agreed to)

(Clause 7 put and agreed to)

(Clause 8 put and agreed to)

Clause 9:

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to amend clause 9(3) by inserting immediately a new sub-clause (4) to read as follows:  "Notwithstanding sub-clause 3 of this clause, the decisions of the committee shall be reached by consensus."  
The justification being that anybody receiving a national award should feel that the award has been supported without any form of objection.  For any award to be meritous in nature, all the members of the committee must have supported it.

(Question put and agreed to.)

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am a Member of this committee, but I would like to raise an amendment subject to the hon. Minister and the chairperson that is under clause 9. With your permission, Sir, when you look at clause 9(2) where we increased the number of members on the committee, we need to adjust the quorum as well.  This is a technical issue, which the House has not yet noted.  I would like to propose that under clause 9(2) the quorum at any meeting of the committee should be five.  I beg to move. 

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Chairman, I have a problem about numbers why doesn't he talk about a third or half or two-thirds? I was proposing to hon. Okumu Ringa that he can re-phrase his amendment to say: "the quorum of the committee shall be half the number." 

THE CHAIRMAN: Are you subscribing to his amendment?  So instead of using the figures you use fraction or percentage?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I do not support that improvement; my figure is five.  This is because we have an odd number of nine; - five is the number, Mr. Chairman. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 9 as amended agreed to.

Clause 10.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete clause 10 and insert a new clause 10 to read:  "10.1 There shall be a department in the public service to be known as a Chancery to perform the functions of the Chancery under this Act."  
The justification being that the Bill proposes to create a body corporate.  The Chancery being a body corporate, the amendment seeks to ensure that the chancery is reduced to the department of government for efficient discharge of its administrative function.  The history of parastatals in this country bears the committee’s recommendations.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

 MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an additional amendment on clause 10 by introducing a new sub-clause 2 to read as follows:  "The chancery shall be in such ministry as the President may from time to time, in consultation with the ministry responsible for public service determine."   
The justification being that it is important to involve the ministry responsible for Public Service to ensure that there is effective co-ordination in government ministries and respective departments, since this ministry oversees the entire Public Service.  
Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 10 as amended agreed to.

Clause 11:
 
MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to re-phrase clause 11 to read as follows:  "11. The Chancery shall have a permanent custodianship and administration of Uganda’s national Honours."  
The justification being that it is a more definitive statement as to the objectives of the chancery.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 11 as amended agreed to.

Clause 12 agreed to.

Clause 13:

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete clause 13 of the Bill.  The justification being that under that clause 25 of the Bill, matters pertaining to finances are adequately dealt with.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 13 as amended agreed to.

Clause 14:

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on clause 14 whose effect is to delete the clause.  The justification being that it is a consequential amendment in line with the reducing the chancery from being a corporate body to a government department.   
Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 14 as amended agreed to.

Clause 15

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on clause 15 whose effect is to delete the clause and insert a new clause 15 to read as follows: "15 The Chancellor (1), The chancery shall be headed by an officer called the Chancellor.
(2) The President on the advice of the Public Service Commission shall appoint the Chancellor.  
(3) The Chancellor shall be the Secretary to the Chancery
(4) The Chancellor’s terms and conditions of service shall be equal to that of a Permanent Secretary."   
The justification being that it is important that there should be a definition of a Chancellor, his or her methods of appointment and the responsibilities that are clearly defined.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to.)

Clause 15 as amended agreed to.

Clause 16

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 16 be deleted. 

Clause 15 as amended.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 15 as amended do stand as part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 15 as amended agreed to.

Clause 16.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move that clause 16 be deleted.  The justification being that they are rendered redundant having inserted the new clause 15.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 16 as amended agreed to.

Clause 17.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete clause 17.  Justification being that the clause is rendered redundant.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 17 as amended agreed to.

Clause 18.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete clause 18.  The justification also being that it has been rendered redundant by the insertion of the new clauses.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 18 as amended agreed to.

Clause 19.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to clause 19 whose effect is to delete clause 19 in total.  The justification being that clause 19 as it stands on the Bill is redundant.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 19 as amended agreed to.

Clause 20.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete clause 20 of the Bill as it stands.  The justification also being that it has been rendered redundant by the previous amendments.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 20 as amended agreed to.

Clause 21 agreed to.

MR. NYAI: Mr. Chairman, I beg your indulgence on clause 21.  He talks about 'The Herald.'  "There shall be an officer called The Herald of the Chancery, who shall serve in a voluntary capacity". And here, we are talking about a Government department.  How do we introduce in a Government department the whole idea of volunteerism?  Maybe the Chairman and the Minister can explain because at the moment I really find that sentence a bit ambivalent and not very illuminating.

THE CHAIRMAN: The hon. Minister is still consulting the hon. Elly Tumwine.  I don't mind you doing it because his point is important.  Who is this 'Herald'? Who is going to function without any remuneration?

MR. NYAI: In fact, Mr. Chairman, it is even worse in 21(2): "The Herald shall be appointed by the Chancellor with the approval of the Minister."  

THE CHAIRMAN: And why don't you go to Clause 21(3): 
"The Herald may be sent as a representative of the Chancellor on missions related to the work of the Chancery and shall assist the Chancery with the honour lists."  Is it on a voluntary basis?  Is the Minister still consulting the Chairman or he is ready?

MR. MURULI MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, 'The Herald' much as he may be serving in a voluntary capacity, it does not mean that he might not be given an emolument or an allowance.  What it means is that he might not have a fixed salary as such and I think the voluntary capacity is also in line with the nature of the Bill.  This is an "Honours Bill" and in many instances such a person will be somebody of merit who will take pride and dignity in serving this particular capacity.  So, this was the understanding behind putting this bit of legislation in place.  

MR. NYAI: I would plead, Mr. Chairman, that the Minister and the Committee agree that we stand this over for further consideration, because I am quite sure the Minister might benefit from Members’ input as to how the'Herald' should be treated once appointed.

MAJ.GEN.TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, I wanted to inform the hon. Member and the House that the position of a 'Herald' first of all was a problem to understand. When we were looking at it we considered other countries and found that, this was somebody respectable who would be called upon to help when need arises and it would be very difficult to have him as a permanent employee of the Chancellery. I know many countries have him as a voluntary person but, as the Minister said, if he is doing some work that involves travelling, he could be facilitated for that particular type of work.  It does not have to be somebody employed under the Chancellery full-time.  It is not a position that is within the employable staff of the Chancellery.  He is somebody who is called upon to give guidance and expert knowledge.

MRS. MUSUMBA: Mr. Chairman, I am really -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Are you speaking on the same point?

MRS. MUSUMBA: Yes, the same point.  I am really worried especially on 21(3):
"The Herald may be sent as a representative of the Chancellor on mission related to the work of the Chancery and shall assist the Chancery with the honour list."  For a country that is just initiating a Chancery and an Awards Committee, I do not think it is advisable for us to leave so many gaps in what we mean, because to me this is just an opening for abuse.  You will have children from Senior four on vacation to serve as a 'Herald'. It is really a subject of abuse and we would rather clear what we are talking about.  We are comparing economies that are better than ours.  I don't think there is a Ugandan today who is willing to work for free, run errands in Congo and Kitgum for free.  I find this a real big venue for abuse.  I would rather suggest that we tighten it and say what we mean.  Thank you very much.  

THE CHAIRMAN: I think let us consult on that.  Let us proceed with the rest of the debate - we stand that over, okay?

Clause 22.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that clause 22 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 22 agreed to.

Clause 23.

MR. EGOU: Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I beg to move an amendment on clause 23 whose effect is to amend (1) (c) so as to substitute the word 'The Chancellor' for the words “The Secretary to the Chancellor.”  Mr. Chairman, the new amendment should read as follows: - 
"(c) any other duty as the chancellor may from time to time assign to him or her."  
The justification here being that it is the chancellor who is the head of the chancery.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.  

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an additional amendment on clause 23(2) whose effect should substitute the word "chancellor" for the word "the secretary to the chancellor" at the end of the clause.  The justification being that it is a consequential amendment.  Mr. chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 23 as amended put and agreed to.

Clause 24.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to delete the clause 24 the justification being that it is a consequential amendment and that is to say the chancery is a government department and not a body co-operate as clause 24 seeks to take care of.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to)

Clause 25.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment in clause 25 of the Bill to read as follows: "Funds of the Chancery.
The funds of the chancellery shall consist of:
    (a) funds as may be appropriated by Parliament.
    (b) grants, gifts and donations that may be received by the chancery from source approved by Government.”

The justification being that it is important that Government controls and determines the source of funds coming to the chancery and that there are standard procedure requirements and regulations that governs Government departments and how they run their resources.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Chairman, I would like the Chairman of the committee to explain as why Government should approve a gift or a donation honestly?

THE CHAIRMAN: Maybe, they are guarding against receiving such gifts or donations from hostile neighbours, and resources; a gift I would run for it, but in terms of management of public affairs you may run into the lions den or into the lions mouth.  

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, the example you have given is the one that the Committee had in mind. Some funds that come into the country are illegal, for example drug funds; we have already situations were we had bicupuli money coming in, so this is what the Committee meant by guarding against.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. NYAI:  Mr. Chairman, the last reason this Chairman of the Committee gave is why I completely oppose sources approved by Government?  This is because a chancery is a Government department and therefore it would be peculiar to accept gifts without Government knowing.  So, what are we really doing? Are we repeating ourselves?

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 25 as amended put and agreed to.

Clause 26.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on clause 26 (b) (1) to read as follows: “The president may revoke a title of honour awarded to a person if:
(b)(i) is convicted of an offence and he or she is sentenced to death or imprisonment of not less than five years; 
Or 
ii) is convicted of any offence involving fraud or moral turpitude.

The justification here is that the offence of treason is one, which is punishable by death, it would therefore fall under the categories of offences for which the sentence is death.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. NYAI:  I oppose this amendment, Mr. Chairman, these titles are given including those titles given to foreign heads of state.  Once you have given a gift and an honour is it you still to withhold? Does it make sense to give a meritorious gift to a person and that very person does stupid things in society? I think it should not be reduced into a state of saying, “I give but I still hold a rope to it,” then that is not a total gift.  I think on that basis, I hope the Chairman of the Committee will be persuaded that this amendment needs to be withdrawn.  I oppose it.

THE CHAIRMAN: Even if the recipient turns against you to demand your head!

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, much more embarrassing is sub clause (i): 
"if that person is convicted of an offence and he or she is sentenced to death or imprisonment of not less than five years." At one time I was about to be charged for treason because of emphasising the right to be free.  In such circumstances would the Chairman elaborate, if I got an honour and I have been wrongly sentenced to go to Luzira because of my articulations of fundamental freedoms what would happen?

THE CHAIRMAN: Mr Chairman, I do not know whether you got the point.

MR. EGOU: Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think hon. Lukyamuzi should appreciate the sense of the offence of treason, the offence of treason involves taking armies to try and fight against the established government of the day.  Being that previously you had been a hero, if you now take armies to fight the very same government that recognised you, I think you are doing a de-service and people should de-recognise you.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi, we are pronouncing ourselves on an amendment, you can now come with your amendment. What is wrong with that? Is that not the procedure?

MR. NYAI:  Was that from – this House, Mr. Chairman?

THE CHAIRMAN: What are you amending?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, before we delete let us understand one another, certainly the views articulated by hon. Dick Nyai and I are convincing enough for the Chair to understand that these two provisions are not necessary. I move that the two be deleted.

THE CHAIRMAN: Therefore, we are pronouncing -(Interjection)- I see you do not want the –(Interjection)-

MR. NYAI:  We do not want this amendment!

THE CHAIRMAN: Right, you are opposing the amendment and then say you don't want it.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an additional amendment on clause 26 whose effect is to amend sub-clause 2 by substituting the word " the chancellor"for the "the secretary to the chancellor" at the end of the clause, the justification being that this is a consequential amendment.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 26 as amended put and agreed to).

Clause 27.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete Clause 27 that talks about budgetary estimates.  The justification being that since the Chancery is a government department, how it handles its resources is adequately provided for under the government financial standing orders.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 28.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment to delete Clause 28 that talks about Accounts.  The justification is that the Chancery is a government department that has the government financial standing orders to be catered for.  I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 29.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment whose effect is to delete Clause 29 for the same reasons that matters of auditing are provided for under the government financial standing orders.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 30.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on Clause 30, whose effect is to amend sub-clause 1 by inserting immediately after paragraph (f) of the Clause of the Bill the following new sub-clause to read (g) and should read as follows: "The President may by statutory instrument make regulations prescribing new (g), the privileges that shall be attached to the respective titles of honour."  The justification being that any of the awards or honours must be accompanied with privileges; for example the right to attend national celebrations and official recognition on relevant occasions.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move. 

(Question put and agreed to).

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an additional amendment whose effect is to amend sub-clause (1) by inserting immediately after paragraph (g), a new paragraph (h) to read as follows:  "The President may by statutory instrument make regulations prescribing new (h), the establishment of new or additional titles of honour."   The justification being that the 'titles of honour' as enumerated in the second Schedule should not be restrictive.  Our society is dynamic and continuously changing, so we should not be restrictive. We should provide a provision that the President may consult with all the stakeholders in the country.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

(Question put and agreed to).

(Question on Clause 30 as amended put and agreed to).

Clause 31. 

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on Clause 31 whose effect is to amend sub-clause 2 thereof  by inserting immediately after paragraph (b), the following new paragraph (c), so that the entire amendment should read as follows:  "A person who (c) desecrates the awards /decorations so bestowed upon him/her by the Committee, commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one hundred currency points or imprisonment not exceeding three years or both."  
The justification here is that once you have been bestowed upon with an award/decoration, you should respect it.  Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I am dissatisfied with the reason advanced by the Committee.  We need a stronger reason to support your argument in terms of justification.  What you have given is weak to stand the test of time.

MRS. MUSUMBA:  Mr. Chairman, just to put the range of honours in order.  I would like the Chairperson of the Committee to clarify to me how often are these honours?  Are they annual, are they five years, so that I am able to know the period of honours, will it be annual for us to check out or is it five years or is it ten years?  When will these awards be offered?  Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Musumba, I would like you to carry me along with you. Is this related to the amendment he has just proposed?

MRS. MUSUMBA:  It is!

THE CHAIRMAN: It is, that's if you desecrate an honour awarded. 

MRS. MUSUMBA: I am looking at the time frame that this offence gets committed, will it be annual because the Bill is about the time frame when honours will be bestowed.  So, I am looking at it in relation to offences.  If for instance I knew that they are annual, then I would know that we would have lot of such offences annually or it is five years or something like that.  I just want to relate it for purposes of my own understanding. 

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I would like to give information related to what the Member of my Committee is asking.  First of all, I want to say that it will be upon the Presidential Awards Committee to sit and determine as and when an award will be bestowed. But when it comes to offences, really offence is defined as when that action takes effect.  I think that should be straight forward.  I thank you Sir.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, for the good of our country, what we are discussing is for posterity.  It is supposed to stand the taste of time.  I thought it was unfair for you to have continued with voting before giving a chance to the Chairperson to reply my challenge.  My challenge is that if I am given an honour and it is not befitting, I have a right to refuse it.  Why should I be seen to be a criminal because I have rejected it? I thought that the Chairperson's reason advanced was not strong to stand the test of time and I need an explanation from the Chair.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi, you know the procedure.  We start off with the general debate, and then we agree on whether the Bill should be read the Second Time. And if we so agree, then we go Clause by Clause, any person who wishes to make an amendment to change a particular Clause is entitled to do so. That is my understanding.

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Chairman, with due respect to you, as the chairperson was about to answer you, we put the matter to vote.  I was about to move an amendment to that effect.

THE CHAIRMAN: We have not yet voted on Clause 31, have we?   Hon. Lukyamuzi, you see, you are taking us forwards and backwards. Can you follow the procedure? 

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr Speaker, with due respect to you, I challenge the Chair to reply.  Why don't you give him a chance to reply?

MR. TOSKIN BARTILE: Mr. Speaker, is it in order for the hon. Member to keep wasting time, after a lot of explanation from the Chair?  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN: Well, if the hon. Member was deliberately, wasting time, l would say yes, is out of order, but I think he wanted to understand the proceedings, so that we can move together with him.  Hon. Lukyamuzi, is that fair? Is that the correct way of reading your mind? Is it the reason as to why you are asking these questions?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:   I am moving with you, although I still demand that hon. Egou meets my challenge.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Egou, can you explain?  I have even forgotten what it was all about.  He said your clarify, your justification, was short and shallow.

MR. EGOU:  Mr. Chairman, I think the majority of Members of the House have got my justification, but probably what my Colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi is saying, given his example, was that, why should it be an offence if an honour is bestowed on him?  I think the amendment has words that are carefully chosen.  He talks about 'desecrating the word'; he doesn't talk about rejecting the words.  So, maybe that is where my Colleague, hon. Lukyamuzi has a problem.  The word desecrating means that having received the award, you probably hold it in disrepute, you destroy it or something like that.  That is what the Committee is saying it is an offence, but really, if an Award is being bestowed to a hero and a hero refused it, I do not think there is a way to force him to accept it.  I thank you, Mr. Chairman.  

THE CHAIRMAN:   Are you with us hon. Lukyamuzi?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:   Absolutely.

THE CHAIRMAN: Very good.   I now put the question that Clause 31 stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to).

Clause 32 agreed to.

THE CHAIRMAN: Now, hon. Members, before we proceed to deal with the Schedules and other items, including the Title, we stood over Clause 21; we had a problem about a person holding a dignified title working for free. It is a very simple Clause, which can be amended as we read.  Is there anybody who can come up with an amendment?   

First, let us agree on the principle.  It seems people say, no, no this is honorary kind of assignment, it should attract remuneration, even though is going to be sent on errands, and still he should be remunerated.   On the other hand, he could be remunerated that is my understanding of the Minister’s statement without putting it in the contest of the law.   But can't you say he will be paid such allowances as the Minister or whoever is responsible may determine or something like that? – At least, you get to know that this remuneration is coming from somewhere. It is not going to come from the Minister’s pockets, God forbid.   So, to me, it is a very simple amendment.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I would like to propose an amendment to Clause 31 (1) to take care of that problem.  It read as follows:"There shall be an officer called a Herald of the chancery who shall serve in a voluntary capacity but will be paid honorarium, as shall be determined by the Minister."   I beg to move, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Why don't we talk about formulation?  We can say; "there shall be an officer called the Herald of the Chancery who shall be appointed."

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Who shall serve in the voluntary capacity.

THE CHAIRMAN: Who appoints this fellow?  It is provided for somewhere?  Okay, you could say: "There shall be an officer called the Herald of the Chancery who shall be appointed by the Chancellor with the approval of the Minister" You join these two.  Then (iii) is where we provide or just before (iii) provide for remuneration and the work.  Sorry it reads: 
"the Herald may be sent as a representative of the Chancellor on missions related to the work of the Chancery and shall assist the Chancery with the honour list." 
 Then you have another Clause; the Harold shall be paid such – first of all, let us agree before we actually do restructuring, should this Herald get something or not? Yes.  Then you will have another clause the Herald shall be paid such – First of all, let us agree before we actually do restructuring.  Let us agree.  Should this Herald get something or not?

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Mr. Chairman, I am a Member of the Committee and we kind of discussed this and felt that in a final analysis there will be the need to reward the Herald.  But in our thinking we felt that the reward should be in a form of allowances or out of station emoluments or expenses.  But the principle should be agreed on.  The formulation will be better if it gives specific remuneration.  So I will support the formulation you have provided.

THE CHAIRMAN: We now want the way forward.  This to me is very simple – I wish I was debating with you I would have moved an amendment.

MR. KYEMBA:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman.  I am rather concerned about the trend that we are taking with regard to the issue of voluntary services. It is obvious that the officer we are discussing is going to be assigned a specific job.  But it looks as if this honourable House is only interested in getting a job assignment with a salary, and yet this is the period when the United Nations is appealing to Government to pay special attention to the spirit of volunteerism.  

Here we are! We are saying we must find a salary for somebody to be assigned to advise the chancellor on a specific job.  I think, let us be fair.  It is possible for somebody to serve without necessarily demanding a salary.  And it is possible for us to make provision for an honorarium to be paid to somebody who has done an extending job.  But surely for us to sit here and provide terms of service for somebody going to do a specific assignment, I don't think it is right.

THE CHAIRMAN: Alright, can you now move.  Your argument is that, no salary.  But are you also arguing that no allowance, because the two are different?  Or the word would be remuneration?

MR. KYEMBA:   Mr. Chairman, I am suggesting that we retain it as it is in the provision without much change. 

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question that Clause 21 do stand part of the Bill.

(Question put and agreed to)

First Schedule agreed to.

Second Schedule.

MR. MURULI MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment about the second schedule. The effect of this amendment will be to give extra information on the titles and honours proposed in this Bill in the Second Schedule. I beg to move that the Second Schedule be deleted and be replaced with the following: 
" TITLES of HONOURS, THEIR DESCRIPTION AND INCIDENTS 
1 PART 1 -CIVILIAN DECORATIONS AND MEDALS
    1. The Most Excellent order of the Pearl of Africa 
[The Grand Master]- This is the highest honour to be awarded to Heads of State and Heads of Government.  

2 The Excellent order of the Pearl of Africa 
[The Grand Commander]. This will be reserved for Heads of State's spouses, Vice Presidents and Crown Princes and Princesses.

3 The Distinguished order of the Nile [Classes 1-V] 
This will be with five classes and shall be awarded to people who have distinguished themselves in productive, research, social and cultural enterprises.  

4 The distinguished order of the Crested Crane 
[Classes1-V] This will be with five classes and shall be awarded to people who have distinguished themselves in leadership and service, both public and private.  

5 The National Independence Medal  
This shall be awarded to all civilian activists who championed and contributed significantly in the struggle for independence and those who have continued to protect the independents of Uganda.

6 The Nalubaale medal  
The Nalubaale medal shall be awarded to all civilian activists who have contributed towards the political development of Uganda either through armed struggle or civil disobedience and otherwise right from colonial times to date. 

Part II MILITARY DECORATIONS AND MEDALS 
7 The order of Katonga
(1) This shall be the highest and most rarely awarded military decoration of the Republic of Uganda for rewarding individual extra -ordinary instances of heroism in the army. 
(2) The instances referred to are those that involve voluntary acceptance of additional danger beyond the call of duty and risk of life. 
(3) The President (or where the President is the beneficiary, the Chief Justice) shall be the only person to make presentation of The Order of Katonga and every time it is presented, the citation shall clearly indicate the reasons for the award. 
(4) The Order may be awarded to an individual more than once on different occasions; and apart from order awarded on the very first time, a bar attached to the ribbon by which the order is suspended shall record each subsequent award.  

(8) The Kabalega Star (Classes l-lll) 
(1) The Kabalega star shall be the second highest military decoration with three classes.  
(2) The award shall be for conspicuous gallantry that does not justify the award of The Order of Katonga but bordering with the qualification for the award of the Order of Katonga.

(9) The Rwenzori Star (Classes l-lll) 
(1) The Rwenzori Star shall be the third highest military decoration of the army with three classes. 
 (2) The decoration shall be awarded for distinguished or exemplary military service, which shall include exceptionally meritorious service or great responsibility in military service.  
(3) Under exceptional circumstances and with the approval of the President, the Rwenzori Star maybe awarded to persons other than members of the military.

(10) The Masaba Star 
    (1) The Masaba Star shall be the fourth highest military decoration.
    (2) It shall be awarded to a person under the same circumstances described in the award of the Kabalega Medal, but where gallantry is not as conspicuous as in the Kabalega Medal.

(10) The Damu Medal: 
(1) The Damu Medal shall be awarded to any member of the military who was or is wounded in action- 
    (a) Against the enemy; 
    (b) With an opposing armed or hostile force of a foreign country; 
    (c) While serving with friendly foreign forces engaged in armed conflict against an opposing force in which Uganda is not a belligerent party; 
    (d) As a result on an act of any such enemy or opposing armed force; 
    (e) As a result of any military operations while serving outside the territory of Uganda as a party of a peace- keeping force;  
    (f) As a result of terrorist attacks against Uganda; 
    (g) As a result of injury by the enemy while taken as prisoner of war;  
    (h) As a result of a military operation during the liberation struggles.  

(2) All officers' men and women killed in action during the liberation struggles shall qualify for the Damu Medal.

12.Luwero Triangle Medal 
(1) The Luwero Triangle Medal is used as the climax of the armed struggles.  
(2) The Luwero Triangle Medals shall be awarded to any officer man and woman who joined armed struggle against dictatorships in Uganda. 
(3) Civilians who operated closely with the armed freedom fighters during struggles against dictatorships shall qualify for the award of this Medal.

13 The Kyoga Medal 
The Kyoga Medal shall be awarded to officers men and women of the army who have gallantry fought and defeated insurgencies in different parts of Uganda.

PART lll- MISCELLANEOUS 
1.Whenever a title of honour is presented to a person, the citation shall clearly indicate the reasons for the award of the tile of honour. 

2.Except for the Order of the Katonga, the President may delegate the presentation of any title of honour to any other person.  

3.Various classes of each award shall have the same design and shape clearly defined and gazetted, provided each class is clearly indicated. 

4.Any title of honour may be awarded to an individual more than once; and apart from the title of honour awarded the first time, a bar attached to the ribbon by which the title of honour is suspend shall record each subsequent award.

5. (1) Any title of honour maybe post-humously awarded to a member of the family of the deceased in accordance with the law of succession and inheritance of Uganda.  

(2) In any case where there is conflict as to who should receive the title of honour, the family shall advise the committee on the appropriate person to receive the title of honour. 
Mr. Chairman, I beg to move.

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Thank you Mr. Chairman. I am seeking clarification from the Minister notwithstanding that I am a Member of this Committee with regard to the Second Schedule Medal (3), I wish the Minister could take note of this.  He seems to be distracted by hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine –but it reads: 
"The Distinguished Order of the Nile (Classes 1- V) This will be with five classes and shall be awarded to people who have distinguished themselves in productive, research, social and cultural enterprises."  
The clarification I am seeking is, as to why we left out the word 'economic' between social and cultural enterprises to make it complete.  It will read: "in productive research, social, economic and cultural enterprises." This will be more embracing. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister any objection to that?

MR. MULULI MUKASA: No objection, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: Thank you!

MR. OKUMU RINGA: I beg to move then. Thank you.

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. do we proceed?  I think let us deal with the issue as raised by each individual, Member. So your amendment is that, after the word "social" you should insert "economic"

MR. OKUMU RINGA: Yes, Mr. Chairman and to make it more embracing.  I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any objection Mr. Minister?

MR. MULULI MUKASA: No objection, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question – on this particular one.  We still have many –(Interruption)

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Yes, on the Schedule of the Minister.

THE CHAIRMAN: On hon. Okumu Ringa’s amendment?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: No, the Minister’s.

THE CHAIRMAN: Yes, but he has moved an amendment, can we pronounce ourselves on that?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: No objection.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question on hon. Okumu Ringa’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

THE CHAIRMAN: With this, we have already pronounced ourselves.

MR. MULULI MUKASA: With regard to military honour, add the Kagera Medal, in the Schedule.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay.

MR. MULULI MUKASA: Thank you Mr. Chairman, the additional information on Kagera Medal I had skipped my eyes, I would like to give description  -(Interjection- Yes the Kagera Medal which appears as No.7 – No.7 in the Bill, the Kagera Medal.  Now this one shall be awarded to any officer or man, national or foreign who participated in fighting dictatorship between 1971 and 1979.  For all the participants who qualify for the award but are foreign their primary next of kin shall receive the award in the following order: surviving spouse, heir, surviving eldest child of foreign participant, father or mother, eldest brother or sister, eldest grandchild, any other next of kin.  In case of any conflict the family shall advise the committee on whom to receive the medal, Mr. Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN: So Kagera Medal comes somewhere? Number seven is Kabalega Star.  Hon. Minister where are you inserting your Kagera Medal?

MR. MULULI MUKASA: Mr. Chairman –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Or in the Bill?

MR. MULULI MUKASA: Yes, Sir.

THE CHAIRMAN: Okay, fine.  

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, I just wanted to remind the Minister that when he makes the amendments on the Military Honours the Constitution enjoins him whenever he mentions man to have women, so he should make that amendment accordingly.
 
MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman I would like to inform the Vice President and the House that in the army when we say officers and men, officers mean those who are commissioned and men cover all those un-commissioned Whether there is a war or not.

THE CHAIRMAN: Did you get what Her Excellency’s – the Vice President was saying? The Minister in his amendment is being gender insensitive.  That is her concern – proceed Her Excellency.

DR. WANDIRA KAZIBWE: Mr. Chairman, the army is very gender insensitive in its terminology and it is upon this House to make sure that all laws and any language that is inconsistent with the constitution is actually addressed.  Therefore, the army should know that it should start engendering its language.  Mr. Chairman I have insisted that nobody calls me Sir because I am Madam and it is working.  Refer to Article 33 of the Constitution – (Laughter).  

THE CHAIRMAN: Is there any other amendment?

COL. OMARIA:  I am glad Mr. Speaker.  I think before I made my point, hon. Maj. Gen. Elly Tumwine came out and cleared Kagera medal.  But I was complaining that these military decorations are very selfish.  Selfish in such a way that they have taken care of NRM only, l wanted some other medals included here. I am happy that you mentioned of Kagera because when you were coming in 1979 you crossed Kagera. You must know that 1979 was a very decisive year for grabbing Amin out of this country with merely formidable army. I am telling you, it was big battle in Kagera.  There was another decisive battle –at Lukaya.  We lost a lot of people there.  People died at Lukaya.  Why is Lukaya not included?  It should have been 'order of Lukaya'.  So I want Lukaya to be included.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: Any objection hon. Minister?

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Mr. Chairman with due respect to our hon. Colleague, we thought that really the Kagera medal is representative of all those other areas where decisive battles was fought for the development of this country. And if we look at the notes carefully, this medal be awarded to all those who participated in fighting against dictatorship between 1971 and 1979.  So there were those who fought in Lukaya, Kagera and Mbarara others were murdered in the various districts, during that period.  I would think that let the Kagera be this embodiment of all these areas where heroic battles were fought, where acts of heroism were displayed and where a relatively weaker army fought against an apparently might dictatorial army of those days.  I beg to oppose this amendment.

THE CHAIRMAN: Where is it on this particular amendment by the hon. Omaria? We confine ourselves to that?  I put hon. Omaria’s amendment.  You want to talk about it?  He is moved and he wants Lukaya Medal  - order of Lukaya all right?

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Thank you Mr. Chairman.  I think hon. Omaria was raising a point of concern, but he said that this Bill was concentrating on the NRM struggle alone, I wish to inform him that it is not the case.  The titles in the military honours that are mentioned are covering land marks of Uganda, namely: the order of Katonga, Kabalega who was not – Katonga is a river, Kabalega was a freedom fighter, Rwenzori is a great Mountain, Masaba is the same, Damu I think is the blood.  It is only the Luwero Triangle, which could be specific for the NRM and other struggles.  Then Kagera covers the entire struggle during the 70s and the other one is Kyoga.  So I wanted to inform him that this Bill is not restricting itself to NRM.  The honours and titles are referring to the geographical and freedom fighter land marks of the history of Uganda and has no character or bias towards NRM alone.

THE CHAIRMAN: I now put the question to Omaria’s amendment.

(Question put and agreed to)

MR. KYEMBA:  Thank you very much indeed Mr. Chairman.  I would like to take note of the Military Honours, which has just been approved – (Interjection).

THE CHAIRMAN: On which paragraph are you taking us? 

MR. KYEMBA:  It is the list of the civilian decoration and medals.  

MR. MURULI-MUKASA: Mr. Chairman, is it not appropriate for hon. Omaria’ to move a proper amendment and provide the necessary descriptions with regard to that order and incidences, so that we can discuss it and then pass it? I would like your advice on that, Mr. Chairman. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Minister, if we were going to stay here and describe in detail the orders that were going to propose, I do not know when we shall finish!  But I was thinking that, since the proposer is merely saying that; it was only the NRM arrangement being recognised.  Now he has been corrected, Kagera was not within NRM and the order of Lukaya, which I think in terms of description, it should not be any different from the descriptions ascribed to Kagera.  But if it is something really very different then we can debate it. But one thing is this, he has made an amendment with regards to this new medal and the House has pronounced itself on it.  Any other?  Oh yes you had the Floor.

MR. KYEMBA:  I had the Floor Mr. Chairman -(Interjection).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: I want to know why in the Committee stage we made new amendments on a substantive item where a new order is being proposed? Yet all that has been proposed has undergone a thorough preparation and discussion at the Cabinet level. At the Committee stage we had the background to the award medal and now we are at the last stage of it and a complete new proposal is brought without a proper description of what we are going to pass and why we are passing it. It is assumed that we have passed completely new medal.  I think procedurally we have not given it enough time and I wanted to beg that we keep the Kagera and let the Lukaya proposal be discussed– (Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN: Honourable Member I will cut you short.  We are legislating.  What is discussed in Cabinet and in the Committee, when it comes here it can change.  We can even throw the whole thing out.  Now, what I can allow the hon. Omaria to put is the description of the medal that he has been brought before us.  Before we proceed, yes information?

MR. EGOU:  Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The information I want to give is that we have already passed in our deliberation today under clause 30(1): a law that prescribes who establishes new or additional titles of honour.  Under the new 30(h) reads as follows:  
“The President may, by statutory instrument make regulations prescribing- the new (h) reads: 
"the establishment of new and/or additional titles of honour”.  
So, I do not know whether we have the powers to make amendments to the titles of order in view of that!

THE CHAIRMAN: Oh, yes we have.  We can prolong the list to the extent that we are unable to do so.  Anything further will now be within this law. I would like you – to remember the point someone made?  Can you give some hit?  May be you describe it.  That is the order of Lukaya.

MR. OMARIA: I am sorry that the Committee that discussed about the Military decorations did not take part in the 1979 war. I mean most of them were very young.  So there was no way somebody could have supported this amendment. For us who took parts in the 1979 war take it to be important because we lost many people in Lukaya. - Lukaya is where we had the toughest and roughest battle. I know my hon. friend there did not take part in war that is why he does not know what it means. (Laughter).

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman, is it in order for hon. Omaria to base on age to say that I did not participate in the 1979 war when I did? And while I was young we had many areas of battles and victories Lukaya inclusive, which were covered under the Kagera issue.  Is he really in order to say I did not participate when I did on a point of age?

THE CHAIRMAN: I think the hon. Omaria was becoming rather personal. The hon. Maj. Gen. Tumwine was making his contribution on the general principle and it was not proper to say that in doing so they were being ignorant of that battle.  I think that is not in order.  But otherwise you proceed.  

Hon. Omaria you are not justifying whether there should be the order of Lukaya granted by this House.  What you are supposed to do is to describe it. Now if you cannot describe it immediately we can stand it while you consult. We can move to the next item - you harmonise it and come up with something.  

MR. KYEMBA: Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I just want some clarification from the Chairman on the issue of consistency and preference for colonial names for honours and awards in the list particularly those dealing with civilian decorations and medals.  The local names and local sentiments seem to have taken care of the military honours, where sites and people have been recognised by the Minister.But when you go to the civilian decorations on the schedule which has been circulated - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Part what?

MR. KYEMBA: Part1 The civilians decorations and medals 1 to 6. This has been circulated, you will note that 1 to 3 are basically orders of the same name but of different excellence:  "1.The most excellent order of the Pearl of Africa" Clause1 and 11 reserved for Heads of State and others. The Minister will also recall that there was previously: "The most excellent order of the source of the Nile". Which seems to have been replaced by: 
"2.the excellent Order of the Pearl of Africa." 
 The third one is new: the Crested Crane. There is "the Distinguished Order of the Nile" for No. 5 the local name; Nalubaale is used - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: So hon. Member now you propose - (Interruption) 

MR. KYEMBA: Mr. Chairman I would like to propose to the Minister that he goes by the local names which many people know as is the case with military medals or forget this idea of bringing one local name Nalubaale used for the other two orders. I would also like some clarification on the question of past awards; will those be changed to match the new orders that have been issued in this particular schedule?  I would certainly like the Minister to clarify what his preference for colonial names vis-a-vis the local names which are equally important for our community.  I know "Pearl of Africa" was by Winston Churchill's idea but I suppose Nalubaale is important, and Kagera is important. Why are we not using those names?  

THE CHAIRMAN: Is Nalubaale number 6?

MR. KYEMBA: Precisely Mr. Chairman I am in for Nalubaale because it is a local name. It is number 6.  I am only questioning the number 1 and 2 which is the Pearl of Africa and number 3 which is the Nile instead of Kagera.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Mr. Chairman, mine is just clarification.  I am seeking several areas of clarification.  One, I note that a number of awards as mentioned by the Minister are associated with wars.  Is greatness basically measured from the yardstick of fighting?  Two, Uganda still has wars within the country and rotating from area to area.  After the Luwero experience with reference to what the Minister has mentioned, are we not likely to have several such awards attributed to areas of origin?  And lastly, Mr. Chairman I have noted with concern that there are too many awards and many of these awards - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Lukyamuzi you are taking us into a general debate.  Do you have any amendment to make?  That is all.  I know you were not here when we were in general debate.  Can you make the amendment?

MR. LUKYAMUZI: I will make it later.

THE CHIARMAN: Be specific.  Any other amendments on schedule number 2? 

MR. KYEMBA: Mr. Chairman I did propose that we should go for local names as far as - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Propose.

MR. KYEMBA: I would like to propose Mr. Chairman, that instead of: "The most excellent order of the Pearl of Africa" we go for "The most excellent order of the Nile or Kagera." And "2.The excellent order of the Pearl of Africa" should again be: "the most excellent order of the Nile or kagera." Number three, should remain the same; "The Distinguished order of the Nile." - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member I want you to go item by item and we pronounce ourselves.  You are saying the most excellent order of the Pearl of Africa should read 'the most excellent order of the Nile'.  Hon. Member you should not forget that, "the Pearl of Africa" he was referring to is Uganda. - Pearl of Africa was the whole of Uganda, and the beauty of Uganda.  Not a mountain or rivers in Uganda take that into account.  There is an amendment that item 1 under the schedule should read: "The most excellent order of the Nile". 

(Question put and negatived)

MR. KYEMBA: I will not make any further amendments because I know that the House wants. 

THE CHAIRMAN: Will those in favour of schedule 2 say aye to the contrary no.

(Question put and agreed to)

The Title.

THE CHAIRMAN: The Title, Mr. Chairman you had a big point there.

MR. EGOU: Mr. Chairman, I beg to move an amendment on the title to read as follows: "An Act to provide for the creation of the Presidential Awards Committee, recognition and conferment of Titles of Honour, decorations, medals, awards and orders, to provide for a Chancery; for the custody of awards and to provide for other related matters".  
Mr. Chairman the justification being that it will tandem with the details and wording of the memorandum and various amendments that we have put in place.  I beg to move.

THE CHIARMAN: I put the question.

(Question put and agreed to)

MAJ GEN. TUMWINE: Mr. Chairman I request we commit schedule 2 so that we have time to exhaust it including an extra medal which we have not discussed - (Interruption) 

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Member may I suggest this; if you are not satisfied with this other amendment. What you can do before we pronounce ourselves on the motion is to recommit it so that we go in an orderly fashion.

MOTION FOR THE HOUSE TO RESUME.

MR. MULULI MUKASA: Mr. Chairman I beg to move that the House do resume and the committee of the whole House reports thereto. I beg to move.

THE CHAIRMAN: I put the question. 

(Question put and agreed to)

(The House resumed, the Speaker presiding)

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Mr. Speaker, I beg to report that the committee of the whole House has considered the Bill entitled "the National Honours and awards Bill 1999" and passed it with some amendments. 

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT FROM THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE HOUSE.

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Mr. Muruli Mukasa): Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the report from the committee of the whole House be adopted. 

(Question put and agreed to)

MAJ. GEN. TUMWINE:  Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I beg to move a motion that, we recommit schedule two of the Bill and have enough time to reconsider the new proposal of an order that has been introduced in the committee stage. We did not have enough time see whether it needs the requirements and necessary information that goes with an order or a medal. The reasons being that, for any order it must have who to get it and the time.  I beg to move, Mr. Speaker.

THE SPEAKER:  Hon. Members, I think it is a convenient time to adjourn and we shall debate this motion tomorrow.  The House is adjourned to 2.00 O’Clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 5.33 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday 1st February, 2001 at 2.00 O’Clock)




. 

