
Tuesday 30th January, 2001

Parliament met at 2.45 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr. Francis Ayume, in the Chair)

(The House was called to order)

MR. LUKWAMUZI: Thank you Mr. Speaker. It was not my intention to interrupt the well organised Session, I was assured by the Speaker that my important Questions on the Golf Course Green Belt on Yusufu Lule and the other one on the Eastern African General Insurance would have priority when we commenced the new Session.  Would it be prudent if my fears were allayed before hand that all would be all right before we proceed?

THE SPEAKER: Well, you can see that there is no item of Questions and I take it that the Ministers who were to respond to the questions are preparing to do so, that is my understanding. But I will investigate after here whether the questions where transmitted to them and make sure that we re-introduce this Item of Questions by the hon. Members.

MR. LUKYAMUZI: Initially, Mr. Speaker, there was an attempt for Minister of State to dodge the answers and I challenged the Front Bench on that day when we last deliberated. One of the Ministers in Charge of Finance was present but he said he was not in position to answer and I wondered whether a Minister of State has no capacity to represent a Senior Minister if government is a meaningful running gear.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Member, I think it is not unusual - in fact it's an honest way of conducting Business. Even if it was a Cabinet Minister and stands up and says I have not yet concluded or completed my research on your Question and therefore, I am not able to answer.  I think that is an honest answer?     Similarly, it does not follow that when a Minister of State says, he is unable to respond is incapable.  It may mean that he is not ready.  I will give you an example, I attended a Session of Parliament in one of the developed countries, the Prime Minister was asked a Question, he answered it the first time, and the same question was asked in another way he answered it.  The third time, he said, okay, if you insist I will tell you I do not know.  Meaning that really he was not prepared and he needed time to go and prepare.  So, I think there is nothing wrong if a Minister stands up here and say, I am not ready.  Do you not think so?  

But anyway, let us go back to your point, we shall re-introduce the Item on Questions and Answers on the Order Paper. I am sure those Ministers to whom the Questions were directed will come here to answer, if they are not ready they will say so here when your hearing.   Then you can pass judgement on what you want to do.

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE NATIONAL HONOURS AND AWARDS BILL, 1999

THE MINISTER IN CHARGE OF SECURITY, OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT (Muruli Mukasa) Mr. Speaker, I beg to move that the Bill entitled "The National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999" be read the Second Time.  I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Minister, I do not know whether you were present when we adjourned the Consideration of that Item.  We had reached as far as receiving contributions from Members and when we adjourned, I did say that today we will start with the Minister and the chairpersons will wind up.  So if you are standing in for the Minister in Charge of the Presidency then what you are supposed to do is to wind up.

MR. MULULU MUKASA: Mr. Speaker, the National Honours and Awards Bill, 1999 came as a result of the liberation struggle from 1981 to 1986.  After that victory of the National Resistance Movement, government saw it fit to recognise the individual heroism bravely exhibited by both the civilian and army personnel during the entire struggle. In this regard, some of the people were awarded medals. This Bill upholds medals and awards that were awarded before the enactment of that law.  It is also clear that some Ugandans contributed to our development in various civil fields like political social economic and cultural landscapes, which fall outside the period referred to above and they, therefore deserve recognition.  

This Bill was adequately debated and it was submitted to the committee.  The Committee and the Ministry had fruitful deliberations and concurred on many points in this Bill.  It is a very important Bill that gives recognition to people who have served this country well.  I therefore, Mr. Speaker recommend that this Bill do pass.  Thank you Mr. Speaker.

DR. MALLINGA: Thank you Mr. Speaker. There are certain points, which have come out in the Minister’s summary, which cause a lot of concern.  One of them was that, this Bill came as a result of wanting to recognise those who were in the bush, which makes it a very limited in its recognition.  There are people who have contributed to the development of this country though they did not go to the bush and it causes a lot of concern in my heart!  Are they going to be recognised?  Is Benedict Kiwanuka who was a member of DP and died standing for the truth in this country going to be recognised?  Is Musazi going to be recognised?  Is Lule going to be recognised?  Is Kakooma, who wrote the National Anthem going to be recognised?  We better ignore the bush syndrome and be serious and conduct business for the good of this country.  Thank you very much Mr. Speaker.  

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Further clarification

THE SPEAKER: Why don't you let the chairman to wind up?

MR. LUKYAMUZI:  Mr. Speaker on behalf of the people I represent in Lubaga south, lam burning with this question. 

THE SPEAKER: Yes, but we must follow procedure.

THE VICE CHAIRPERSON, SESSIONAL COMMITTEE ON PRESIDENTIAL & FOREIGN AFFAIRS (Mr. Egou): Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. I was also absent when the chairperson who is away on official duty was discussing this Bill.  He did inform me, I stand to be corrected by the House, that the Bill during debate received tremendous support from all members who contributed from the whole House.  No major issues were raised that required specific response from the committee.  

However, in response to what the hon. Mallinga raised, I want to point out that in the report of the committee they looked at rewarding our gallant sons and daughters who fought from the period of 1981 to 1986 to liberate the country. The committee put it to government that there was inescapable thrust of opinion in Uganda that even Ugandans dead or alive who have or had contributed to the country’s development in the various fields outside the period referred to deserve to be recognised.  And that is the recommendation of the committee in this Bill.  

I wish at this juncture to thank this House, and the Minister responsible for the Presidency together with his team for having been very fruitious in the deliberations. Mr. Speaker, the committee has twenty-two amendments, which l will move at an appropriate time.  I thank you very much.  

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members we have reached a stage where we have to take a decision on the motion. We are not in a position to move to that stage.  I will suspend the proceeding for fifteen minutes to see if we shall be in position to overcome that technicality.  

(The House suspended for 15 minutes)

(On resumption, the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Members we still have not overcome the problem.  We shall therefore adjourn to 2.00 O’clock tomorrow.

(The House rose at 3.27p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday 31 January at 2.00 p.m.)

