Wednesday, 31 January 2007

Parliament met at 2.47 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Mr Edward Ssekandi, in the chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, again I welcome you and I thank you for coming. Despite the fact that there is a lot of congestion and traffic jam in town; you have been able to come here on time. Thank you very much.

Yesterday there was a recapitalisation of Housing Finance. It never occurred to me that that was a loan. Paying a loan normally – loans are dealt with by the Committee on National Economy, but we decided to send it to the Committee on Finance. That was on the plea of the Minister of Finance. What I suggest now is that this matter be handled under the chairmanship of the Committee on National Economy but jointly with the Committee on Finance. Thank you very much.

PRESENTATION OF PAPERS

THE MEDIA COUNCIL ANNUAL REPORT, 2006

THE SPEAKER: This falls under Information, the Third Deputy Prime Minister. I understand he is out of the country but I think the office is operating. So what do we do? Leader of –(Interruption)

2.52
THE MINISTER FOR GENERAL DUTIES, PRIME MINISTER’S OFFICE (Mr Adolf Mwesige): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The Media and Journalists’ Act under section 12 of the Press and the Journalists’ Act, 1995, the Media Council is required to submit an annual report on all its activities to the Minister of Information for him to table it to Parliament.

It is now my honour to lay the annual report of the Media Council of 2005 and the Annual Report of the Media Council of 2006 on the Table of Parliament.

THE SPEAKER: I request the appropriate committee of Parliament to study and then report to Parliament as soon as possible. 

A BRIEF TO PARLIAMENT ON THE PROPOSAL FOR A SUPPLEMENTARY LOAN FROM THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND OF UA32.99 MILLION TO FULLY FINANCE THE KABALE-KISORO-BUNAGANA-KYANIKA ROAD PROJECT

THE SPEAKER: Is it a brief or there are papers related to the – honourable minister?

2.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, INVESTMENT (Prof. Semakula Kiwanuka): It is my honour to present this brief to Parliament on the proposal for a supplementary loan from the African Development Fund of UA 32.99 million for fully financing of the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagana-Kyanika Road project.

This brief is for the purpose of seeking Parliament’s approval in line with Article 159 of the Constitution to allow Government to borrow an additional amount of UA32.99 million in order to fully implement the construction of the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagwa-Kyanika road.

I lay the paper on the Table.

THE SPEAKER: When you say supplementary what does that mean? You mean there is another loan request or approved loan that deals with this issue?

PROF. KIWANUKA: Mr Speaker, the background of this supplementary loan request is as follows:

As honourable members may be aware, Parliament did on 17 May 2005 authorise Governmnet to secure UA 27,010,000 from the African Development Fund towards the implementation of the road sector support project, whose main objective is the upgrading of the Kabale-Kisoro-Bunagwa-Kyanika road. The project is being implemented by the Road Agency Formation Unit under the auspices of the Ministry of Works and Transport.

The action required, in light of the foregoing, I will ask the hon. Members of Parliament:

a)	To note this brief and the draft resolution attached to it.
b)	To agree that there is need to procure the said supplementary loan from the African Development Fund at the stated terms and conditions.
c)	To authorise my ministry in line with Article 159 of the Constitution and by passing the resolution attached to this brief, to borrow the said amount of UA32.99 million from the ADF, for the purpose of fully financing the said road.  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the position is that previously we authorised Governmnet to get a loan for this project but it seems that it has been found necessary to requisition for more funds to complete. Therefore, I think the purpose of today’s business, which the Minister has been handling is to lay before us a paper dealing with this particular issue so that the relevant committee, that is the Committee on Economy, can examine this and then report to us for necessary authorisation. 

2.58
MR HENRY BANYENZAKI (NRM, Rubanda County West, Kabale): Thank you, Mr Speaker. When we passed this loan last year in May we had expected that with this loan works on the road were going to begin immediately. But in the event that the money was not enough and they are seeking a supplementary loan, I would have expected that the principal money would be doing the work as of now. I would like the Minister to clarify, since we already passed the loan in May, almost a year ago, why haven’t we used that money that we passed to begin on the road and this would just be a supplementary? When we are passing supplementary, it should supplement the on-going work. Why are we stalling the whole project? Why can’t we allow the project to take off?  

2.59
MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA (NRM, Buvuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I would also love to hear from the Minister telling us the performance of the first loan. It is not prudent and proper for the honourable minister to come to this august House just to seek approval of loans. In the first place, let Parliament be advised on the performance of the first loan and if it has not performed, why do you want the supplementary? Supplementary means that you have exhausted the first batch.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the purpose of today’s business is to seek supplementary. Maybe the person to answer the progress is not the same minister who requisitioned for the money. Therefore, by bringing this business to us, it will afford the committee concerned an opportunity to ask all these questions and even ask the parent ministry to attend and explain the progress on the first loan. But this should be in the committee.

3.00
MR NATHAN BYANYIMA (NRM, Bukanga County, Isingiro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Most of the colleagues here were not in this Parliament when this loan was being passed. But today the Minister for Finance has just vaguely talked of a supplementary. I think it is proper and fitting that the Minister of Works tells this House about this project so that by the time the Committee on National Economy brings another report here, the Members are fully versed with what has been happening so that we can get an update rather than having the Minister of Finance who has just vaguely talked about the project and yet our people are being hurt by this particular project. 

THE SPEAKER: But let us be structured in handling the business. Under what business will the Minister of Works come to explain? As for today, the Order Paper is about a loan. I think if the committee deals with this loan, it may reject or may say, “There is a lot of money that has not been used. Why should we incur another loan?” Or they may be satisfied. When they do, that is the appropriate time the Minister of Works will come to explain what has happened when the business is properly on the Order Paper.

3.02
MR STEVEN MUGENI WASIKE (NRM, Samia-Bugwe North, Busia): Thank you, Mr Speaker. According to Article 159 of our Constitution, when a loan request comes to Parliament it is supposed to be accompanied with the terms. I wish to know whether the terms have come with this request.

THE SPEAKER: I have said this was laying of papers. When you lay papers, then they are taken to be examined. When they are examined, the committee will be in position to say, “We need this detail and the other.” Maybe the committee will find those details here. It is not yet time for us to deal with this before the committee has examined the paper. That question has merit but this is not the right time to ask because within our system, there is a committee that will first deal with the paper and any Member will be free when they are examining it to go and participate in the proceedings of the committee.

3.03
THE CHAIRPERSON, STANDING COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL ECONOMY (Mr Ibrahim Kaddunabbi): I would like to inform my colleagues that I have received a copy of the loan request, which is being laid on the Table and we have already programmed to meet the Minister next week so that we could have the details and we shall report to this august House when time comes.

MR NSUBUGA: With due respect, is it in order for hon. Al hajji Kaddunabbi to come to this august House and inform us that what is being laid has already been given or handed over to him and he has even made programmes? What is the essence of bringing it here now? Is it in order for the Executive to operate like that?  

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, let us not waste a lot of our time. He is the chairman of the committee. I have got a copy here too and I think what he was trying to do is to inform you that this matter is going to be considered by the committee and any Member who is interested to participate in the proceedings can do so. I think we have handled this matter. 

MR BANYENZAKI: Mr Speaker, mine is simple. There is money that is idle. We passed a loan in May –(Interruption)

3.05
MRS KABAKUMBA MASIKO (NRM, Bujenje County, Masindi): Mr Speaker -(Laughter)- I was the vice-Chairperson for the Committee on National Economy of this House. We passed this loan even before I was a Member of that loan they are trying to supplement. Hon. Banyenzaki was, and still is, a member of that committee and he knows the procedure because you have clearly guided that all these questions, including his, are going to be asked in that committee. When the committee brings a report to this House, Members will be free to ask and debate but if we start asking questions - because there are many questions that will need to be answered and they can be answered in detail during the Committee Stage and not in this House. The procedure I am asking is, is it correct Rt hon. Speaker?

THE SPEAKER: Well what I can explain hon. Banyenzaki, it seems you are concerned that money was granted in May but to your personal knowledge, no work is going on. I think the proper way to find out the answer is for you to ask a question to the parent ministry, now the Ministry of Works, as to why in view of the fact that we gave them money in May, nothing is going on. But today the business is under the Ministry of Finance because it is the one to look for the funds and pass it to the parent ministry for projects. But as to the execution of the project, it is the parent minister, headed by engineer Nasasira here, to answer, but he has no question to answer as of now.

MR NASASIRA: I have some information here to give.

THE SPEAKER: Please do.

3.08
THE MINISTER OF WORKS (Mr John Nasasira): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Let me just give one piece of information. The procedure is that Government comes here to ask for approval of a loan for a project, in this case a road project. As soon as Parliament gives that approval, then the relevant ministry in this case the Ministry of Works, can go ahead and tender for the project. So that is what happened when Parliament approved that loan. 

We went ahead and tendered for the project and when the tenders were received, the money that had been made under the engineer’s estimates was not enough, not even for the lowest bidder. So we could not start the project because what we had borrowed from the ADB was not adequate to start the project. So Government went back to ADB and asked for a supplementary loan so that we could have enough money to start the project. All those are given in the paper that has been laid on the Table for honourable members. And that process took its time to see why that money was not enough et cetera, which information you will get. 

Finally, after ADB had convinced themselves that the bidding was okay, but the engineering estimate was wrong, that is why the ADB bard eventually approved the loan on the same terms -(Interruption)- let me finish - on the same terms. 

What I understand with hon. Banyenzaki, he is saying that since we had approved the other money, why don’t we start the project? We could not start it until we had enough money. The other ADB money would not have been touched without getting more money because it was not covering the project as the purpose. But if it was in order for us, we were ready to start yesterday and launch the project but we wanted to wait for the approval of the extra money so that the full project can be implemented. Otherwise, we would not touch any dollar from the other money without complete financing. So I only want to beg that the Committee on National Economy quickly assesses this loan and we come back here and as soon as Parliament approves the loan, we shall be on the road starting the project.

3.10
MR TRESS BUCYANAYANDI (Independent, Bufumbira County South, Kisoro): Thank you, Mr Speaker. We have basic concerns over this road. One is that this road has been on the drawing board for a long time. We are also aware that money was borrowed and although supplementaries were required, one of the concerns is that is there any counterpart funding available to start on this road even if this ADB money were available? That is concern number one. 

Then the second concern, clearly in the absence of money for compensation purposes, this road is still unlikely to start even if the ADB loan were approved. That is very basic.

Finally, because of the time lag it has taken from the negotiations up to the present, I think there is need to set a practical timetable for us to inform the people who are concerned that this road may not start. We have heard of promises of starting in September, and then January. Now we know that this thing is going to the committee and it is not even going to start as soon as it is said. So can we also have two things clarified: one, the addition of counterpart funding for compensation purposes and two, a practical timetable to the estimated time of completion? Thank you, Sir.

MR WILLIAM NSUBUGA: Mr Speaker, I would also want to add that it has been reported in the Auditor-General’s report that a lot of money being borrowed by Government is unutilised. This is just one example. You have said they are going to the committee but as Parliament, whenever you borrow money and you don’t use it, there is a fine. The Government is paying over 30 percent of its total budget in fines.

THE SPEAKER: Hon. Nsubuga, since you say this is in the Auditor-General’s report and the Public Accounts Committee acts on the Auditor-General’s report, you consider it in the Public Accounts Committee, report to us and then we shall debate the report.

3.13
MR OGWEL LOOTE (Independent, Moroto Municipality, Moroto): Mr Speaker and honourable members, my concern on this loan is that the minister presented his work plan on this road to the Ministry of Finance. And the Minister of Finance went and requested for this loan, which was given. Now why do you come here and ask for the money and all of a sudden turn around and say that it is not enough? That shows lack of work planning – completely poor planning and poor budgeting. Can you clear that?

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, I think all these questions have merits but they are not being handled at the right place. The right place for handling these questions should start in the committee, which is going to handle this matter. When the committee presents its report, some of the comments you are making will be part of your contribution to the report. Therefore, let us really wait - give opportunity to the committee to examine this; ask questions; get answers; and report to us and then we shall contribute when the report is presented.

MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT MOVED ACCORDING TO SECTION 3 OF THE SALARIES AND ALLOWANCES’ SPECIFIED OFFICERS ACT (CAP. 291) FOR THE PURPOSE OF AMENDING THE SECOND SCHEDULE TO THAT ACT RELATING TO THE SALARIES, ALLOWANCES AND BENEFITS OF JUDGES

3.15
THE SECOND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER AND MINISTER OF PUBLIC SERVICE (Mr Henry Kajura): Some overzealous officer has brought this matter, which has been put on the Order Paper. I beg that we be given say two weeks to bring it after the various procedures have been fulfilled, that is, Cabinet and the committee.

THE SPEAKER: Well, but what we need clearance about overzealousness in Parliament or elsewhere. (Laughter)

MR KAJURA: Mr Speaker, it must be one of my people in the ministry.

THE SPEAKER: Okay. Well, he is not ready with the motion.

MOTION SEEKING LEAVE OF THE HOUSE TO SUSPEND RULE 43 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE OF PARLIAMENT TO ENABLE THE MINISTER MOVE A MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT IN ACCORDANCE WITH ARTICLE 210 OF THE CONSTITUTION AND SECTION 39(2) OF THE UPDF ACT, 2005, FOR APPROVAL BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REQUEST BY THE PRESIDENT TO DEPLOY UPDF TROOPS IN SOMALIA

3.16
THE MINISTER OF DEFENCE (Dr Crispus Kiyonga): Thank you Mr Speaker and hon. Members of Parliament. I want to move under rule 14, to suspend rule 43, which requires that if one is going to move a resolution on the Floor of Parliament, three days’ notice should be given. 

The reason I want to seek this suspension is that following the Summit of the African Union in Addis Ababa, the heads of state have expressed urgency for the African Union to move into Somalia to assist stabilise the situation in that sister African country. It is for this reason that I request my colleagues to allow us to suspend rule 43 so that I can move the resolution. I beg to move, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Okay, it is seconded. Proceed to justify.

DR KIYONGA: Mr Speaker, as honourable colleagues in the House are aware, our sister country, Somalia, has been unstable for a long time. Our leaders, the heads of state on the continent supported by the UN, have been taking progressive steps that should lead to more active intervention in that country of Africa. Given our constitutional regime, if the country is to deploy troops outside, and in this case Somalia, the President will require permission from Parliament. 

Given this urgency, Mr Speaker, we have come to the    House to move this resolution and we want the honourable colleagues to allow us to suspend rule 43 so that we can move the resolution. I beg to move.

THE SPEAKER: Any further contributions on the issue?

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you, Mr Speaker. There were issues that the Minister was asked in the caucus regarding issues of procedure. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, here I am not dealing with caucus matters -(Laughter)- caucus matters are domestic matters.

3.20
MR ASUMAN KIYINGI (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I am uncomfortable with us suspending the requirement for the notice, particularly in view of the fact that this matter has been with us for a very long time. It has all along been known that Governmnet requires approval to go to Somalia. For the Executive to come after the Opposition has walked out and say we should now suspend the rules and debate this motion, gives an indication that actually -(Interjection)- Can I be protected, Mr Speaker? 

I am strongly of the view that this is a very important national decision we are taking and we should all participate in taking this decision. Doing it in the manner we are doing it may raise suspicion. I would strongly suggest that we observe the rules.

THE SPEAKER: When is the Opposition supposed to rejoin you? I think you should talk about the merits of the motion to suspend the rule. As far as I am concerned, the proceedings of the House are going on.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I agree entirely that the House is proceeding, but we have had an issue of fundamental importance raised in this House.

THE SPEAKER: I have ruled that I do not chair parliamentary caucuses.

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, the issue I am raising, which was the source of the walk out, has been before the Parliamentary Committee on Legal and Parliamentary Affairs. The issue was with respect to disregarding court orders. The Committee on Parliamentary and Legal Affairs took exception to that and even asked the Minister to explain. In fact there are Members who were of the view that actually the Constitution had been overthrown. It is that serious! So, if a matter like that is raised on the Floor of the House -(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable member, the motion on the Floor of this House is for leave under Rule 14 of our rules, to suspend Rule 43 which requires anybody who wants to bring a motion here to give three days’ notice. The mover has given his reasons. If you want to oppose, go ahead and we proceed but the House is continuing with its business. As I said, I regret that one side walked out and I have appealed to them to come back. But this does not mean that we will not continue with our work. 

MR KIYINGI: Mr Speaker, I want to say that I am uncomfortable with the suspension of our rules. I want it to be put on record that I opposed it.

THE SPEAKER: Yes, that is okay. Let us hear from the Member from Fort Portal.

3.22
MR STEVEN KALIBA (NRM, Fort Portal Municipality, Kabarole): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I think the Minister of Defence has given a very convincing explanation as to why we should suspend Rule 43. I rise to support that we suspend this rule so that the minister can move the motion.

3.23
MS MARIAM NALUBEGA (Independent, Female Youth Representative): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I appreciate the request by the Minister of Defence, but I am also of the view that we do not suspend this rule. I do not think it would delay so much if we gave notice of three days. Maybe by then our colleagues would have thought twice and come back to participate in debating this national matter. 

Today we are looking at it just from the surface but it might lead to other challenges. I beg this honourable House that let us not be selfish. Let us not look so much at today and forget about tomorrow. I beg the minister to give the notice of three days. In those three days, something will happen and then we shall be together and take this decision together. I thank you.

MR BANYENZAKI: I want to inform the honourable that what she is requesting is actually stipulated in Rule 43. Now, can the minister clarify whether he gave a three days’ notice before this motion? (Interruption). Let me read the rule verbatim so that you understand want I am talking about: “Subject to the provisions of Rule 44, no motion shall be moved unless the Member moving it has given written notice of the same to the Speaker and the Clerk not less than three days previous to the sitting at which it is intended to be moved.” 

So the clarification, which I –(Interruption)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable Banyenzaki, you read Rule 14, because in moving he referred you to 14. What does 14 say? Please you read it to us.

MR BANYENZAKI: It says: “(1) Any Member may, with the consent of the Speaker, move that any rule be suspended in its application to a particular motion before the House and if the motion is carried, the rule in question shall be suspended.” 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, a motion has been moved, let us see if there are merits or not in it and then we decide.

3.28
MR JOHNSON TOSKIN BARTILLE (NRM, Kongasis County, Bukwo): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. I stand to support the motion of the minister. I think all of us have been following the conflict that is going on in Somalia. It would look rather queer if this Parliament does not rise up to support the minister in this matter. Uganda is number one among the African countries, which have come out to give support to the African Union. It is trying to see that we get the best way to stop the genocide, the killing that is going on in Somalia. 

Right now, the whole continent of Africa and our leaders are in Addis Ababa talking over this issue. There is no other time. We cannot wait for more people to die. Our parliament is well constituted now. We know the Opposition are out, but this cannot stop us from going ahead to decide on this matter. 

I appeal to the Members that we give this matter consideration because it is very urgent. I have heard people saying that there is nothing very urgent. But sincerely, what is more urgent than stopping a conflict in which we are losing a lot of lives? I thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.30
MR WILLIAM OKECHO (Independent, West Budama County North, Tororo): Mr Speaker, I think we all know that the honourable minister just sought our indulgence to suspend Rule 43 so that he can present the motion. We have talked so much about this and we know the urgency of this issue. So, I move that the question be put. (Laughter)

THE SPEAKER: Well, you are entitled. But since I see some three people, who want to make contributions, let us hear them out and then I will put the question.

3.32
MS JOYCE KWEBIHA (NRM, Woman Representative, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I stand here to support the minister so that we suspend Rule 43 of our Rules of Procedure. I say this because of the enormous suffering and death of the people of Somalia. Somalia is an African country and as a woman, I know that it is mostly the women and children that are dying. We should also bear in mind that with death you cannot wait.

Secondly, I support that we stand on Rule 46(2), which says: “A Member may move a motion without notice in the following manner -” and it gives the details to which the minister has complied. I support the motion.

3.33
MR MEDDIE MULUMBA (NRM, Luuka County, Iganga): Thank you, Mr Speaker. Since last year, the minister has been knowing that we are going to deploy our troops. Actually our troops are ready but he has been sitting wherever he has been. It is a sign of bad faith when he comes here and uses other words in order to stampede us into debating the motion and bending the laws. I don’t support the motion and I am of the opinion that we should follow the law. Thank you, Mr Speaker.

3.34
MRS MARY MUGYENYI (NRM, Nyabushozi County, Kiruhura): Thank you, Mr Speaker. It is a noble cause to send our troops to Somalia. Uganda is very well known for supporting sister countries when it comes to liberation wars. But we only need three days in order to follow the procedures. Is it really necessary to suspend the rules for just three days to be able to follow the rules as established by this Parliament? I would suggest that we follow the rules and observe the three days necessary to give notice to this House. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Well, I should put the question. Do you want further contributions on this?

3.35
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS (REGIONAL COOPERATION) (Mr Isaac Musumba): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. Sir, this is a procedural motion. This is a motion that is laying the foundation for an introduction of a substantive motion. When the substantive motion is introduced in this House, the House will decide on how it wants to deal with the substantive motion. Therefore, this is a procedural motion, which is that we would want to bring to the attention of this House a motion, which they will deliberate on today, tomorrow and on the day after tomorrow. That is all we are asking for and we are doing so within our Rules of Procedure and we just want to be allowed to abridge this period of notice so that we bring this matter to the attention of the House. I beg to support the motion, Mr Speaker.

3.36
MS GRACE TUBWITA (NRM, Woman Representative, Nakasongola): Thank you very much, Mr Speaker. As much as we have a rule, which allows us to suspend, we should learn to follow some of the clauses in our Rules of Procedure. All along we have been knowing that we shall send our troops to Somalia and no one is against that. We are in support of that but we need our clause to be followed unless there is really an urgent matter, which has arisen, that is when we should suspend a rule. But we have known for a long time that we shall send our troops to Somalia. 

We are setting a bad precedent if we don’t start using some of the clauses, which are in the Rules of Procedure, which were adopted in this august House. I request that the honourable minister follows the proper procedures and we debate this motion at an appropriate time when it comes before us. He would have followed the rules earlier on because they have known that we had to approve the deployment. I thank you, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I want to put the question. The motion is that we suspend Rule 43 requiring notice of three days before a motion can be moved and that this motion is made under Rule 14 of our Rules of Procedure. 

(Question put.)

(The Members voted by a show of hands.)

THE SPEAKER: The position is as follows: Abstentions 4; Ayes 43; and Nays 45.

(Question negatived.)

PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT ON E-PARLIAMENT ENERGY HEARING MEETING HELD IN NAIROBI FROM THE 16TH TO 20TH OF NOVEMBER 2006

3.43
MR JOHN KIGYAGI (NRM, Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Mr Speaker, I would like to correct the impression given. It is not a report but a brief on the E-Parliament Energy Hearing in Nairobi from the 16th to 20th of November last year.  

Mr Speaker, I was invited on behalf of the Parliament of Uganda to attend the E-Parliament Hearing on sustainable energy, which was co-sponsored by the E-Parliament and the World Future Council.

E-Parliament is a new global forum in which democratic legislators work together to exchange and implement good policy ideas on energy and climate.  

This E-Parliament Hearing followed the international climate change meeting in Nairobi.  The experts who attended the meeting in Nairobi followed the E-Parliament in Amboseli National Park. The meeting was similar in format to the parliamentary committee hearings. Leading experts on energy and climate change made presentations to 30 Members of Parliament from all over the world, in which I was privileged to be.

Experts on climate change, energy and forests told us about the changes in climate and its dangers and the respected experts from oil warned us of the global supply of oil which is likely to pick in the coming years and this drives the prices higher. So, they said that there was an urgent need to provide an energy access to the poor if this serious situation was to be mitigated. The main issues, among the many others, which were raised and addressed on this bearing, were:

1.	How we as legislators can promote a rapid shift to an energy efficient economy that is powered increasingly by renewal energy.

2.	Then the second aspect that was considered in detail was, how we as legislators in developing countries can be supported by our colleagues in the North to promote a climate friendly path to development while ensuring that everyone has accessed modern energy services.

3.	Renewal energy efficiency and energy access for the poor citizens were strategically focused on by the national parliaments.

It was also observed that there was a growing chorus of alarm from scientists on the new global warming signs by burning fuels and destroying forests. We have increased the level of carbon dioxide to about 30 percent. As carbon dioxide goes up in the atmosphere, the climate changes because there is general global warming.  

Climate energy and the damage to eco-systems in the different aspects are causing a global crisis, which need the energies and the brains of all parliamentarians over the world to discuss and see how we can mitigate this problem.

It was also noted that among the millennium development goals, energy was not mentioned and it is so difficult in the world to achieve the millennium goals without the aspect of energy.  

Energy is indispensable for poverty alleviation and for providing services in areas of health, communication and productivity. More than 1.6 billion people globally live without access to electricity and 2.4 billion without modern energy services for cooking and heating. The majority of the world live in the Sub-Saharan Africa and when it comes to electricity, the position of Africa is that 80 percent of our people do not have access to electricity. In Uganda, the situation is even grimmer. Only three percent of our rural population have access to electricity.  

So, what are the effects in summary of the climate change, global warming?  

1.	There are droughts and falling levels of water, which everybody knows. The floods all over the world, famine as a result of drought, the hurricanes like Katrina, which even the strong countries cannot support, cyclones.  The sea level has risen by 25 meters and countries that live near the sea level are already flooded. Unless we have mitigation measures, even those countries in the developed world will not be able to manage that.

2.	There is damage to infrastructure; there is loss of productive land; there is eco-system alterations; there is increasing instances of climate related diseases; loss of property and life; it is threatening the continued existence of living organs including man. The least developed countries are prone to more problems of climate change: there are outbreaks of waterborne diseases. 

Where we were meeting in Amboseli, which is around the foot of Mt Kilimanjaro, of the 1920 caps of ice, 83 percent have been lost. This has been lost through global warming and melting. As we talk, Mt Rwenzori’s ice cap is retracting, so we have a lot of climate related disasters. Individually and jointly, we have all caused the climate change and irrespective of our contributions to this problem, we shall all be affected. 

United States and China have given a bad example by refusing to ratify the KYOTO protocol. This protocol requires the developed countries to reduce their emissions of carbon dioxide by 5.2 percent of the 1990 levels. The highest polluters of the environment in this world are United States, China, India, South Africa, Brazil and Mexico.  

As legislators, we are charged with the mandate to shape, influence laws and strategies, policies and plans pertinent to energy and climate change.  

Alternative forms of energy production including solar, wind mills, small-scale hydro stations, co-generation, biogas, bio-fuels and geothermal were discussed and presentations were worked out and given successfully. 

As Uganda Parliament, we presented our request to the E-Parliament to help us as a committee on Natural Resources, to be able to make an input in the oil policy, which we expect the Executive to table very soon.  So, my call to my colleagues is that all committees should use the forum of the E-Parliament, which is a global forum, because they have experts. They have countries, which are handling the same issues, which we might be handling in our committees. This will help us to make very good laws, policies and decisions which will help us in managing especially the eco-systems in this country and in the world over. I thank you very much, Mr Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much for the brief and representation.

3.52
MR JOSEPH MUGAMBE (NRM, Nakifuma County, Mukono): Thank you, Mr Speaker. I will start off by thanking hon. Kigyagi for the brief as he has called it.  I would like to request the committee to come up with a comprehensive report in relation to climatic changes. We want to relate what they discussed in that meeting with the situation here in Uganda.

Of late, there are a lot of discussions on global warming. There are others who are saying that they are exaggerations and there are others who think what is being stated is a reality.  I have noted that in all the forms of energy discussed - they talked about renewal energy, but I don’t know why they left out nuclear energy. It is also an option. I don’t know why it is not being considered. 

I know there are about 140 nuclear reactors over the world generating energy. I think when people hear of nuclear reactors they think of nuclear weapons, but we want a source of clean energy, with no emissions, no carbon no nothing. 

It is a contradiction to see that we are getting more water leased from the ice caps – the Antarctic and Arctic - and at the same time we are getting deserts. So, I think we need a more elaborate report with facts that we can discuss and relate to our economy so that we don’t get problems. Otherwise, I would like to thank hon. Kigyagi – I wish he had told us the rule under which he is presenting this brief so that we can know how to address it well. (Laughter)

MOTION FOR PRESENTATION, CONSIDERATION AND ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON COMMISSIONS, STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AND STATE ENTERPRISES ON THE PERFORMANCE OF THE NATIONAL MEDICAL STORES

3.55
COL (RTD) TOM BUTIME (NRM, Mwenge County North, Kyenjojo): Thank you, Mr Speaker. The committee has mandated me to present this report. This report is being circulated, but it was ready by yesterday. It is a voluminous report, and I don’t intend to read the whole of it. I will guide the Members through the report and they can do the reading along or later.

Mr Speaker, while as Article 163(4)(5) and 164 of the Constitution of the Republic of Uganda enjoins Parliament to enforce accountability of public funds, Rule 153 of the Rules of Procedure of Parliament on the other hand specifically mandates the Committee on Commissions, Statutory Authorities and State Enterprises to carry out the following duties among others: - (a) “To examine the reports and audited accounts of statutory authorities, corporations and public enterprises and in the context of their autonomy and efficiency, ascertain whether their operations are being managed in accordance with the required competence and where applicable, in accordance with sound business principles and prudent commercial practices.” 

Now this continues throughout page 2. The methodology is on page 2; scope and information sources are on page 3 and what is important on page 3 that I would like to draw your attention to is that this report covers seven financial years beginning from 1997/98 to 2003/04.  

For the seven financial years examined by the committee, we noted unprecedented financial scandals that culminated in litigations, dismissals and interdictions of many staff of various ranks. These form the major part of our report as detailed out in the audited accounts.

Mr Speaker, the committee wishes to acknowledge the co-operation it received from all those who appeared and provided useful information particularly the board and management of NMS, the Ministers of Finance, Planning and Economic Development and other stakeholders.

We also thank hon. Kiyingi Asuman, former board secretary and now Member of Parliament of this House, hon. Prof. Anokbonggo Willy, Member of this House and former board chairman for their contribution. We also wish to register and acknowledge the assistance we received from the Auditor General, the criminal investigations department and the media.

The committee finally appreciates the technical support rendered by the Office of the Clerk to Parliament during our deliberations up to the production of this report.

We now move to page 4 where you have the background; page 5 you have the vision and mission statement of National Medical Stores; page 6 you have appointment of directors. And our attention to you, Mr Speaker, is that the board chairman informed the committee that under Section 8(3) of NMS Act, all directors are appointed by the Minister responsible for Health for a period not exceeding three years and that the current board is the fourth board of directors of NMS. It was appointed with effect from 13 May 2005 on a three-year term, which term shall expire on the 12 May 2008. However, according to the Act, all members are eligible for reappointment.

The committee noted that the board is constituted by not more than 16 members and that in making his appointment, the minister is required to appoint two directors as proposed by the National Drug Authority, one director, each proposed severally by:

a)	The Ministry responsible for Finance, Planning and Economic Development.
b)	The Minister responsible for Local Government.
c)	The medical missions. And
d)	One expert in each of the following fields: 

•	Company law or corporate management – that is page 7
•	The profession of pharmacy
•	The profession of medicine
•	Primary health care.

The establishment of NMS was primarily intended to establish a reliable and sustainable National Drug Supply system. Therefore, the performance of the board may be measured against the following principle objectives of the corporation. And the objectives are spelt out here: I, II, III, IV.

We go to page 8, issues raised: Arising from the board’s presentation, the committee demanded to know the capacity and effectiveness of policy formulation and monitoring of responsibilities that are implemented by the management. 

The committee observed that a lot had been said and written in both the print and electronic media regarding the expiry of drugs in stores. The board was consequently asked to comment about this expiry of drugs and its causes. 

The committee further inquired on how NMS was going about discharging this mandate. They also demanded to know what procurement systems and procedures have guided NMS since its establishment.

The board responded as follows:

The committee was informed that the board was new and had spent a few months in office. However, there are individuals within the board that had been reappointed from the previous board. The committee was assured that the new board had put in place a strategic investment plan to help revamp the corporation. 

The board admitted to the expiry of drugs in stores, which was also a subject of inquiry by the parent ministry. This incident resulted in the interdiction of the general manager and the head of stores and procurement by the minister.

The committee noted that the most affected drug was the “Trimion pack” and “ARV” drugs. However, the committee noted that other drugs had equally been expiring in stores and this is an old phenomenon. 

Regarding the causes of the expiry of drugs, the committee heard that there are a number of causes among which include the involvement of third party stocks, the slow uptake of drugs and laxity by the regional districts and health centre facilities in presenting requisitions on a bi-monthly basis to NMS.

In light of the importance of NMS in the procurement and distribution of drugs in the country, the Ministry of Health must work quickly to ensure that the board’s capacity is built to execute its mandate more effectively and efficiently. 

And the board must be facilitated to supervise upcountry facilities at least twice a year. The board must address the chronic problem of drug expiry in stores. The board activities must stretch out to the lower health centre IV facilities as opposed to a district and referral hospital facilities. This could be done by decentralisation of stores to regional headquarters. 

The board must improve its vigilance in detecting causes of corruption in the procurement and financial internal control system in order to curb mismanagement in the drug supply industry.

In the case of conflicting policies and laws, the Ministry of Health should work with sectors in Government to harmonise them with a view of improving the procurement and distribution of drugs in the country to mitigate the impact of influx of third party procurement and supplies.

On the whole, page 10 has the achievements of the National Medical Stores up to page 11. On page 12, you have the continuation of the same. On page 13, you have the challenges faced by the National Medical Stores, which the committee thinks it is very important to read. 

The Chairman of the Board Dr Philip Byaruhanga listed the following as the challenges facing the National Medical Stores: 

Supplier performance

Poor supplier performance in terms of delivery, product range and narrow supplier base caused by the registration system. 

Conflicting policies and laws

Conflicting policies and laws; Uganda Investment Authority, Public Enterprise Reform Divestiture Department, National Drug Authority, Ministry of Local Government and Public Procurement and Dispose of Assets Strategies Programmes. These create serious market distortions in unlevelled ground market and sub-optimal utilisation of scarce Government and donor resources. 

Bureaucracy

Lengthy procedure: Characteristics of regulated bodies have bedevilled National Medical Stores leading to slow decision-making.

Geographical Location

The majority of staff stay in and around or even beyond Kampala. Although officers at the headquarters and some staff have motor vehicles purchased on company loans, other staff have two bus shuttles that move from Kampala to Entebbe. Logistics are not only inconvenient but also expensive in terms of fuel, maintenance costs and time lost in commuting to and from Entebbe and places of residence. Very few staff are willing to stay in Entebbe. 

Inadequate funds and debts:

Increased operations have impacted negatively on the funding capacity. This is aggravated by the fact that National Medical Stores has to wait for over two months before getting payment because of the operation of the credit line system. Debts have aggravated this problem. Prominent among these debts are the pre-commitment system debts and debts from third party programmes.

Lack of adequate storage space:

Due to the increased activity and volume of stock, the available storage space at NMS has been constrained.

Mr Speaker, on page 15, we have attempts to address the above challenges and I am sure Members will be able to read through and get fully informed. 

On page 16, you have performance of management and page 17 is a continuation of the performance up to page 18, where we find audited accounts. This is now the report of the Auditor General. The Auditor General reported that the process of recording the corporation’s transactions and safeguarding its assets from unauthorised use or disposition was significantly dependent on the design and operation of its internal control structure. 

During the year, the operation of internal control structure at National Medical Stores was unsatisfactory. This was demonstrated but not restricted to a protracted fraud perpetuated by staff of the corporation. That resulted into loss of cash amounting to Ugshs 1.3 billion reported in 96/97 and Shs 153 million reported in the cashbook. 

Mr Speaker, the reports of the Auditor General continue throughout up to almost page 40. But I will pick out what to read just because I want to save some time. On page 20, having discussed with the committee in the presence of the Auditor General, the response of management was as follows: The accounting officer who is a general manager admitted that there was financial fraud involving more than Ugshs 13 billion in the organisation in 1998. This adversely affected the operations of the institution.  

He further submitted that following a tip-off from Standard Chartered Bank, Police and the Internal Audit Management Unit carried out investigations and the evidence deduced implicated the following persons: Mr David Kimoimo, former head of finance department, Mr Patrick Kyakulaga, former accountant, Mr James Mukwaya, former accountant, Mr Nelson Okao, former accounts clerk, Mr Francis Asiimwe, former staff of Gold Trust Bank and Mr Joseph Katende, a businessman. 

It was also explained that under criminal case No. 1063 of 2003 (Mr Nelson Okao and others), the case was handled by the High Court. He however stated that Mr Samuel Kasamba, the then general manager/ accounting officer had been acquitted by the High Court and is currently with the United Nations in Monrovia, Liberia.  

The general manager also disclosed that only Ugshs 400 million was recovered from the then Gold Trust bank and banked on NMS account.  He reported that due to the closure of the banks involved in the scandal, NMS was finding it difficult to proceed. 

The committee was also informed and assured that NMS has since established an Internal Audit Department that reports to the board.  

Mr Speaker, the committee recommends the following: 

1.	That National Medical Stores should use every available means to recover the debts including the attachment of assets of those implicated in the fraud. 
2.	It is the opinion of the committee that the Attorney-General reinstates Mr Samuel Kasamba.   
3.	The board should also retain its mandate of overseeing NMS operations including responsibility for financial regulations. In this vein, therefore, the provision in the rules that mandates management to interpret and amend the financial regulations should be removed from the financial regulations manual.
4.	The committee recommends that public officers who cause financial loss to public institutions should be black listed and should never be employed in the public sector.  
5.	Internal control systems should be strengthened to detect fraud at an early stage.  

The Auditor-General reported that the investigation report on the fraud indicated that part of the cash lost was proceeds from debt collection at different dates and that given the fraud environment, it was considered most appropriate to confirm the debtor balances directly and independently from the debtors themselves. 

He further noted that most of the debtors that were selected did not respond to the requests and in circumstances of unsatisfactory internal controls there were no practical audit procedures that could be adopted to obtain assurance that debtors were fairly stated.  

It was also reported that the debts included Ugshs 5,015,038 due from Central Government and Government hospitals that were long overdue; and that no appropriate provision was made for doubtful amounts. Included among debts was Ugshs 84,171,113 relating to staff debts for which no supporting schedule was provided. Consequently, it could not be confirmed that the debts were fairly stated in the accounts.

The committee was informed that reconciliation of debtors’ balances to the control account had been done and that it had revealed that the differences of Ugshs 365,453,784 was a result of including the cost of expired drugs in the debtors’ schedule. It was also explained that during the year under audit, NMS customers were paying on account thus making it difficult to allocate payments received to particular invoices.  

The committee was also informed that management had noted that this practice renders reconciliation and aging debtors’ accounts problematic but presently, all payments received are allocated to particular invoices.

The committee observed- on page 24 on top- that huge debts are owed by Government institutions like State House, ministries of Health, Defence, Local Government, Finance Planning and Economic Development.  

It was further observed that there were accumulated staff debts incurred through the individual loan scheme which was not properly documented and therefore difficult to recover.  

There is a discussion with the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, which Members will read and there is information about the suspense account on page 25. 

On page 26, you have the recurring matter reported in previous years; on page 27, we discussed stocks; on page 28, you have responses from management; page 29, the report of the Auditor-General for the year 1999; page 30, the Auditor-General’s report for the year ending 30 June 2000 and on page 31 the continuation of the 2000 audited report. 

On page 31 is the continuation of the 2000 audited report; page 32, the year 2001 report; page 33 the continuation of 2001; page 34, audited accounts for the year ending 30 June 2002 which go up to page 36.

Mr Speaker, on page 36, the management informed the committee that National Medical Stores was attempting to correct stock costing by considering this aspect in newly introduced Navision Accounting Package. This is a system that helps accounting officers manage accounting software.  Software has been introduced in the National Medical Stores and this one almost satisfied the Auditor-General and the Auditor-General convinced the committee that since the introduction of Navision Accounting Package, a lot of problems had been overcome as far as accounting is concerned.  

In other words from 2003 to 2004, all issues raised and all queries by the Auditor-General on the accounting system were streamlined. The committee was satisfied with that statement.   

From page 37 you will find the resolution of issues qualified in the audit report up to page 40.  On page 40, you have a special audit report, which the committee thinks is very important and needs to be read out. The special audit report was carried out in response to a request for an audit inquiry into fraud financial irregularities, interference and influence peddling.  

The alleged case of summary dismissal of a cashier, one Scholar Namanda, who had been implicated in financial irregularity and the use of deposits taking long to be credited to NMS account in Stanbic Bank, Entebbe.  

According to the audit report, the alleged fraud started in 2001 when Namanda withdrew cash amounting to Ugshs 6,903,350 for the staff of NMS to visit customers in various areas of the country.  Unfortunately when the trip cancelled, this money was neither receipted nor banked on NMS account. It was also alleged that Scholar Namanda did not account for the funds totalling to Ugshs 9,960,600.

The same Scholar Namanda is alleged to have refunded Ugshs 660,000 using cheques, which had questionable signatures. A review of bank reconciliation statements for account number stated here 0410020378101 Stanbic Bank, Entebbe Branch for the period 31 December 2003 revealed that deposits amounting to Ugshs 226,473,388 had not been credited on the account.

The Auditor-General reported alleged fraud, which started in 2001 when a cashier withdrew Ugshs 6,903,350.

The committee’s observations

The personnel regulation is very weak, unacceptable and would serve only to encourage corruption, misappropriation and embezzlement for which one can escape with impunity.  

Recommendation

Management should look for the culprit and recover the money with interest using all available means including litigation.

Fraud in bank transactions

The Auditor-General noted that between May and December, 2003 Ugshs 7,941,092,331 was collected by National Medical Stores and banked on NMS various accounts in Kampala and Entebbe. 

A review of bank reconciliation statements on a monthly basis revealed that for account No. 0410020378101 Stanbic Bank, Entebbe Branch for the period of December 31 2003, deposits amounting to Ugshs 226,473,338 had not been credited on NMS account. These deposits were subsequently credited on NMS account between January and April, 2004.  Management regretted the incident and pledged to improve the internal control system.

Observations

The committee concurs with the Auditor-General that this incident could have the following implications:

•	A possibility of teaming and lending where bank and/or staff members are diverting NMS funds.  
•	The practice affects the liquidity of NMS by delayed crediting of cheque deposits. 
•	Over delay of crediting may be proof of irregularities and wrong doing which could lead to fraud. 

Recommendations

•	Management should put in place an effective internal control system, which can verify dates on which the cheques were cleared.  
•	Irregularities and fraud must be confirmed or discovered and the culprits must be made to refund the money and punished appropriately.  
•	The individuals involved should be further investigated and held responsible for their acts.

Debt Management

The Auditor-General noted that National Medical Stores had a big debt portfolio, which until June 2000 was standing at Ugshs6.5 billion. The board approved the principle of using debt collectors and management did appointment of individual debt collectors by head hunting.  The appointment of these debt collectors was not based on competitive tendering to enable the best debt collectors with proven experience and better service costs to be appointed.  

Management response

Management explained that head hunting of debt collectors was adopted as opposed to competitive bidding because of the urgency and the need to recover these debts in the shortest possible time. Further, that this was a last resort because of absence or lack of budgetary provisions and allocations.

Misappropriation of funds

On the 8 May 2001, a memorandum of understanding was signed between the corporation and the Ministry of Health requiring National Medical Stores to distribute the specified drugs, STD and TB pharmaceuticals and medical supplies procured under sexually transmitted infection projects. (FDA) credit No. UG2603. These supplies were valued at Ugshs 4, 380,465, 345. The memorandum covered a period of May to December 2001. 

On 4 September 2001, an official of the Ministry of Finance, budget department assured NMS finance and procurement committee that Ministry of Finance had budgeted Ugshs 1.8 billion for settlement of debts to NMS and the STI project and that this sum could be paid by October 2001. He informed a meeting that consultations had been held in the Ministry of Finance to pay NMS other debts due from the Ministry of Health, UPDF, Mulago Hospital, and districts under domestic arrears. 

The Auditor-General reported that one debt collector, Rugasira & Company advocates was assigned debts totalling to Ugshs 2, 645, 959, 200 on September 2001 to be recovered by 31st December the same year. Among the debts assigned were, the World Bank STI debt arrears, which was certain to be recovered as already reported. Subsequently, the commissions that were attributed to these debt collectors were as follows: 

Payments from Ministry of Health under World Bank STI project memorandum of understanding totalling to Ugshs 1,500,000 on cheque as indicated there. This was part of the debt lined up for payment by the Ministry of Finance. A commission of Ugshs 120 million or 8 per cent was paid to the debt collector. 

The second payment totalling to Ugshs 350 million on account of World Bank STI project was received by NMS in February 2002 on the cheque indicated from the Ministry of Health. This debt collector issued demand note and was paid Ugshs 28 million as commission on this payment. 

Management response: 

The accounting officer explained that the choice of head hunting of debt collectors was the most effective approach to save time and get the best and competent firms to recover NMS debts. 

On the choice of Rugasira & Company Advocates, the accounting officer stated that upon receipt of an introductory note on this firm from the Minister of Health, he considered the communication to be an instruction to engage in the said firm. 

On the assignment of the same firm, which was introduced by the Minister to collect debts from the same ministry, the accounting officer stated that it was based on geographical location and the familiarity of the debt collector with the debtors, which could give the best results. He stated that debts from UPDF, Mulago Hospital and other facilities should not be recovered because the corporation stopped the policy of using debt collectors following the recovery from the Ministry of Health.

The committee concurs with the Auditor-General’s observation; the appointment of debt collectors was not based on competitive tendering to enable the best debt collectors with proven experience and better service costs to be appointed. 

The committee noted that the accounting officer, Mr Robert Rutagi, flouted the provisions of the procurement regulations especially sections 10 (1 and 2) and 20 (1) of the Public Finance Procurement Regulations, 2000 when he authorised without competitive bidding the appointment of Rugasira & Company Advocates.The committee disagreed with the accounting officer on how he could treat a mere introduction letter from the Minister as an instruction. 

The committee’s decision was based on the inconsistencies submitted by the accounting officer. The accounting officer should have subjected Mr Rugasira’s application to the normal procurement process. Rugasira & Company Advocates did not pay URA any tax upon receipt of the commission of Ugshs 148 billion from the proceeds of the debt collectors. 

Recommendations

Article 164 (2) of the Constitution of Uganda, 1995 is a specific provision on accountability and states that: “Any person holding a political or public office who directs or concurs in the use of public funds contrary to existing instructions shall be accountable for any loss arising from the use and shall be required to make good the loss even if he or she has ceased to hold that office.” The accounting officer should be subjected to this constitutional provision. Meanwhile, the committee recommends that the accounting officer be held responsible for those actions. 

Handling fees Ugshs 438,046,535
The Auditor-General observed that Ugshs 438,046, 545 was approved unauthorised by commissioner treasury officer of account on December 2001 to transmit Ugshs 438, 046,535 by swift code to NMS account seen here in Standard Chartered Bank, Speke Road Branch. The verification of records revealed that only Ugshs 180,500,000 was received on NMS account. The balance of Ugshs 257, 546, 535 was still outstanding unverified. 

Management response

The accounting officer acknowledged having received only Ugshs 180,500,000. The balance of Ugshs 257,546,535 has not been paid to NMS.

Recommendations

The committee recommends that the accounting officer should ensure this money is recovered and paid to NMS. An investigation should be instituted and those implicated should be prosecuted.  

Investments on fixed assets

There was a debate between the Ministry of Finance and National Medical Stores on fixed assets when Uganda Medical Stores changed to National Medical Stores. But this one was overcome later when it was found out that there was reconciliation on Finance and NMS and that problem was solved eventually. That is why I beg to move on beyond page 50.

On page 51, records available indicate that the former General Manager, Mr Samuel Kasamba, opened a fixed deposit account in Greenland Bank in 1998. A sum of Ugshs 1 billion was transferred from Standard Chartered Bank current account to Greenland Bank fixed deposit account and is referenced to the general manager’s letter to Greenland Bank without authority from the board. 

On 20 September 2000, Mr Patrick Kisitu, the Acting General Manager with his head of finance and administration, Mr Charles Sabiti, acknowledged a sum of Ugshs1, 328,608,904 only from Standard Chartered Bank account to a fixed deposit account within the same bank which was due to mature on the 27 November 2000. 

On the same date, 20 September 2000, the same Patrick Kisitu and Charles Sabiti instructed the bank to transfer a sum of Ugshs 1 billion from the current account indicated to the fixed deposit account of the same bank. They confirmed that the principal sum on the fixed deposit account was Ugshs 2, 326,608,934 and they demanded that the bank should amend the certificate and deposit to that effect.

All transactions left the corporation with a bank balance of Ugshs 1,118,445,793 to support its operations as confirmed by a memo from head of finance and accounts to the acting general manager. 

Surprisingly, in minute 8/52/2002, the board was persuaded to approve the existence of the Standard Chartered Bank fixed deposit account which was opened in the year 2000 and had already accumulated Ugshs 155,456,177 in interest under the leadership of Mr Rutagi as the substantive general manager. No mention of the Greenland fixed deposit account was made in this respect. 

Management attempted to defend these irregular transactions by quoting the NMS financial procedures manual which states that, “Upon the approval of the board of Directors of a recommendation by management, NMS shall be authorised to carry out long term financial investments.”

As I said, this was a very long report; I wish to move you to page 55. The committee heard that the former Minister of Health, hon. Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi, interfered with procurement processes of the NMS. It was established that he made telephone calls to Mr Rutagi, the General Manager on 17 August 2001 and followed them up with written communication on the same day introducing M/s Rugasira, Tusubira & Company Advocates as a firm desirous to participate in debt collection.

The said Rugasira, Tusubira & Advocates Company Advocates appeared in the general manager’s office the same day carrying a message from the Minister. The general manager invited the corporation secretary to his office for a discussion over the subject and later on the general manager directed the corporation secretary to handle as discussed.

M/s Rugasira, Tusubira & Company Advocates were appointed as NMS debt collectors even though they had no impressive company profile in debt collection. 

Where as the general manager agrees with the committee that his action was inappropriate as this disregarded the procurement procedure process which would require that the firm goes through a competitive bidding, he further admitted that the telephone calls and formal introduction of the firm by the Minister did take place. And that he interpreted these to be clear instructions from his boss which prompted him to act accordingly. 

Appearing before the committee, the former Minister of Health, Maj. Gen. Jim Muhwezi admitted having rung the general manager to verify the debt status of NMS as reported to him by Rugasira and Tusubira and what policy was in place to recover it. The general manager confirmed that the debt was huge and that the board had approved the policy of appointing debt collectors, but that management was using head hunting other than normal public procurement procedure to recruit debt collectors. Hon. Muhwezi, therefore, introduced two individuals, Rugasira and Tusubira to the general manager. I must add here, Mr Speaker, that Maj. Gen. Muhwezi then was only a month and a half in office as Minister of Health. 

The committee was surprised that the accounting officer could treat an introductory letter as an instruction. As a result of this action, the said firm was assigned to collect debts amounting to Ugshs 2, 645, 935,200 from the Ministry of Health even when the Ministry had already made commitment to pay the debt.

Out of this, Ugshs 438,046,535 was advertently included in the schedule since it was not due for collection. The balance of Ugshs 1, 850,000,000 was collected from the ministry. While hon. Jim Muhwezi admits introducing the firm, management should have subjected it to the normal procurement processes like any other firm. 

The firm was paid a commission of Ugshs 148 million and this commission was not necessary at all as the appointment of a debt collector to pick cheques from the Ministry of Health to take to NMS would not require one.

Section 1 and 2 of NMS Act, 1993 establishes the NMS as a body corporate with perpetual succession. Section 8 of the same Act provides for the appointment of the board by the Minister with clear mandate. The Minister also appoints the general manager and corporation secretary under the same. There is no provision for the Minister to interfere with the running of NMS saved by the fact that the corporation is under his/her jurisdiction.

Recommendations

In the event that the letter from the Minister was just a mere introduction, which does not constitute an instruction, a recommendation or a directive, the committee dropped this allegation. Ministers should in future, however, avoid any action which may be misinterpreted to influence the operations of autonomous establishments and state enterprises such as NMS. 

In spite of the commitment by the Ministry of Finance towards debt repayment, management appointed debt collectors, which resulted in the loss of Ugshs 148 million. For this, the accounting officer should take full responsibility as this amount is seen as funds misappropriated. 

As a law firm, Rugasira & Company Advocates, should be warned to completely desist from using political offices for their own benefit as this conduct is unethical in the legal fraternity, Mr Speaker.

In the event that a commission of debt collection was 2 per cent, this Ugshs 148 million is too high as it was revised upwards to 8 per cent and to 10 per cent in various agreements between NMS and the debt collectors. The committee demands that the amount in excess of 2 per cent should be recovered from the affected debt collector. The committee directs that URA should ensure tax payment with interest and necessary penalties.

The Director General of Medical Services, Prof. Omaswa

Whereas it is proper that the Director General of Health Services is mandated to ensure effective and efficient delivery of medical services to the public and the primary role of the statutory body would be advisory, the committee noted that the language used in his letter to NMS referenced here “Surgical gauze and bandages from Medical Products Ltd” was too strong and authoritative and reflects coercion with a demand for compliance from MNS. For example, part of paragraph two reads as follows: “I am surprised and disappointed at the way NMS is frustrating this local investor…” I don’t think I will go much into this, but will go to the observations and recommendations on page 61.

The former Director General, Prof. Omaswa, should be held responsible for causing the loss of Ugshs 14, 840,000 by directing NMS to purchase 1855 rolls of surgical gauze and absorbent cotton which turned out to be of poor quality and thus never used. Similarly, any other officers who shall be holding the portfolio of Director General in Ministry of Health are duly warned to desist from interfering in the procurement processes of NMS or any other statutory institution under the ministry. 

Finally, Mr Speaker, I beg that we move to page 65. The committee regretted the blockage of the distribution of Anti-Retroviral Drugs and other drugs which are quarantined at NMS stores in Entebbe on the assumption that they are expired. Among other drugs affected, the committee looked at large volumes of redundant stocks of Malaria drugs which are estimated to be about 8 million doses of Homapak, (another batch of 5 million doses was expected), 10 million condoms, Nystatin Pessaries and Benzathine injections. 

NMS management informed the committee that this could have been as a result of Government’s change of policy without proper coordination and planning. Giving an example of Government’s change of policy to a new malaria drug called Coartem, leading to the huge stockpiles of Fancida and Chroloquine.

The committee was informed that the substantive General Manager was suspended to pave way for investigations to establish whether the expiry of over 42,000 doses of drugs was due to human error. The committee took note of the expiries and investigations should be handled expeditiously.  

Conclusion

There are good lessons we can learn from a quotation extracted from the autobiography of the late Rev. Dr Martin Luther King Junior as edited by Clayborne Carson, subtitled Recovering lost value: “The thing we need in the world today is a group of men and women who will stand up for the right and be opposed to wrong whoever it is. A group of people who have come to see that some things are wrong whether they are never caught up with, some things are right whether nobody sees you doing them or not” This committee would urge the House to live by these wise words and ensure that the accounting officers take note of these words of wisdom. I beg to move, Mr Speaker, that the House adopts this report and the recommendations contained there in. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: I thank you for presenting and taking us through the 67 page report and we thank the committee for handling the issues involved. Honourable members, you have got the copies of this report, he has not read the entire report; you have to go through it, but we should give ourselves a date or time frame within which to deal with the report. A week is enough. Thank you very much. It appears we have disposed of today’s business; it is therefore time to adjourn to tomorrow at 2.00 p.m. when we shall resume.

(The House rose at 4.50 p.m. until Thursday, 1 February 2007 at 2.00 p.m.)   
  




