Wednesday, 31January 1996      

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

BILLS
SECOND READING

     THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTION (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

(General debate continued.)

MR MORO (Koboko County, Arua):  Mr Chairman, thank you for giving me this opportunity to contribute to this debate, and Bill for the parliamentary election interim provision, Bill 1995.

Mr Chairman, before I contribute to the Bill, I would like to congratulate one of our Colleagues, who has newly been elected to join us; he is Mr Kilak from Kitgum District. He has replaced late hon. John Obwangamoi.  

Mr Chairman, I stand here to support the Bill.  I would like to congratulate the NRM Government for keeping her promises.  When the NRM government came to power it had promised people that it would bring the government and have a government which will be pro-people, it will be a government of democracy.  After a short period the country witnessed that democracy has been practiced.  There are elections being carried out every now and then; since 1986 when NRM government came to power it allowed people to elect their representatives who represent them in Parliament, they were also represented at lower council, from RC 1, RC 2, RC 3 up to RC 5; I think this is a very good stand, I wish the government continues with this spirit, it allows people to elect freely the leaders of their choice.  We should rally behind this government which is open minded, which has given people the liberty to chose their own representatives.  

I looked through the Bill and I discovered that on the whole there is very little that we can debate for a long time.  What I can only say is that, perhaps, we may amend here or add here and there; I do not think that there are really major changes in this Bills.  If you take article 16.2 which says that the commission shall not exercise its discretion under subsection 1, in such a manner so as to permit a nomination paper to be received by a Returning Officer after 4 0’clock in the afternoon on the nomination days; or subject to subsection 4 of section 56 of this Statute to permit a vote to be cast before or after the hours fixed in this Statute for the opening and closing of the polls.  I think, here this House should consider this issue very carefully so that the commissioner could be allowed to use his powers in deciding such issues.  All the time has been fixed, and it is stated that beyond 4 O’clock on nomination day nobody should be allowed to be nominated.  The case is when somebody could come at the right time, but unfortunately for unknown reasons he could fall sick on the way; he may faint and fall down and remain there for some time until when it is nearing the closure of the time; and then he wakes up again and struggles to come to the station.  I think after arriving at the station the commissioner or the presiding officer should use his discretion to see whether the reasons which were given were genuine or not.  

So, in such a case if he discovers that the reason is genuine, I think, such a person should be allowed to be nominated even if it is after the closing hour.  I also suggest that during voting day if the same case happens, that somebody had attempted to come or he was very sick and he could not reach on time, and if he was either assisted or he struggled on his own and arrived there even at a later hour, such a person should also be allowed to vote.  

Section 24 page 22, the voter’s role for every constituency shall be open to inspection by the public free of charge at the office of the Returning Officer during the office hours -(Interruption)

MR OMARA ATUBO:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, hon. Moro said that if somebody gets a problem and cannot reach the Presiding Officer in time for nomination he should be given discretion to extend time.  Now, hon. Moro is an experienced teacher, I am wondering whether in his years of teaching, when UNEB set examinations and on that day a student falls sick, it has been permissible to extend the time for examination and the following day the student can sit the exams. Thank you.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, I did not say that it was the following day; what I stated is that if he arrived late, if the closing hour was 4 O’clock in the evening and a person arrives one minute after 4 O’clock and he finds that there is still a long cue of people who are still expected to continue voting - this is a special case, he failed sick, he fainted, he could not move, but by good luck God gave him the life to come.  

So, I think, this is a case where he could be considered, because as a teacher, definitely if there is a good reason, and if the paper did not arrive on time, the examination can be postponed or a new question paper can set so that the students are tested instead of condemn them completely, because of not taking the examination.  That is what I was saying, Mr Chairman.

Again, in section 24.1, what I was saying is in this section, it is stated that anybody is free to go and look at the voters roll at the Returning Officer offices during working hours.  These returning officers normally reside at the district headquarters, which are far from some areas.  I do not think that it is possible for people to travel 60 or 65 miles to go and inspect those voter’s rolls; so, I was suggesting that instead of going to the Returning Officers offices, some of these should be transferred to divisional or parish offices so as to enable the voters to go and inspect their voters rolls, otherwise most of the people in most cases will not be able to go and visit those areas.  

In number 26 -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman, I want to inform the House and hon. Moro, that the inspection being talked about in 24 is more of a permanent feature so that that register will be available to anybody in the country at the district headquarters;  but down in 25 if hon. Moro reads it he will see that there is time being proposed for these registers to be taken as far down to the polling centres for inspection by the public to find out whether there are any mistakes in them.  So, I think, the question of distance being very far from the residences of most of our people at district headquarters does not really hold.

MR ABU MAYANJA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to get clarification from the hon. Minister of State the problem one of which has already arisen, that the allegations papers have published that fake names have been sent to the Electoral Commission from Nyendo in Masaka District, now in order to stop this kind of thing the provision in the old law was that before the end of the election period the provisional registers are displayed, at every centre where the writing takes place, in the case RC 2, or even RC 1, for a period of a week or two weeks for people to read and raise an objection if names that should not appear there are there;  or to place claims if their names have not appeared although they actually went to register, or omitted by the typists.  

Now, since the period of registration ends today, and since there has not been in my constituency in Busujju any display of these provisional registers, when will the population have an opportunity to view the provisional registers and if need be make claims or objections with a view to rectifying the registers.

MR KAVUMA:  Thank you, Sir.  There will be time once the data that has been collected now from the field, has been properly entered in the computer and the register, there will be time for people to get these copies of the register to be inspected by them with a view to finding out whether there are any mistakes committed, and that situation is partly addressed by clause 25 which allows the commission to gazette a time so that people can come and look at these registers with a view to finding out whether there are any mistakes of any nature, and then collective action can be taken.  I will be done.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, in article 26.2, no voters shall without lawful authority hold more than the valid voters card in the voters name.  Mr Chairman, I think, that section completely unnecessary.  It should be deleted; if it is left there it will give room for other people to give authority and then give certain individuals more than one vote, which I think is very unfortunate.  So, I request the Minister to consider this very carefully with a view of deleting that.  Then section 27.1 says whenever a voter’s card is lost, destroyed, torn or otherwise damaged, the voter shall, at least, seven days before polling day notify in writing the Returning Officer or any other officer duly authorised for that purpose by the Returning Officer stating the circumstances of that loss, destruction, and damage.  

Here I am more concerned about the seven days given; supposing that the card gets lost three or four days before the polling day, should the voter not report the damage or the loss of that card?  I feel that, instead of the seven days anybody who loses his or her card towards the elections should be allowed to report such damage or loss.  

Now, section 2, of the same article states that the Returning Officer or that other officer is satisfied as to the circumstances of the loss, destruction, defacement or damage of the voters card he or she should issue to the voter a duplicate copy of the voters card with a world ‘duplicate’ clearly marked or printed on it.  That one is good but then I say this should be done also for those who even damage their cards when they are even at the polling station during that very day.  Section 3 or the same article say, no duplicate voter’s card shall be issued to any voter on polling day or within three days before polling day.  

I would request the minister, perhaps, to make some clarification whether he is very serious about that statement or he just stated it because, I do not think that is fair to really penalise somebody because - either by accident then the card got lost.  

I would like to request the Minister or through the Minister, the commissioner to consider the appointment of Presiding Officers; some of the Presiding Officers are a bit biased; so, I feel that when these presiding officers are appointed the candidates should be consulted to the suitability of such officers.  Well, this is my personal view and I think I have witnessed occasions where some officers were seen to be biased.  

On the election of the various groups of people, I would recommend that apart from the elected members who are directly elected by universal adult suffrage, I would like the different categories or groups of people to be elected in the same way as the directly elected people.  I take the women representatives at district level; I find no reason why if these women are elected as representatives of women at district level, why the women are denied the right to elect their representatives.  According to what I have seen in the Statute it appears the majority of the voters are going to be men, mainly from RC 1, up to RC 5, the only exception is one person in most cases, who is a Secretary for Women Affairs in these RCs, and then the rest are going to be men.  I would suggest two things, one -(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and the entire House that women in this House - I am a district woman representative, representing the whole district, everybody in the district, women, men, children and everybody; we are not a women representative, we are not representing only women.  Thank you.

MR MORO:  Mr Chairman, I would like to thank hon. Kiryampawo from Tororo District; that was exactly what I was going to say when I clear the first part of my speech.  I wanted to tell her that if she is a representative of everybody like the men, she should help any women who wants to stand to stand so that she can be directly elected like everybody.  But because the women are still lower than men and we have to give them special treatment, then I will say that treatment should be accorded to their own fellow women, women should be the ones deciding which woman to represent them here.  So, it should be the women councils from RC 1, up to district level; all the women councils; and then -(Interruption)

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, I think, if the hon. Member read the Constitution, he should realise that the position of having a woman in the district is not to cater of an interest group but is to cater for a marginalised group, in other words, we are trying to build capacity so that women in the long run can no longer be marginalised, but if you that only women should elect the woman, then you are talking about a narrow interest group and she will only represent women not any other person in the district.

MR MORO:  I think, Mr Chairman, the hon. is correct, this is marginalised group and this marginalised group are the women.  That is why they have got an interest, and this is the women interest and not men interest. (Laughter) 

I would also suggest that if the Minister can, perhaps find out other ways, I would like to take the same system which is going to be applied to the RC V Chairman of the district; why does the hon. Lady who intends to stand not stand so that she can voted by all the women in the district, or even all the people?  

So, I would suggest that that one should be looked into very carefully so that either these hon. ladies or women are going to be elected strictly by the RC women secretaries, and the few women who stood like men, plus the councils from RC 1 up RC 5; if not the second alternative is to all them to compete on equal basis, on universal adult suffrage so that all the women of the district can vote for the representative, so that the representative can know that she was elected by the whole groups.  

Mr Chairman, section 35 –(Interruption)

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Member, could you wind up please?

MR MORO:  Yes, I am winding up with this one now; 1(d) says sufficient funds to cover all the expenses to be incurred by the Returning Officers in telling out the electoral process.  The Minister should ensure that enough money is given to the commissioner and then that money should be given to the Returning Officer in good time.  I would like to inform the hon. House that some of the money which was given for payment of these officers and never reach them since the time of CA; up to now from my area, people are still complaining that this money has not reached them.  I will be most grateful if in the next elections the people who have volunteered, people who have offered themselves to work for this country, if they are left like that without payment, I do not think that is a good thing, Mr Chairman, thank you.

MR KARUSOKE (Ntoroko County, Bundibujo):  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman for availing me this opportunity.  I stand to support this Bill, and in supporting this Bill I would like to start by thanking the Minister for bringing up this Bill which sets the last stage of our long journey towards full democracy in this country.  This country has been on a very long journey for the last eight years or so towards full democracy, and the election of Members of Parliament and of President and other local government will signify the end of our long journey there.  I would like in view of this to appeal to whoever is responsible for organising the forthcoming elections to be as careful as possible so that these elections serve the meaning it is intended, that is to deliver Uganda to full democratic process.  

I would like also to say that Uganda’s history is that we have never had free and fair elections before and the 1980 elections which were not free and fair resulted into peoples struggle which ended up in the creation of a National Resistance Movement.  We would like, therefore, to avoid any circumstances that may create another stalemate after elections or during elections.  I hope all Ugandans will aim at a free and a fair election so that no more problems are created -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member and my neighbour here on the Floor that while I agree with him that in 1980 elections were not as fair, for instance, they transferred the then DCs from their respective areas or district to another, but we are encountering the same thing right now. For instance, when the RDCs go to different electoral areas and campaign almost in the same manner as in 1980.  For instance, in Mbale the Deputy DRC went to Budadiri on Friday and was preaching the gospel without, therefore, making it fair and free.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

DR KIYONGA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I wanted to inform the House and hon. Karusoke who was a member of the CA that in 1994 we had very, very successful general elections in the country, and before that when we were expanding the NRC in 1989 we also had very free and fair elections, Mr Chairman.

MR ONGOM:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman, hon. Karusoke stated that as a result of rigging of the 1980 elections some wars were waged and which resulted into NRM victory.  I would like to inform him that since many time now the President of Uganda who is also the Chairman of NRM has stated in several places that he did not go to the bush because the election was rigged, in otherwise he did not go to the bush because D was denied an election victory, he went for other fundamental reasons; he has stated it several times already.

MR KARUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Members for the pieces of information given, I fully endorse hon. Kiyonga’s information that we had very free and fair elections in 1994 for CA and we also had some fair elections to expand the NRC in 1989 but the 1989 elections were indirect; it is the 1994 elections that really stood out very prominently as free and fair elections.  As to reason why Mr Museveni himself went to the bush, other then for reasons of rigging the election, I am not aware at all, and I have never heard him talk like that, I wish I will continue to hear that and, maybe, demand that he tells us what other reasons took him to the bush other than rigging the 1980 elections.  

Mr Chairman, I am wondering why the Minister has found it necessary to reproduce almost the whole text of the Interim Electoral Commission Bill No.5; I yet stand to be educated why whole text has been reproduced here in this Bill.  If there is no valid reason, I would request that we delete the whole of that because it is properly spelt out in the Bill No.5 of the Interim Electoral Commission.  

Demarcation of constituencies, Mr Chairman. The Constitution spells out clearly that it is the Electoral Commission that will create or demarcate constituencies but the basic unity of a constituency shall be a county; but then there will be counties that have more than the population quota required which will qualify for more than one electoral area.  Apart from the numbers of population in a given county, there are other considerations that are always taken into account when considering a special demarcation of an electoral area, and these are things like geographical features of an area, the difficult terrain like say in my district where there are very sharp hills and deep valleys, lack of communication where there are no roads and all you have to do is to walk, and in the absence of telephone or anything else - these are real impediments and real difficulties in supervising and carrying out elections.  

But I do not quite buy the idea of population quota.  Let us look at a place like Bukoto which has about 350,000 people; now, if it is not for services like say, for example, when you are considering Entandikwa, Bukoto should not really get the same amount of Entandikwa like Kalangala, for example, or even Ntoroko.  

So, Bukoto in this case should be divided into a number of areas for purposes of services, but when it comes to representation in Parliament, I do not really see the main reason why a county with bigger numbers of people should be subdivided for purpose of representation in Parliament.  Because what does a Member of Parliament do with huge number of his people; does he bear them on his head so much so that there is so much weight, and we should relieve him of the weight?  If anything we should consider distance, because if he is going to spend so much money and time moving around his county, then surely the question of distance should count but not the question of population.  

Population can only count in terms of services, which is different from representation.  So, when considering demarcation of constituencies more attention should be paid to distance, the size of a county and these special difficulties like the geographical features, like lack of communication systems and so on, but not population density.  Women representation -(Interruption)

CAPT. BABU:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you very much.  Representation in assemblies and parliament is usually done because you represent a group of people, and therefore, the argument on how we represent geographical areas is also valid, except in very rich nations where they have had this debate extensively, they have had to have a bicameral to resolve this issue.  In a country like United States, you have to have two houses to resolve the geographical issue and the population issue.  But because our country is not that rich, you combine the two, one you represent the county which is geographical and two, you also represent the population, where the population is excess.  This argument we can go on all day and you are going to find that we eventually one day, if we are very rich, probably have two houses, the upper and lower house.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE:  I thank the hon. Member for that information, I am afraid I am not very much convinced on the question of population density vis-a-vis representation in Parliament; women representation in Parliament.  It is true those of us who believe in equality of mankind, those of who prescribe and subscribe to the welfare of women and, therefore, work hard to see that women are emancipated, will uphold the position of women in affirmative action.  Women as a marginalised group must continue to be given a special position in the politics of this country, not only in Parliament but even at lower levels, and the onus is on us men who are the giants to make sure we patronise and protect and defend the interests of these women at all times.  

I still have a problem and I would like as many of my friends here and more especially outside this House, to explain to my satisfaction the rationale behind an electoral college.  In my view an electoral college under normal circumstance dilutes the quality of mandate (Applause)  

One of the main reasons behind creating a constituent assembly for purposes of writing a Constitution, which Assembly was to be different this House was that this House had been created through electoral colleges, that Members here had not been given full mandate by all Ugandans, and therefore, the mandate that we had and we continue to have in this House is rather dilute; it is not top layer mandate.  

In view of this, I get surprised that in our effort to patronise and propel our women folk into strong positions in society we go behind and begin advocating for electoral colleges for them, which would in a way weaken their mandate of the people here; they will continue to represent their people here through a second party, and I do not see the service we are trying to give them!

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  When Members of Parliament anywhere in the world are elected, they represent people in that electoral area; therefore, our own democracy is highly diluted and as a result in the CA you find that some young girls came to the CA, they produced there, some got married while they were there -(Laughter)- and, therefore -(Interruption)

MISS KULANY:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is the hon. Member in order to abuse women when it is their right and biological right to produce children.  Is he in order?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members, if what hon. Wanendeya is saying is true then he is in order! (Laughter)

MR WANENDEYA:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman for that wise ruling from the East, after all you also crossed the Nile to come this way; the other side of the Nile, the Western Bank.  Mr Chairman, the information over here is that I did not say that women should not produce, but in Luganda they say age is wisdom, therefore, usually the people who make Constitutions are people who are a little bit well educated in these matters.  So, if we do not want to dilute our democracy the women should be elected by adult suffrage, maybe, with women alone, but it should be by adult suffrage.  

MR KARUSOKE:  Mr Chairman, we should resolutely work for and defend affirmative action; there is no doubt that there is need for affirmative action at all times; but if affirmative action is going to be over-emphasised then it will become counter productive.  We should defend affirmative action up to a certain level; beyond that one we shall be doing the disservice to our women folk.  Mr Chairman, an over patronised child becomes spoilt instead of developing progressively.  So, we should not over patronise our women folk, we should defend them and protect them and support them, but not really to over patronise them.  Under affirmative action women are given a special position in this country namely, that there is one constituency for them in every district, which is a district; every district is a constituency for a woman, not for anybody else, but a woman; and those who go to compete for that constituency must of necessity be women.  That is affirmative enough, that no man should come in to interfere with women in their competition for Parliament in a district; it is women per women.  If they are complaining about distance -(Interruption)

MRS SSEBAGEREKA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform the Member holding the Floor and through you, Mr Chairman, that the affirmative action is up to a given period, and it is a woman per district; and I want to inform him that I am trying to stand in the general seat to take as affirmative action to its degree, and it is the same gentleman and other gentlemen who say but you Victoria are you made, you have your affirmative action, why do you not stay there?  

Mr Chairman, I want to make the hon. Member holding the Floor gender sensitive that the affirmative action is for a given period and it is to make the positions of responsibility from the third up to the national level, but we should not say that it is spoiling women, because women have misrepresented for all these decades and we have to be given a chance to be able to make use of the affirmative action as well as be able to join into the other open seats.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR ELYAU:  Mr Chairman, I wanted to inform the former who has just sat down, the hon. Lady there, that some women are discouraging us again.  In Soroti last year, a woman stood for CA and contested men, when she was defeated; she has now turned to come back again to stand in the district so that she will face the colleagues.  You can see the circle is not going to stop because they are interested in challenging; that means she has been discouraged.  So, the affirmative action should consider giving women encouragement to challenge men on and on.

MR KARUSOKE:  The Constitution of Uganda, Mr Chairman, gives women and other interest groups ten years to hold these special positions and after ten years Parliament will be reviewing their positions every five years.  So, there is still plenty of time, and I would like to call upon my sisters here and out of this House that they should take on the challenge given to them; they should not only go and stand in districts, but they should also stand for presidential election; I would love to have one or two women standing for presidential elections; I would like to see as many women as possible stand for district chairmanship, and I would like to see as many of them as possible come to counties to stand against men and challenge them.  

Under affirmative action women in a given district will compete alone for a seat in Parliament if they are burdened by distance and costs involved in moving around, it will be a burden for all of them as women who are standing for that seat.  So, there will be nobody taking advantage over the other; they will all be women overburdened but looking for people’s mandate to come here; and when they are elected under universal suffrage, the people of that district will feel that these are their representatives; they will not feel that they belong to a particular group of people.  

Mr Chairman, looking at the expenses, especially, now when we have to expand the electoral college to go down to LC 2, LC 3 and so on, it is in my view more expensive for the candidates to communicate and negotiate and discuss with each one of these.  Because you do not stay at the district and you think people of a given parish will elect you, you have to go there, whether you like it or not, and these parishes are spread all over the district, so in a sense you will find you are moving around the district.  So, where you move to meet the Electoral College members, you still can move to talk to the electorate.  

So, the people of the district should be given the chance to elect their woman representative.  Members of the Electoral College will be coming from the entire breadth and length of the district, and candidates of necessity must reach them wherever they are; it is the right of these members of the voters to be reached by the candidates.  So, the question of distance being too great for the women does not really arise.  The system of electoral colleges denies the majority of voters in a given area the right to elect their representative.  For example, those of us who came here in 1989, I will give our own example.  I was elected by 94 voters out of 120, in a whole county; and my county has over 30,000 people.  So, the majority of the people in my county were denied the right to elect me, and we want to maintain this, and so is everybody here; everybody here came in through that.

CAPT. BABU: Point of information.  Mr Chairman. The information I want to give the hon. Member on the Floor is, I would not have disturbed his submission, but he has used expressions like, if you are elected by an Electoral College you are really a bit dilute.  But, I look at this House, including yourself this has been probably one of the best Parliament this country has had -(Applause)- and we were elected using an Electoral College the Pope is elected by conclave; this is an Electoral College.  The American President is elected by electors which is an Electoral College. 

Now, while I agree entirely that there are different Electoral systems in the world, one cannot degrade one against the other as long as the achieve means.  Because in my opinion, Sir, and hon. Member, if you can achieve a House of this magnitude using Electoral College and we had another one, the CA which we got on universal suffrage. In my opinion, Mr Chairman, I am sincerely so I do not feel a difference I think both of them are performed very well.  Thank you, Sir.

MR OKIA: point of information. Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that during our NRC elections, the LC Executives  who were to come and elect the Members of Parliament were elected by the people and before they go for the  election the area where they represent people sat down and remanded if you are going, go and vote for so and so, they did not go and use their own mind and vote for candidate X  So, it is wrong to say that people elected through Electoral College are not true representatives of the people.  Thank you.

MR KARUSOKE:  I hope people are not getting me deliberately wrong I have been precise I have never anywhere said that they are not true representatives of the people, I said the representation is dilute, they do not carry the full mandate of the people and I gave the example of the decision made on the Floor of this House in 1993 when we were passing the Constituent Assembly Statute the reason was –(Interruption) 

I am sorry, Mr Chairman, I will not allow any interruption because I am winding up.  That one of the reasons we gave was that, we did not really have fully mandate we were elected through colleges and I know that this House has done better than may be, previous Houses.  But, that is not the reason that if we had been elected directed we would not have done even better than now and there is no reason to doubt a future Parliament which will be elected through universal suffrage, that it will do as well as we or even better.  So, it is not because we came through Electoral College that we have done better and if circumstances at that time had allowed us we would have gone through the general elections, but of course it demanded a lot of other things and it was not possible so we went through the Electoral College and we have been able to do all this much.  I like it, but we can still do better and go through a better system than the Electoral College.  

I would like to end on the note on the registration of voters. There has been a lot of problems surrounding registration of voters, one wonders why, because according to 1994 voters registers we fairly know the numbers of voters in every constituency fairly although not quite correct to the nearest and one wonders why it was not possible for the Interim Electoral Commission to give out the number of forms along those numbers at least.  So that we would have very few people failing to get forms, but today they are so many, for example, in my constituency alone through rough estimate I have just been going around their over 4,000 people who have not been registered in one county and the main reason is they came and did not find forms, forms were not even at the district.   

Last week I was talking with the Chief Administration Officer he said he did not have them, I said why do you not get one copy and we photocopy?  He said that was illegal, I was trying to beat the time, which is today.  He said the main reasons the forms have not been there and yet we fairly know the numbers of our voters in every constituency.  

So, I do not know why? Since we know the numbers of voters roughly we should add on maybe 10 percent to the numbers we knew.

Secondly we are also aware that there has been deliberate effort by some people to fill this exercise, there has been some effort in some areas by some people to make sure people do not go for registration -(Interjection)- yes, in some places; I am saying, not all.  So, the Electoral Commission really should have reasons to be - as quickly as possible to make sure that if there such people we should work hard to beat them up by giving the necessary requirement.  

Now that the date is -(Interjection)- I am sorry, Mr Chairman, I will not allow anyone.

MR WASSWA NKALUBO: Mr Chairman, in view of the serious allegation made by the contributor on the Floor that we have a group of people who have been on trailing the exercise of election and if he has any facts as a House are we not entitled to know these fellows who are ready to make us fail other than going ahead and say, they are groups.  Is it not in order for him to substantiate his allegation that otherwise he withdraw? (Applause)  

THE CHAIRMAN: Hon. Karusoke would you substantiate.

MR KARUSOKE: Mr Chairman, I said that in some places there has been people deliberately confusing people and telling them not to go for the exercise.  I have people in my constituency and I would give specific Bill  (Interjection)- yes I will give them in a written form, Mr Chairman.  

Section 35 (2); of this Bill does disturb me a bit.  It says, and I would like to seek qualification on this section, I beg to quote “The Commission shall also transmit to each Returning Officer as soon as practicable after nomination days, a sufficient number of ballot papers for each constituency within the Electoral district of the Returning Officer”. Which means in my view that the ballot papers will be delivered to the district long before polling days, but after the nomination day.  I am wondering, Mr Chairman, whether these will be - or actual and real ballot papers. I would like to seek clarification on this when the Minister is winding up. Mr Chairman, with these remarks I support the Bill.  Thank you.

MR NTIMBA (Mbarara Municipality, Mbarara): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  To start with I shall congratulate the hon. Minister and his team of officials as well as the committee on Legal Affairs for the work extended they have done in doing this Bill to this House.  Since I have many comments to make on many clauses I shall go straight to making comments on various clauses.  I would like to bring your attention, Mr Chairman, and the hon. Members to Article 11; of the Bill sub-clause 5; which says “subject to subsection 1; of this section the Commission shall review the division of Uganda into constituencies within 12 months after the publication of the results of census of the population of Uganda”. Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, you may be, aware that we are going to hold this Parliamentary election almost highly as after the last census of January 1991.  So, we can appreciate that since then there has been a considerable change in the population of this country.  The children who were 13 years old on the census day in January 1991 are already old enough to register.  

So, in view of this considerable change in the census I would hope that, when carving out the election boundaries the Commission should at least give us population projection giving us an estimate of what the population of Uganda is approximately at this time so that after the boundaries have been carved out for the seek of transparency we shall be able to say yes, we have been carved out according to what is the expected population of Uganda as of January 1996.  

Now, ideally these constituencies should have been carved out before the registration exercise took place, so that when a person goes to register he knows that he is registering in district whatever the number is, county code number, and so on and so forth.  

Now, we expect that the Interim Electoral Commission may have to cover out counties or Electoral boundaries which may not be exactly the same as what we had in the CA elections.  So, you can imagine somebody who is registering himself or who have registered himself for the C.A election of two years ago, getting a voters card then at a later stage he turns out that his county has been divided may be, in more than two counties the chances where that his voters card in the - elections might bear a different serial code number from what might appear in the books of the Electoral Commission.  So, I do hope that the Electoral Commission will take this into account so that there will be no confusion about the numbering on the voters cards vi-a-vis the numbers and code numbers of the new constituencies that we expected to be carved out.  

Now, I want to turn your attention and that of the hon. Members to Article No. 22 on page 20; clause 22, sub-clause 3.  It says that, “where practicable for the purposes of registering Ugandans residing abroad the Commission may appoint any foreign service officer stationed at the embassy of Uganda extra.”   Now, here it would be a very good thing for our Ugandans who are resident abroad to be accorded opportunity of exercising their constitutional right of voting, but great care must be taken in this regard.  It might be possible that some unscrupulous Ugandans who may already be registered in this country as voters might want to go abroad and register again and in the process vote twice.  

So, it is to my sincere hope that if this option is to be exercised the Electoral Commission will take all the necessary measures to ensure that this provision is not abused and again on this I would like to point out that in that sub-clause since the word ‘Foreign Service Officer’ is a title like that of a Permanent Secretary or Minister, I think it should have been printed with capital ‘F’, ‘S’, ’O’and so on forth.

I now go on to Article number 28; and this is where my greatest concern lies.  In Article 28; sub-clause 3; the Statute says, when a person who is unlawfully in a position of a voter’s card whether issued in the name of the voter or not, (b) feels or attends to sell or offers to sell extra, commits an offence.  

Now, I think there is something to be added on to this. Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, for those of us who have been following the news paper report, we have been hearing that some Ugandans for reasons best known to themselves have been threatening to destroy voter’s cards I think most of us have seen that in the News Papers.  Now, some of these Ugandans may have grievance of one kind or another, but honestly are there not many ways in which people’s grievances can be aired to a Government and here I happen to say that the NRM Government is the best Government as far as listening to complaints is concern if you compare to any past regime. (Applause) 

So, instead of people destroying their voters cards and clearly makes my blood almost boil veins to hear this, especially when you consider the fact that, many of our sons and daughters have spent five years in the bush an hardship conditions some of them have lost their lives in order to bring us the freedom to exercise our constitutional right and have free and fair elections and yet people are prepared to frustrate this exercise by burning their voters cards.  So, I think we should put in an additional amendment to the effect that anybody who is seen to be willingly destroy a voters card should be regarded to have committed an offence and should be punished accordingly.  So, if it is an offence for somebody to destroy Uganda currency note which belong to Uganda Government, is it not an offence for one to destroy voters card? -(Interruption)

MR KAVUMA: Point of information.  I thank you, Mr Chairman and hon. Member, for having given away.  I only wanted to inform the hon. Member and the House that there is in our general criminal law an offence call malicious damage to property and this voters card is going to be the property of the State through the Commission, so everybody even without putting it here anybody who destroys it is already committing an offence of that malicious damage to property. 

MR NTIMBA: Mr Chairman, I am most grateful to the Minister’s clarification, I now would like to go to clause 40; sub-clause 4; on page 34; of the printed Bill, it concerns the nomination of parliamentary candidates and say for the purpose of paragraph one (a) the names of the candidate shall be recorded in the nomination paper with a surname first and shall not include any title, degree or other prefix or suffix, but may include a nick name if the candidate so wishes.  

I think if I am not mistaken I think the word title refers to things like Doctor, Professor, Lt. Col. and things of the kind.  Now, I have been used to knowing my Friend from Rubabo as Prof. Kagonyera it would be funny if is name appears on the ballot paper not as Mr, not as anything, but Kagonyera.  Now, let us look at the way some of the people in our villages tend to think, if the opponents of that Kagonyera says that the word ‘Professor’ has disappeared from before his name, he is likely to say you see, this fellow has been telling us lies he is not even a Professor so the nomination papers say this.  So, I see nothing wrong if somebody is a professor X,Y and Z, having his title included on the nomination paper and on the ballot paper.

Secondly, some times these titles step distinguish people who have similar names.  I will give you an example; about a week or so ago, I think the New Vision that gave the appointment, we were told that some people have been appointed as Ambassadors to represent Uganda in various countries and I think among the people who were supposed to be appointed we have a certain Doctor Kamugisha, now we do not know whether this is a Doctor kamugisha who comes from Rukungiri or another Doctor Alex Kamugisha who happen to be a Veterinary person from Mbarara district.  I am told both of them are I think Alex, both of them are Kamugishas, where one is a Doctor, the other one I think he is a doctor; So, if the people’s titles although their names are fully spelt on the ballot papers I think it will save us a lot of confusion and if you say do not use people’s titles do not call them Doctors, do not call them Lt. col. why should nicknames be allowed?  Mr Chairman, we are here on every serious National exercise of electing Parliament I would rather disqualify the use of nicknames on the nomination papers and allow somebody who is a Doctor or a Priest to use his title accordingly. (Applause)

Mr Chairman, I go on to clause number 75; sub-clause 1; which states that where at a polling station is interrupted by a riot or violence or any other event while there remains in the voters register voters who have not completed the polling process the presiding officer may adjourn the polling until the following day extra, extra.  

I am not trying to say that we should include an additional amendment to this, but April and May, during these months they are likely to hold this elections happens to be a rainy season in many parts of this country, I am saying this because I happen to be a geographer.  Now, I think the commission should make provision whereby if a storm or heavy rain starts about 2.00 p.m. in the afternoon and continues until 7.00 p.m. in the evening there should ready at hand alternative arrangement to shift the polling gadgets from the open space where the election is taking place to a nearby, convenient place were the polls can conveniently take place.  As I said I do not want this to be included in the Statute, but I do hope that the Electoral Commission is very conscious of this possibility.

Finally, let us talk about qualification for being elected to this august House and I want to draw the hon. Members’ attention to page 83; the second schedule entitled Standard of Education equivalent ‘A’ level standard.  Now, here the drafters of the Bill have endeavoured to indicate various categories of people who might have qualifications which are equivalent to ‘A’ level and I am happy that the education policy review White Paper has been consulted. But here they talk about, a nurses certificate, they talk about grade three teacher certificate, they talk about a Business certificate awarded by Uganda National Examination Board, a diploma awarded by Uganda National Examination Board or a certificate or a diploma awarded to a Hotelian, certificate awarded by the Military Academy.  

This causes an attempt to give guidelines to those who will be responsible for accepting the nomination papers or Parliamentary candidates.  However, I want to say that there is a danger in not making this list comprehensive, I want to put myself in the shoes of a nominating officer who might receive papers from somebody who qualified at Bukalasa Farm Institute, Busitema Mechanise Agricultural College, Katabi Surveyor’s School and so on and so forth.  Some of these are Uganda departmental purifications which - directions has been of two or more years beyond the ‘O’ level certificate.  Now, if a person’s certificate from that area goes to present his papers at the nomination table, the nominating officer takes second schedule and says, Sir, I am sorry you do not hold enough certificate you do not have this and that, there could be quite a lot of problems  

So, I would like to suggest that either the Electoral Commission take down a list of all these departmental training certificate which are recognised by Government plus those recognised by the Minister of Education as per white paper for the guidance of those who will be involved in the exercise of nominating the people, failing that and I believe the committee for Legal Affairs has deliberated at length and I happen to have participated in the discussion and it is my sincere hope that the committee will come out with a very comprehensive arrangement to ensure that people will not be disqualified just because nobody is sure as to what is equivalent to ‘A’ level or not.

Finally, let me point out a small typing error at the top of page 84; in the second schedule, that is clause 1(b); which says “a grade three teacher certificate awarded by the Institute of Teachers’ Education Kyambogo”.   The correct title of that institution is ‘Teacher Education’ without an ‘s’ and an apostrophe.  Because the word teacher is an adjective it is not a noun, it is an adjective qualifying the word ‘Education’ at Kyambogo, so since we are enacting a law let us be sure that we do not leave out the important commas and full stops where they should be.  

With that, Mr Chairman, I once again congratulate the Minister and all those who have been charged with the duties of bringing this Statute into this House and I am very hopeful that we shall all give it our overwhelming support so that democracy is brought back into Uganda once more.  I thank you.

MR KAHERU (Historical Member): Thank you very much, Mr Chairman, for giving me an opportunity.  I would like to give my unreserved support to this Bill.  I give it support because it is in line without NRM has been doing all along, in fact, I can inform you that, in 1981 soon after we started this struggle there was a meeting and NRM issued a booklet which was a basic for our struggle it was headed towards a free and democratic Uganda.  In this booklet, there are a number of interesting objective and areas, for example; in that booklet NRM tells out the objects of transforming the Governance of Uganda by introducing in constitutional reforms and, in fact, what eventually happened was exactly in line with what was said because it was stated that, there would be constitutional Commission which would canvass ideas on the constitution to give Ugandans an opportunity of expressing their views and that there after there would be a Constituent Assembly and, in fact, I was surprised when some people thought that what happened was a new idea; it was actually already spelt out.  Now, if you trace the truck record of NRM, Mr Chairman, you find that the reasons for staying in power for ten years was really to lay down the ground work for democratization of Uganda.  

Now the good governance was in line with that, the participatory democracy through Resistance Council which was started while the struggle was in the bush.  The respect for Parliament.  For example, you will not hear that the Bills which we have passed here have been vetoed by the President.  That is significant.  In other words, when decisions by the representatives are made, they are respected.  

We have also had established a democratic culture.  I am mentioning all these because I get infuriated when I read in some of our newspapers allegations that the NRM intends to rig elections.  I also get irritated when I read allegations and noises trying to depict a wrong image.  What is the record of some of these political groups, which make some of these allegations?  I do not need to go into details, we know their record.  We know what happened in the 1961 -(Interruption)

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Is it in order, Mr Chairman, for hon. Kaheru, to state that he gets irritated when they say that NRM has established democratic principles.  But when you go to the actual part of what NRM went to the bush for, why would multi-partyists not be allowed to talk if it is really going to be democracy?  Is it therefore, in order for him to say that he gets irritated when somebody tells us what is inappropriate?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Order, hon. Members.  Hon. Kaheru is in order as a Historical Member of NRM to get irritated. (Laughter)

MR KAHERU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I may add, Mr Chairman, that the hon. Member who raised this point together with others were elected by the people to draft a Constitution.  This Constitution clearly spelt out that these elections would be covered on the basis of a Movement Political System, where individual merit will be the best thing and it will not be on political party basis.  So, the hon. Member should actually correct himself rather than try to correct the people who have been following the Constitution which he drafted.  

Mr Chairman, I do not intend to spend a lot of time talking about issues which are not connected with this Bill.  But allow me to remind Members of actually what happened in the elections which took place just before our independence and the one which took place just after our independence.  Now, these two political forces are the very forces which were involved in the rigging of elections even before we got our independence.  And this one can easily be admitted at least in private by the people concerned and yet since NRM came into power, at least we have tried to put in place elections which are not being rigged by the official machinery.  Individuals could rig these elections, but they were not being rigged by the government or the NRM.  Now, the other issue, Mr Chairman, which I will like to comment on is the Alliance.  

I intend to only touch on a few points regarding the Alliance, because it is the basis which some of our friends are using.  Let me first of all touch on the Democratic Party.  The Democratic Party before independence and after independence, had never advocated Federalism.  In fact, if anything, they have always been against Federalism.  And it is really the ultimate opportunism now for them to turn at this particular point in time to claim they are supporting federalism when it was not part of their Memorandum which they submitted to the Odoki Commission; even before Odoki Commission the issue of federalism has never been an issue.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform hon. Kaheru and the whole House that man is not static.  And that decisions change according to circumstances.

MR KAHERU: Mr Chairman, I accept a statement which the hon. Member has stated.  But he is in a way confirming what I am saying that opportunism has no limit. (Laughter)

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, may I point out that, the Democratic Party gave allegiance to NRM by joining it and therefore, the way it has stayed in power for ten years; if it were not that all the democratic forces joined NRM, we would not be where we are.  Not only that, but when Hitler was taking every country in Europe, the British and the French were at log heads with each other.  The Americans and the Russians were also not in good terms. But when Hitler was swallowing every country in Europe, they joined forces together.  

Indeed, when Bunyoro was fighting the British, Buganda joined the British to form an Alliance.  So Alliances have been there in the world and people or human beings change when it is for their good course.  I thank you.

MR KAHERU:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for the information he has given before us.  But we also know that, there have been alliances before and there have been alliances between the Lion and the Lamp; and we know what has been happening.  As soon as registration changes, we know which animal eats which. (Laughter and Applause)   

Mr Chairman, I wouldl like to congratulate the Minister and the Cabinet for the type of Bill they have presented to us.  It is a type of Bill, which is generally good so that we do not have much to improve on.  For example, the proposal for a credible Interim Electoral Commission.  Some of us who were candidates during the 1980 elections, know what can happen if you get a bad regime appoint a bad  Electoral Commission.  Now, the proposals in this Bill have been pleasing for some of us in that, we are no likely to get the malpractice which took place in 1990 through the Electoral Commission.  And if you may remember, Mr Chairman, although the Electoral Commission made a number of malpractice in 1980, the one who appoints the Electoral Commission did not think that, the malpractice are enough and he made a Decree to take over the responsibility of the Electoral Commission.  

And in this connection, Mr Chairman, I would like to suggest and I understand the Minister has accepted strengthening the provision which gives the Minister powers to make regulations, so that the people of Uganda are assured that there is no possibility of making regulations which will deny Ugandans of their democratic right.  The other area which of course caused us a lot of problem in the past and the Minister has put it right, is a demarcation of constituencies.  You may remember the gerrymandering, which took place in the demarcation of constituencies in 1980.  You remember the question of ballot boxes and how the regime then insisted on having many ballot boxes and I am glad that, government has corrected this.  Now, even the question of declaring results and so on and so forth.  But, Mr Chairman, I have got an area of concern where I will like to improve the Bill.  And this is regarding the question of sequence of election.  What do we have first, the Presidential Elections or Parliamentarian Elections?  Some people would say, we should leave this matter to the Electoral Commission.  Others have got doubt.  Now this is a reason for the doubt.   

I happen to share an opinion with the people who consider it wise for this House to put this right.  Because if things go wrong, blame cannot be entirely put on the Electoral Commission, and I will explain to you why.  

Mr Chairman, we have already passed the Presidential Elections Interim Provisions Statute, 1996.  And if the hon. Members have copies with them, and they turn to Section 10, subsection 1; of the Presidential Elections Interim Provision Statute; it states that ‘A candidate shall not be declared a elected President unless the number of votes cast in favour of that candidate at the Presidential Election is more than 50 percent of the valid votes cast at the election.’  Mr Chairman, you have to note that, if any of our Presidential Candidates do not achieve that 50 percent, it means no one will be declared President.  

Now, we go to sub-section 2. ‘Where at the Presidential Election, there are more than two candidates and no candidate obtains a number of percentage of votes specified in subsection 1; a second election shall be held within 30 days after the declaration of the results in which election the two candidates who obtained the highest number of votes shall be the only candidates.’  Mr Chairman, this is already law.  If for example the Electoral Commission were to make a mistake and we had Parliamentary Elections first, and Presidential Elections later, it really means that we cannot fit in this.  If for example it happens to be that, one Presidential Candidate has not got 50. ­-(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is it in order for hon. Zack Kaheru, to refer to the Commission by saying that, if the Commission were to make a mistake; because he is indirectly telling them to do it the other way round.  Whereas the law stipulates that they are free to make their own decisions.  Is it in order Mr Chairman, for me to refer to the Electoral Commission by saying that, if they were to make a mistake?  And does he have the prerogative to judge whether that would have been a mistake if they decided to hold the other elections first?

THE CHAIRMAN:  As a Member of this House, he is entitled to his personal opinion and he is in order.

MR KAHERU:  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  What I am saying is, we must avoid areas of having trouble and we should not sit back and leave political decisions to the Electoral Commission.  On page 11, of that Statute; that is Section 11, subsection 9. Well before that, subsection 8, talks about the Supreme Court annulling a Presidential Electoral.  And then Section 9, states ‘ where an election is annulled, a fresh election shall be held within 20 days from the date of the annulment.’  So, you can see the Presidential Election as opposed to Parliamentary Election, does not really end at the time of the initial election.  There is a possibility of our continuing stalemate when a successful candidate has not been determined.  Because initially, because of what I had stated before of failing to get 50 percent and then later on because of having execution and a Supreme Court annulling an election.

MR MAYENGO:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member, that probably he should keep in mind the Constitutional requirement that the election he is talking about must take place within the first 30 days of the last 90 days.

MR KAHERU: Thank you, very much.  In fact that makes it even more of a problem.  Now, from what I have said already, the Electoral Commission should start on Presidential Elections straight away.  Somebody is suggesting that, we cannot dictate.  It is not a question of dictation.  The responsibility of making sure that elections are properly held is essentially ours.  We are the people who have created the Electoral Commission.  The Electoral Commission is supposed to deal with administrative matters and matters which are going to determine who is going to win and who is not going to win.  But it will be irresponsible for us to keep quiet and leave the entire political issue to an Electoral Commission.  Therefore, I intend to propose an amendment that we have Presidential Elections without waiting for Parliamentary Elections.  Thank you very much.

PROF. KAGONYERA (Rubabo County, Rukungiri):  I thank you, Mr Chairman.  First of all, I would want to make some general observations regarding why we should be debating this Bill, and then I will make some brief remark on what I consider maybe weaknesses in the actual draft.  

Hon. Kaheru touched on the political philosopher of the Movement and he said, it would be unwise or if even out right foolish of the Movement to try and rig the coming elections; and I agree with him.  Therefore the question we must ask, Mr Chairman, is whether the provisions in this Bill will enable us to hold free and fair elections.  

In that connection, Mr Chairman, I would like to refer my Colleagues in this House to what the Germany President who was recently visiting this country said when he addressed some Ugandans on Constitutional jurisprudence, something like that. I was privileged to attend his talk.  Some of the items I picked include the following; he said that, as far as he was concerned, what was written in any law including the Constitution was not as important as the players themselves.  He said, in regard to our constitution, having of course said that, it was an innovative Constitution.  He said that, in the final analysis, it was the quality of the lawyers who were going to interpret the Constitution and the politicians who were going to use it in practicing their politics that was very crucial.  And, therefore, the question I would want to put to my Colleagues and the country is whether we have got our political priorities correctly.  Why should we be so keen about what is written in this document and we do not wonder whether we ourselves as leaders and the like, are politically prepared to do what we are supposed to do?  This is a question that every leader especially must ask themselves.  Are we prepared to lead this country to wait or to go?  

Before we care too much about what is written in this law or for that matter what is in our Constitution.  He also said that, political leaders should be careful about exaggerating things.  This was in connection with a question asked by someone about contradictions in the Constitution, he was talking about 279 and some other article in the Uganda Constitution.  This President of Germany who is a Constitutional expert in his right said that there was nothing unusual about contradictions in the Constitution.  He cited examples in his own country’s Constitution, I cannot remember; but I think it had to do with Parliament electing a President who had completely different constitutional role to play.  So, contradictions in the constitutions or laws do happen.  The most important thing he said, therefore, was leaders should not exaggerate and the leaders should be men and women of quality.  And that is what every Ugandan should aspire to.  

It is absurd when I read in the papers about Young Democrats; I am told so called.  And they could be so called!  Because there are people who take the politics of this country as a game.  People saying that one million voters are being imported by the NRM to come and vote for the NRM.  If this is the type of political freedom we are talking about, we have got a serious problem and especially if it is young and educated people, who are going to be around for another 30 years, some of us will soon be gone; and that is why maybe we would not give a dam what happens.  People who will be here for another 30 years, are laying land mines in our politics; is not a correct thing, whether we pass a good law or not.  So, my appeal to leaders and aspiring leaders is that, we must endeavour to measure up to the task.  

I consider politicians including myself to be among the most selfish people you can find around.  Instead of this country attempting to produce politicians of reformation, who must reform this country.  We have read the history of Europe, we have read the reformation of New York, we have read makers of civilization; but we do not care about civilisation in our own country.  So, I feel it is a waste of much time for us to make laws if we are not going to interpret them well and practice them.  That is why I would like the politicians of this country instead of being power hungry to consider themselves political reformers of this country.  And for that matter yes, thank you for the Clerk; I would like them to join President Museveni in whatever capacity will be after the next election.  To participate in reforming the politics of this country, rather than calling back into history and imagining that things ought to be what they totally failed to be in the past.  I would like us to give opportunities to the industrialists of this country, the Mulwanas, the Sembules, the Crown Bottlers, to the farmers.  Doctor Nsambu who has spent a long time in his life treating people is now mobilising people to export soya beans which has hitherto been rotting in people’s homes.  He is horrifically attempting to put money in Ugandan’s pocket.  

The question I am asking, therefore, is what do we want to make Uganda after the next elections rather than having an election or not.  Therefore, the politicians in my view, should be helping people who are trying to reform the politics of this country, the economy of this country, even scientists.  It is not surprising that Ugandans go abroad and shine.  

Recently, postgraduate students from Mulago Hospital were in Zimbabwe at a conference; they came number one. (Applause) Yes they did!  The Law Students went to South Africa and they too came number one. (Applause)  Recently, there was a conference on tropical medicine in Hamburg and because of the presentation by Ugandan Scientists, a Collaborative School is going to be built at Mulago Hospital.  So, I would expect politicians to be focusing on issues like that; to facilitate them rather than obstructing them.  That is why I think they should aim at having free, fair and peaceful elections.  And politicians should put their own personal ambitions second to the Uganda’s history.  So, the next elections should be about issues.  

I was told by a friend that, the Anthem in Malaysia is the year 2020; that is what everybody is saying in Malaysia.  Instead of multi partism for them they are talking 2020.  What is this 2020 they are talking about?  They are talking about Malaysia being in their priority by the year 2020.  Why should the Ugandan politics not be seen to be seeing results in consonant instead of thinking about multipartyism and what have you?  Sometimes I get disgusted.  I really do.  Because we are getting our priorities completely worn or even up side down. 

Mr Chairman, having said that, let me make a few observations about specific provisions in this Bill.  I think Mr Chairman, the Bill should go to the Committee after it has been debated.  Because there are many items that need polishing up.  For example, there are so many provisions which give the Commission options.  The Commission may do this.  When in fact the Commission shall do this.  For example when you are talking about producing the voters’ role.  It provides that the Commission may produce the voters role if it is entitled, that is not correct.  The voters’ role should be produced as a matter of fact; and if any candidate or any Ugandan citizen wants to have a copy, it ought to be a right not a privilege.  Otherwise when we allow these too many options hon. Kaheru has been talking about, the role of the Commission as being administrative rather than policy making.  A Policy must be made here and the Policy we make here must be as specific and as an ambiguous as it could possibly be.

MR WANENDEYA: Point of information.  Thank you very much, and I thank Prof. Kagonyera for giving way.  Tthe presenter of the Bill was given ideas by some people whom I know.  Secondly, the point over here is that, wherever there is practice, Committees of a Legislature go into details of the Bill before it comes before Parliament.  But we decided yesterday that we should debate it and then after debating it, it will go to the Committee and then whether will debate it again; this is not the usual way where Parliament have got Committees.  So, I would like Mr Chairman, that, that point which hon. Kagonyera is making -(Interruption)

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of order.  Mr Chairman, is hon. Wanendeya in order to allege without substantiation that the presenter of the Bill was given ideas; which ideas he does not disclose, from some people.  Is he in order to make this wild allegation?

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Wanendeya, please substantiate.

MR WANENDEYA:  Mr Chairman, I thank you very much for giving me the opportunity to substantiate.  Hon. Lubega Daniel, plus Mr Robert Kitariko, sat in a meeting with Legal and Security Committee and that those ideas including the Uganda Law Society,  were distributed and this should have been discussed before coming here.  But instead the presenter of the Bill gave us where the information in the Bill came from.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

AN HON. MEMBER:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I want to clarify in the most categorical terms that, I was not at a meeting where some honourables gave ideas to the Committee and in any case, the Bill is not being presented by the Committee.  Hon. Wanendeya, you better get your facts properly.  The presenter of the Bill is not the Committee and you are talking about information given to the Committee.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I was saying that, if we leave too many options in the Bill, it could cause the Commission itself problems if they make a mistake, we cannot blame them or we should not blame them because it is humanity error.  But if we make the law as unambiguous and instructive as possibly it can be, then we will make the job of the Commission and also the job of the people who will be involved in the elections as easy as possible.  

I wanted also to add my voice to what hon. Ntimba said.  I do not know who included this thing about nicknames, I do not know what he was up to really.  Because quite often, nicknames are prerogatory.  I do not know whether they are going to be included by choice of the candidates or by his detractors and as to the titles of course I have interest in the issue of titles.  Therefore, I will leave it to the Members, I will not make any comment.  But I find it almost ridiculous for anybody to suggest that people’s nicknames should be part of their name.  Because your name should be the registered name that is if you are lucky to have a passport, that is in your passport, that is your name.  Now, if anything else is not in that passport as you registered, then it is not your name for heavenly sake, Mr Chairman.  Also, I find it a little bit difficult in Article 47(4), where the presiding officer will inform people verbally that candidate ‘X’ has withdrawn from the race.  If I happen not like hon.Mwandha; at that time he will be James Mwandha flat.  If I do not like him, I can easily tell everybody coming to vote.  That you know Mwandha has withdrawn from the race. (Laughter)   

So, I would rather that be better methods of informing people that candidates have withdrawn including canceling their names from the ballot paper.  And I think except through death, maybe even should be a limit to when candidates can withdraw from the race.  Once you have not withdrawn by certain time, then your name should remain there and even if you publicly say, people should not vote for you, some might.  For example, recently in Kenya a dead person nearly won an election. (Laughter)  

I am told even in Mbarara something like that happened.  So, if candidates must withdraw, they should withdraw within certain a time and their names should be removed from the ballot paper, rather than someone whispering in people’s ears that so and so has withdrawn.  

Lastly, I wanted to propose that when the ballot papers are made, this is because I do not like and I do not agree with this business of people helping others to vote.  As I said yesterday, this question of people helping others to vote was so much abused in the last elections that really it should be done away with.  In 1962, and 1961, we had general elections; people did not help others to vote.  And people’s inability to identify candidates, was not a major issue in those elections.  Therefore, I wanted to suggest that except for the blind, we should print portraits of the candidates, as well as symbols.  Symbols are very easy to recognise even by the most illiterate. (Applause)  

If you are standing somewhere in Bukoto County and you put a bunch of Matooke, nearly every Muganda there will be able to identify that bunch of matooke.  And even we Bakiga who are of recent started eating matooke, we know what they look like.  So, we should be able to say, this is a bunch of matooke, this looks like a hoe, this looks like a cock.  But I would like to cancel that we avoid some of the symbols that have in the past been more notorious than famous.

MR BAKKABULINDI:  Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor, about the issue of symbols I was listening so attentively.  I am worried!  What if it happens that, another person puts a symbol for hoe which represents DP; will it not portray a different message to that person instead of suggesting a different solution.  I am seeking clarification from the hon. Member.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I thank hon. Bakkabulindi for the concern he has raised.  But if he had been a little bit patient, I was talking about those symbols that they have been more notorious than famous in the past, and have not been very useful politically to this country.  For example, some people may choose the hand, others may choose the hoe, others may choose the lamp and I wished I could choose the lamp.  But I think for purposes of leveling the ground and since we are avoiding party politics, all symbols that have in the past been used by political parties, should be excluded from being used by any candidate.  

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Members should not start to speak until given permission by the Chair.

MR HARUNA IMAGA:  Point of information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  Some people are using these symbols, not because of political motive.  For example, I have started a coffee project and in that coffee project, my symbol is somebody holding a hoe with a word coffee there.  So, I think it will depend on the design, how the hoe or the hand is put. (Laughter)  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MRS MWONDHA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  I am seeking clarification from the speaker holding the Floor, when he suggests that, the candidates who are aspiring should try to use symbols.  I am just wondering whether he is not mixing up the Movement politics and the multi party politics.  Because the Movement politics I would assume that we are on the same level, so there is no need for having a symbol.  But if we were in multi party political system, then there we can justify it using symbols.  Is he not mixing the Movement Political system and the Multi party Political System?  I beg him to clarify, Mr Chairman.

THE CHAIRMAN:  Hon. Prof. Kagonyera, please wind up.

PROF. KAGONYERA:  Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Members for their contributions but I would like to respond in this manner.  I think it is good politics to avoid even however remote indirect references to be in symbols of political parties.  Symbols are only proposed here with regret and that is because many of our people can neither read nor write.  But in countries where people can read and write, the name of the candidate is all you need.  I am saying, I totally do not agree with people helping others to vote and therefore, I am looking for a solution to how these people can independently vote and I say that, in 1961 and 1964 when we had these general elections, people were able to identify their candidates of choice likely because of symbols.  

Now, really I do not think that any form of a symbol is going to be appropriated with a political party, a bunch of matooke, a bicycle, a house, a door, a cow with its horns.  Let us say if I was standing in Nyabushozi, that is the one I would rush for; a cow with its horns.  But anyway, we have to find - this is the job of the Committee.  We have to find a way of avoiding this business of helping others to vote.  

Having said that, I thank you very much for allowing me to participate in this debate and I wholly support the vote and I hope it will enable the people of Uganda to give fresh mandate to their political leaders, so that we can also adopt something like 2020, like other countries are doing instead of engaging in petty differences Mr Chairman.  Thank you very much.

THE CHAIRMAN: With that we come to the end of today’s session, we adjourn until tomorrow at 2.30 p.m.  Thank you.

(The Council rose at 4.50 p.m. and adjourned until Thursday, 1 February 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)













