Tuesday, 30 January 1996

The Council met at 2.30 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Deputy Vice Chairman, Mr Cosmas Adyebo, in the Chair.)

The Council was called to order.

ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS

The Oath was administered to:

Mr T. Lak Kidega

BILLS
SECOND READING

THE PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS (INTERIM PROVISIONS) BILL, 1995

MR KAVUMA:  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, it is with pleasure and honour that I beg to move that a Bill entitled The Parliamentary Elections Interim Provisions Bill 1995, be read a Second Time.  Mr Chairman, the Bill before you this afternoon is yet another bold step and a very significant landmark in the consolidation f the fundamental change brought about by the NRM in our contemporary politics.   The Bill has its political base and legitimacy in point No. 1 of our programme which seeks to re-establish democracy, both popular and Parliamentary.  Permit me, Sir, to use this Floor and this opportunity to pay tribute to those gallant sons and daughters of this country, both living and those who have since departed, -(interruption) 

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of order.  Mr Chairman, it is with regret that this being a very important Bill, I cannot see myself in my honesty and way of trying to see democracy being practised in our country, that the quorum is not here and we proceed or the Minister proceeds to read his information - in reading the Bill for the Second Time when the House is nearly empty.  I cannot see my conscious really approving this.  Is this therefore, Mr Chairman, in order for us to move forward and really do business?

Mr Chairman, if we are democrats, we do not have to say yes, we have to behave like people on the streets.

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  Please, could you be precise?  What point do you want to raise?

MR WANENDEYA:  Is it in order Mr Chairman, to continue with an important Bill without the quorum, Mr Chairman?  Is it in order? 

THE DEPUTY CHAIRMAN:  I think the Clerk will have to make a count.  Please could you count and tell us? According to the Rules of Procedure, under that Section which you are aware, Mr Chairman, it is satisfied that we can proceed.  Hon. Minister, proceed.

MR KAVUMA:  I thank you Mr Chairman.  Mr Chairman and hon. Members, I was saying that the Bill before us is yet another bold step and a very significant land mark in the consolidation of the fundamental change brought about by the NRM in our contemporary politics.  The Bill has its political base and legitimacy in Point No. 1 of our programme which seeks to re-establish democracy, both popular and Parliamentary in our society.

Permit me, Sir, to use the Floor of this august House to pay tribute to the gallant sons and daughters of this country, both living and those who have since departed for having resolved to wage a protracted struggle against the dictatorial regimes that had destroyed constitutionalism and democracy since the mid 1960s.  Sir, I speak with confidence when I say that the vast majority of our people are genuinely grateful for the exemplary manner in which the NRM has led this country for the last 10 years to this point in time when they say, the Ugandans should now assume full control of and responsibility for their country’s destiny through free and fair elections, based on the principle of universal adult suffrage.  Hon. Members, you will agree with me, not many Governments which come to power through the barrel of the gun, offer a genuine opportunity to people to take control of their destiny in the way the National Resistance Movement has shown ever since it came to power in 1986.  

Mr Chairman, the Constitutional base of the Bill before you and this august House, is to be found in Article 263, 264 and 271 of our Constitution.  It is true, the Bill looks big, perhaps, one of the biggest this House has handled, but let me state, Sir, that the big percentage of it, is dealing with matters that are very familiar to members.  Many of the Clauses are constitutional provisions, many others are taken from now expired Constituent Assembly Statute, which was debated in detail by this hon. House, over a long period, while others are provisions taken from the National Assembly Elections Act, Chapter 131 of our laws.  I have Sir, circulated sources of some of the provisions of the Bill for the ease of reference for hon. Members.  

Allow me to make some brief general reference to some provisions.  Article 77 and Article 83 provide for the composition of Parliament, qualification of Members and their election to Parliament and Article 86 provides for among other things, reference to the courts of disputed elections.  Article 140 of the Constitution, deals with the way courts handle all election disputes.  

Considering that time is not on our side, in view of the fact that we must by constitutional requirement have in place an elected Government by the very latest, the 7th of July, this year, we have put much of what would normally be Rules made under the Statute as substantive provisions of the law to save time, thereby reducing considerably on the possibility of numerous Rules to be made as subsidiary legislation under the Statute.   

The Draft Parliamentary Elections Bill was drafted in simple and straight forward language. This is an element of significance in relation to an electoral law which should not only be available but should also be easily understandable to the widest possible range of the public.  On the other hand, care has been taken to make the draft Bill comprehensive enough, to cover a wider range of electoral situations.  This should lessen complaints about legal lacuna being filled in by the Commission in ways that cause dissatisfaction for any party to an election as it sometimes occurred with the Constituent Assembly elections.  Indeed, Mr Chairman, much of the experience acquired from the Constituent Assembly elections has influenced the Draft Bill.  The Bill has a total of 13 substantive parts each of which deals with distinct aspect of the electoral process.  

Part II of the Bill provides for the Interim Electoral Commission.  Clause 3 of the Draft Bill continues in existence the Interim Electoral Commission already established under Section 3 of the Interim Electoral Commission Statute 1995, Statute No. 5 of that year, a Statute to be repealed by Clause 123 of the present Bill.  Clause 3 is thus essentially a transitional provision continuing like the existence of the electoral Commission inspite of the repeal of the original Statute creating it.  The rest of the provisions under part II cover the usual matters relating to an institution of the kind of an Electoral Commission such as, its independence, its Secretary, staff, remuneration, immunity, et cetera. 

 Part III, Sir, of the Draft Bill, embodies provisions relating to the general functions of the Interim Election Commission and other related matters.  Some of the provisions in this part are required by the Constitution; a few such provisions are repeated in the Draft Bill.  Relevant provisions include, Clause 10 dealing with the functions of the Electoral Commission,  Article 61 of the Constitution, Clause 11 relating to the designation of constituencies, Article 63 of the Constitution and Clause 12 relating to the appeal to tribunal established under Article 64 of the Constitution.  

Part IV, Sir, of the Draft Bill entails provisions relating to the maintenance of the voters register and voters rolls or lists.  The voters register in all elections present the greatest challenge to electoral agencies.  It also often generates the greatest public criticism and petitions to the court.  Even though great efforts have already been made to ensure that the national voters register will be on a reasonably accepted level, by the time of holding the elections to which the draft Bill relates, it is nevertheless considered wise, to make sufficient provisions in this area to cater for every possible eventuality. 

Part V, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, of the Bill, makes provision for the appointment and operation of the Electoral officers.  Election officers at all levels constitute an element essential for the success of any election anywhere in the world.  Careful selection and training is required of all election officers.  Adequate provision is made in this part of the Bill for the necessary electoral infrastructure to be in place, well before an election; in particular, polling divisions, stations and centres are to be created and made known to the voting population in advance of the election to facilitate voting on polling day as smoothly as possible.

Hon. Members are aware that Article 78 of the Constitution which regulates the composition of Parliament makes provision for the presence in Parliament of 39 Women Representatives one for each district and other members representing the Army, Youth, Workers, persons with disability and such other groups as Parliament may determine.  

Part VI of the Draft Bill, embodies provisions relating to these matters.  It is proposed under Clause 37 II, that the representation of the Interest groups be as follows:

(a) UPDF - 10 representatives
(b) National Organisation of Trade Unions - 3 representatives
(c) National Youth Council - 5 representatives
(d) National Union of Delegates of Disabled People of Uganda - 2.

I must say, Sir, we have received several proposals in this area which are being considered but Sir, we must always bear in mind the fact that we must ensure that we have a Parliament that is of a size that is manageable and easily facilitated.

Mr Chairman, the rules for the election for the representatives of Women and Special groups are set out in the First Schedule to the Draft Bill, which provides for the 39 Women Representatives being to be elected by a broadly representative electoral college.  The number of single member constituencies, Sir, is required to be prescribed by Parliament under Clause 1 of Article 63 of the Constitution.  This matter is not dealt with conclusively in the Bill; instead this number will be prescribed by a resolution passed at a later date.

Clause 38, Sir, of the Bill, spells out the qualifications and grounds of this qualification for Members of Parliament as per the provisions of the Constitution.  Sub-clause 4 of Clause 38 provides for the 2nd Schedule intended to specify the minimum formal education standard which should be regarded as being equivalent to Advanced Level standard as provided in the Constitution.  The rest of the Clauses in that part, Sir, deal with matters relating to the nomination of candidates.

With your permission, Sir, I now turn to part 7 of the Bill.  This is a part that deals with campaigns.  Hon. Members are aware that Article 269 of the Constitution guides political parties from carrying out certain specified activities until Parliament makes laws regulating the activities of political organisations in accordance with the Constitution.  

Taking into account the provisions of the Constitution, the Draft Bill ensures that the major of campaigning is the same as applied to the Constituent Assembly elections.  It, therefore, provides for candidates meetings, programmes, to be designed and conducted by he Returning officers in accordance with the provisions of Clause 48 of the Bill.  The rest of the Clauses in part 8 deal with matters relating to the conduct of election campaigns.  Hon. Members, you know that voting procedures and rules need to be simple, clear and detailed enough in order to be generally understood and followed without much difficulty.  

Part 8 of the Bill embodies propositions that aim at achieving these objectives.  The voting procedures provided for under the Parliamentary Elections Bill will, as you remember, hon. Members, apply to the Presidential elections under the Presidential Elections Statute we passed last week.  Most of the provisions of the voting procedures reflect similar procedures to those followed during the Constituent Assembly elections.  However, many of the omissions and loopholes which became evident in that election, have been the subject of explicit provision in the draft Bill now before you and hon. Members. 

Other important ideas in part 8 include the proposals contained under Clauses intended to facilitate voters who may be restricted in hospitals and other places, something required by Article of our own Constitution.  The counting of votes calls for very stringent and well-considered procedures.  In addition, the records of the election returns must be both secured and delivered to the appropriate authorities without undue delay.  The provisions being proposed under part 9 of the Draft Bill aim at achieving those objectives.  The only significant innovations are the proposals for recount contained in Clause 84 and 85.  Clause 84 proposes that an administrative recount be mandatory in all cases either where there is equality in the votes of two or more leading candidates or where the winning candidate leads by 20 or less votes.  This provision is mainly intended to pre-empt the very high possibility of numerous and long petitions which experience in Uganda and elsewhere show often arises from such situations.  

Clause 85, Mr Chairman and hon. Members, provides for an optional judicial recount at the instance of any of the candidates.  However, the application for such recount must be filed within 7 days from the date of the declaration of the results of the poll. 

In part 10, Sir and hon. Members, the draft Bill contains provisions applicable to election petitions, because elections constitute a matter of great public interest and importance.  Clause 90 permits either the losing candidate or any voter in the constituency concerned to have no cast standing to institute an election petition.  This is a new idea which is introducing in the law in conformity with the politics of today, where politics is no longer centred on the candidate but it is a kind of joint venture between the candidate and the electorate. This provision, Sir will allow a candidate or candidates who feel that the election was unfair, but may be the would-be winning candidate has chickened out for reasons best known to him; this provision gives them a right by law to raise a petition and protect their interests as voters of this country.  But, Sir, to ensure that voters do not initiate petitions, they are required to be supported by the signatures of not less than 500 other voters, registered in the same constituency.  Further, Sir, because election petitions are quite expensive, the party filing the petition is required to furnish sufficient security for the likely cost to be incurred.  

Clause 91 empowers the courts to set aside the election of a candidate on the ground specified in that Clause.  The rest of the Clauses under part 10 provide for matters related to the expeditious settlement of election petitions and other related matters.  

Sir, permit me to proceed to part 11 and 12 of the draft Bill which spell out general election offenses other than those that are particularised in specific Clauses within the rest of the Bill.  

Part 11 embodies what are normally considered to be the more serious offenses which are normally called illegal practices. Unlike less serious offenses, they can result into an election being set aside where a candidate commits the offence or where a candidates agent commits the illegal practice with knowledge and consent or approval of the candidate.  The main illegal practices are contained in Clauses 98 and 101.  Clause 102 provides for a general penalty for the Commissioner of all illegal practices specified in any other provisions of the Bill.

Part 12 creates and provides penalties for the election offenses other than illegal practices.  The range of offenses is long and comprehensive so as to cater for particularities of the Uganda social, economic situation.  A general penalty Clause for the specific offenses embodied elsewhere in the Bill is contained in Clause 113; while Clause 114 makes it mandatory to secure the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions, before any prosecution is commenced under the proposed legislation.  This requirement, hon. Members, is intended to ensure that the process is not abused since the proposed legislation is intended to regulate matters relating to the public life in this country.

Part 13, Sir, of the Bill, deals with matters considered general in nature.  I will mention Clause 124 in that part which deals with regulations.  Mr Chairman, I did mention earlier that time is not on our side.  An elected Government must be in place as soon as possible and in any case, not later than the 7th July of this year.  Sir, the NRM Government is firmly committed to meet this dead line and indeed, it will be met.

Mr Chairman, and hon. Members, allow me to divert briefly to the fear that has been expressed which we considered to some extent when we were debating the Presidential Bill.  Fears are still expressed by some hon. Members that it may be improper to hold Presidential and Parliamentary elections before local council elections.  That, I did explain, Sir, that there was nothing wrong in law and in fact, in doing so.  After that, a further question has of recent arisen; we shall have an elected Government in place and as soon as we have it, the NRM Government will cease to exit since it is a transitional Government.  Consequently, Sir, the RCs will cease to exist and they will no longer - this is a fear being expressed, that the RCs will consequently cease to exist and that they will no longer be capable of forming part of the electoral college for the election of the 39 Women Members of Parliament as provided for in this Bill.  We have taken off some time, Sir, to consider this problem and I would now to allay the fears of any Member or anybody in the public, that through the following explanations, it will become clear that there is no problem whatsoever.  

Ever since the NRM came to power in 1986, during the Interim period, the NRM Government has had the national Government which is the Government for the whole country.  This had the traditional organs of Government, namely, the legislature, which is this august House, the Executive, headed by His Excellency, the President and the judiciary.  These have always been dealt with under the Constitution based on Legal Notice No. 1 of 1986 as from time to time amended.

The RCs on the other hand, have as Local Governments been handled under another legal framework in the form of first, the original RC Statute of 1987 and then under the current Local Government Resistance Council Statute of 1993.  The Constitution and the law has always therefore, treated the national Government and the Local Government separately and the same is true under the 1995 Constitution.  By that reason, Sir, the current RCs will not legally expire with the election of a new national Government as provided for in the Constitution.  The new Parliament - they will continue under the law which governs them, that is the Local Government Resistance Council Statute of 1993 until Parliament makes law governing the formation, et cetera of the new Local Government system provided for under the new Constitution. They will therefore, Sir, be capable of forming part of the electoral college for Women MPs, even after elections of the President and Parliament.

In view of the obvious constraints we have in time, I urge hon. Members to consider this Bill with a due care it calls for, but at the same time, as expeditiously as possible.  Government is convinced that once passed into a law, this Bill together with the Statute on Presidential elections, will (we passed last week) achieve the long standing objective of the National Resistance Movement of introducing into our politics a culture of constitutionalism, that will ensure for now and for ever that there will always be a smooth, peaceful and orderly transfer of power from one set of leaders to another through the ballot box as opposed to what has hitherto been the order of the day since 1966 when the forces of dictatorship usurped power and abrogated the Constitution, thus, ushering in the era of the rule of terror and abuse of human rights. 

It is now my honour to urge Members to do their historical function to debate and pass the Bill before us as soon as possible, so that we can embark on the final assault on the enemy of absence of an orderly process of transferring power from one leader to another without the spilling of blood and damage of valuable property.  I beg to move, Sir.

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA (Rubanda County, Kabale):  I thank you Mr Chairman for giving me this opportunity to second the Motion of the Minister for giving a Second Reading to this very important Bill which contains measures for the election of members of Parliament.

The Minister has very ably pointed out the salient features of this Bill and I have no anything to add.  However, last night, I was drowsing through this Bill and I discovered there are many, many areas of anomaly which need to be ironed.  First, the Bill does reproduce in parts the Statute we have already passed; namely the Interim Electoral Commission which is not necessary.  Indeed, the first 20 pages of the Bill do seem to simply reflect the Statute that we have already enacted.  As the Minister spoke, he also reminded me what I read last night, that there have been certain terms and conditions imposed on some of the liberties of the citizens which the Constitution did not impose and there may be a possible conflict between the constitutional provision and what is now drafted in this Bill.  I also take note, very seriously of the Minister caution, that we have very little time in which to consider this Bill.  I have no doubt whatsoever and this morning, I was reading some comments in the newspapers, some Members, both in and outside concerned about certain provisions of this Bill.  

It is my considered opinion, Mr Chairman, that we would be speedier and we would bring this Bill more quickly to Statute book if it were to be submitted in total to the Legal and Security Committee immediately almost without debate; so that, that committee considers it, if there are any Amendments to be submitted on the Bill, these could be sent to this Committee and then, after we give it until Thursday and then they compile the report and then, I believe, that by next week, we would pass this Bill.  To do otherwise, Mr Chairman, would prolong the issue, it is likely to be a very detailed and complicated debate on some of these measures, but if it was given to this Technical Committee, which deals with our legislation, I have no doubt that the matters would be speeded up.  

So, with your permission, Mr Chairman, I want to move formally, that this Bill before we debate it, be submitted to the Legal and Security Committee for consideration where Members -(Interruption) 

MR BUTAGIRA:  Point of information.  I want to inform my Learned Friend, indeed, we had a chat over these issues, this morning, I must disclose and in light of what we saw, when debating Presidential Elections Bill, when there were so many Amendments and so forth and in light of the fact that only when a Bill is formally referred to the Committee, then the obligation is for that Committee to report formally to Parliament, but if that is not done, then, whatever Committee is doing is informal.  However, having said that, I would like to inform my hon. Friend, that normally the Bill would be referred to a Committee after a thorough debate on Second Reading.  At the end of the Second Reading, then after all Members have expressed their views, then it can be referred to the Committee which will have the benefits of the full debate.  

PROF. KANYEIHAMBA:  Thank you Mr Chairman. I am very grateful for hon. Butagira for making that suggestion which as he rightly says, is the only way of doing things.  But for me, I was responding to the Minister appeal for the urgency of this Bill.  My view, I am entitled to my views, even if you do not agree, is that, it would be much quicker if what I suggested did happen, because, for example, part of the Bill is not very relevant.  As I have said, the first 20 pages; I do not know why the drafts men did it that way, I believe it is because presumably, this Bill was drafted before the Constitution was promulgated.  Be as it may, I am able to support any view which says that whatever we do, whether we support it now or after the Committee has carried out a surgery on it, that it should be ultimately be considered by the Legal and Security Committee. So, I have no strong views one way or the other, but I wanted to support the Minister, that we do not have time.  I beg to support, Mr Chairman.

MR BUTAGIRA  (Rwampara County, Mbarara):  Mr Chairman, I rise to support the Bill with few comments.  Mr Chairman, this Bill is welcome, it is a fulfillment of what we all know, the yearning of the people of this country to fully democratise their society and have elected Government and elected Parliament in place to replace the succession of interim Parliament, interim Government.

The Bill looks a bit bulky, but in actual fact, when you look at it, it is not.  Some of the provisions are exactly a replica of what is contained in the Interim Electoral Commission Statute which we passed; some are even contained in the Presidential Election Bill which we passed.  So, when you look at it, there are few areas, I think which merit some comment.  

First of all, I want to comment on the issue of number of constituencies.  It is a constitutional duty imposed on this Parliament to determine the number of constituencies.  This is a matter which can be delegated through the best of provisions to any other body.  This country is entitled to know how many MPs they are going to be, if it is left to ad hocking business, whenever a county is created, you have an MP; you will end up with this House overflowing.  Then, there is a constraint of money; there is money aspect of it.  Right now, it is very difficult for Members to be paid their allowances; they are in arrears for months and months.  This is again, a fact which should be looked at; we have a sizeable, a manageable Parliament that can transact business, that can have facilities which are accorded normally to Members of Parliament, Research Assistants and so forth. 

For this to be done, you need a manageable number of Members of Parliament.  So, this House should not shut its responsibility; we should determine now, how many Members of Parliament are going to be in this House.  Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR NTIMBA:  Point of information.  Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I would like to inform my hon. Friend holding the Floor, that when you have a Parliament that is extremely too big, it becomes difficult for whoever is a Speaker, to give a chance to Members to contribute.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, I want now to comment on the issue of qualification.  

Qualifications for Members of Parliament;

It is provided in the Constitution that the minimum qualification is ‘A’ level or its equivalent.  Now, who determines the equivalent parts?  It is this House. Mr Chairman, we, the Committee looked through the provisions provided here of what should be equivalent; we also took some other views.  I must say, this is an area where we have not come to any conclusion positively and we thought may be, we shall have the benefits of the views of Members of this House but I want to emphasise one thing, that whatever we do, should not undermine the Constitutional provision.  Why is it that the Constitution set as a minimum ‘A’; there must be a reason.  If you now depart, stating say, a P. 7, plus how many years, Primary, Junior Three, plus so many years, where are we ending?  You are under mining the Constitution, this should have been done there, but for us now, to assume the role which should have been done by the Constituent Assembly under the guise of expanding the definition of equivalent, may be to cater for certain people, I think this is a provision which we should discuss without any selfish interest.  If there be any Member here, who actually does not meet the requirement, we should not stretch the provision to cater for him. So, I would like therefore, for us to look very, very carefully at what is equivalent.  

A suggestion has been made that there was a report of the Education Policy Review Commission - the report was tabled here and this House adopted it.  If you look at that report, by experts in education, they are at least providing what is equivalent of ‘A’ Level. Why do we not use that as a yardstick, because I am not qualified; some of us are not qualified; we shall never reach a very, very, amicable answer.  So, we must may be take a guide from some people who have done this and who are experts in this field.  So, that could be a good guide as to who, what is equivalent of ‘A’ Level.  

MR WANENDEYA:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, you find that somebody who is in our Armed Forces might have stopped at Junior 3, but then, eventually, he goes to Sandhurst and Sundhurst may be a Diploma, perhaps a Degree.  So, how are we going to get at this?  Should it be left to the high court to interpret for us or some other legal set up, to see the minimum equivalent of ‘A’ level; may be the Mover of the Bill should clarify that to us and perhaps go to the high court to get interpretations put right.  Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, we are already witnessing the difficulties of determining who is equivalent.  So, we need time really to look at it very closely and come out with something satisfactory.  Let me move on to clause 66. Clause 66 regards the issue of people unable to vote because they are blind, they are illiterate, they suffer from any other disability, there are unable to fix an authorised mark in the ballot paper.  This provision as it is, is susceptible to greater juices.  First of all, from the experience of last elections, whereby people who even had Degrees pretended not to know how to write, whereby one person ‘assisted’ over 200 people to vote; you would find one person was an expert in assisting, so whoever  - I want that one, I want that one, it became very suspicious.  How can only one person be the one leading these people to vote?  

I have looked at these provisions and some Members of our Committee also have not touched this provision and I think we should really restrict the person to aid to the Presiding officer.  The Presiding officer will be having candidates’ agents, they are present. If somebody comes, he says, I am blind or I cannot do this, then, the Presiding officer, in the presence of these two agents of the parties or more, will assist him or her to put a mark.  Mr Chairman, I do not see anything wrong with that, - (Interruption) 

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of clarification.   Mr Chairman, I would like to seek clarification from the hon. Member holding the Floor as to what the intention is, to have three people now instead of one, if you are talking of secrecy.  You have one person who is chosen by the blind person or the person with a disability of some kind, the person says, I want Faith Mwondha to be the one to do it, so he or she has confided to this person the person he or she wants to vote for.  

Now, you are saying, who may not be known to that person with disability and the two Polling Assistants who may not be known either to that person, the party agents who may not be known, especially if you are talking to blind ones, the polling agent may be a young person who has not been seen by this blind person.  So, you are saying, that in this situation you have more justice for the voter than when the voter has made his or her choice.  Can I be clarified?

MR NTIMBA:  Point of clarification.  Thank you Mr Chairman. I want to seek further clarification on what happens to the confidentiality of the voters wish when more than one person have got to know how he or she is going to cast his vote.

MR BUTAGIRA:  Mr Chairman, what I was driving at and what I call upon the Members of this House also to assist in, is the possible abuse of this provision as it is.  Mr Chairman, once you have told even one person that you want to vote for somebody, you have already broken the secrecy; it is no longer secret.  If you blind and tell hon. Didi, I want to vote for hon. Etiang, now, that already is no longer a secret.  I hear they call it guarded secret.  But it is no longer a secret.  If one person, why not two?  Here we are saying strictly two.  

AN HON MEMBER:  Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that using the experience of the CA exercise, and some of us who were participating in such an exercise, we found that using the agents of other candidates as you have indicated that the agency should be there in the presence of the presiding officer, who ever he is, is more risky for these people who fear to be known at the end of it be questioned why he voted for such a person.  We leave the freedom to that person.  He can choose any person he trusts.  I think it is more of the confidentiality so that he comes with his own person and then from there he votes rather than saying, we collected the agents and that person is now exposed to the risk.  Mr Chairman, we leave it as it is in the Bill.

MR KALULE SENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I have my own doubt these people; these individuals we are talking about because the individual has also got his own conviction.  Let us take the example of a blind person.  The blind person can say he wants ‘X’, when in fact you ‘X’ you prefer another.  Now, when you go to mark, you will mark the person you want because the other person is at a disadvantage.  That is why I am suggesting, it would be better if we left the whole exercise to the agents because the agents will actually fulfill what one needs.  Unless the Mover convinces me as to how he is going to guard against a person that is trusted, and yet that person has got a different choice and is working for a person who is blind who cannot defend himself and then he does the contrary.  How are you going to guard against that, Mr Chairman?  Thank you.

PROF. KAGONYERA MONDO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I think the first information I should give is that microphones in the House should be taken care of.  Now, the information I would like to give is - One, this proposal of people guiding people to vote was the most abused in the last election.  It made a fuss of the election and as far as possible it must done away with, as far as I am concerned.  Two - I was trying to find, unfortunately I did not bring my eyes with me, but I was trying to look at the ballot papers.  They are going to have photographs of the candidates besides their names.  Therefore, I thought the Commission were doing their level best to make it possible for even the illiterate to identify the candidates of their choice.  

Now, if voters cannot be trained to identify people’s portraits, faces, of persons, I have an illiterate person in my village who recognised that he was being mislead, because he had already been told the order of the candidates and he knew where the candidate he wanted ought to be.  When he was shown where to mark, this very short man discovered he was being misled, he shouted loudly the candidate he wanted to vote for and he said he was being misled by the person.  

So, what I am saying is that people should be trained to identify the pictures and if they still fail to do that, maybe time has not come for them to vote.  

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Members who have given the information.  You can now see the problem we are facing on that particular issue.  My concern is to prevent an abuse.  If we can arrive at formula  that will prevent this abuse, at the same time guard secrecy, so much the better.  But what I was suggesting here, I think would take care of the problem.  

Mr Chairman, there is another area I want to comment on, and this regards the first Schedule.

The First Schedule concerns Rules for the election of women representative and representative of special interest groups.  If you look at Clause 37, 4 of the Bill.  

MR APULI: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, when Prof. Kagonyera was giving information, I got confused.  When he said, people who are disabled, I wanted to find out who actually are the disabled.  Those who have failed to read, that is illiterate; or those who are physically blind; or those who have no hands?  Then when he said that they should not vote, I got confused.  Also, I am trying to find out, what percentage in Uganda are these people?  If he said, they cannot vote, then are we not running to danger?  Because the only thing I see here which I should not be clarified is that these people, I remember in my own experience, in 1989, when we came in here for NRC, a blind man shouted and said, on which line am I?  They said, on so and so.  He said, I want to be on that line.  That was a blind man.  Now, when we say, they are not going to vote, that means, the great population of our country will not vote.  I want to be clarified, Mr Chairman.

MR MANZI TUMUBWEINE: Mr Chairman, I do not think the hon. Member understood hon. Prof. Kagonyera.  The issue is not that all illiterate people should be stopped from voting.  There are very few illiterate people who cannot recognise pictures of individuals.  Certainly in the candidates’ meetings, and at other photographs of the candidates will have been distributed; will have been known.  Now, if you really want to be serious and you look at how these voting for other was abused in the last CA elections, you must agree that you cannot afford to have a situation where even secondary school teachers turned up and said that they could not recognise pictures.  They are illiterate and handicapped.  

The whole thing was a fuss in that, you would have one person on a polling station, voting for as many as 100 plus.  I can quote one station which I know where somebody voted for 161 people because he happens to have been a Gombolola Chief and he said anybody who comes here and cannot read and write, I will vote.  Otherwise, you will pay more tax next year.  Those are the issues that we must avoid in these coming elections. 
 
MR AKURE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, why this was happening; why there was this rigging was that - one, agents of the candidates were made to sit very far.  Now presiding officer took advantage of the situation.  Whoever was to vote, if the person said I want so and so, he marked against the man of woman he wanted.  I can give an example, I would like to give was in my place.  Someone who was blind came and said, he wanted so and so, instead of voting for that person, the man who was presiding decided to make that person vote against the fellow he never wanted.  So, this is very true and I think it is better for the head of the candidates to be nearer in order to avoid this anomaly.  Otherwise, we are going to have the same problem on and on until no more.  Thank you.

MR BUTAGIRA: Mr Chairman, I was referring to the First Schedule when hon. Opuri took us back.  The First Schedule to this Bill concerns Rules for the election of Women Representative and Representative of special interest books.  If you look at these Rules, they are really providing a method for electing these interest groups.  For instance, Clause 3 of that Schedule concerns election of Women Representatives. All councilors at LC II, III level shall form a college.  

Now, the point I am making here is that these Rules are so important that whoever is aspiring to be elected as a Woman Representative, or from an interest groups, he should know before hand these Rules.  But if we are leaving them to be determined by, as in Clause 4, the Minister who may change them although with approval of Parliament, this maybe late.  Yet these interest groups want to know how they are going to be elected.  

So, what is the problem with having these Rules formulated and put in the Schedule now, and we know them?  So, I suggest that rather than leaving to the Minister at a later stage to vary and so forth, these Rules are enacted passed by the Legislature and people know what Rules are going to govern their elections.  Just as we provided for any Members of Parliament.  

Lastly, I want to refer to Clause 122 - It concerns the powers given to the Minister to make regulations.  Mr Chairman, consistent with what we have passed when dealing with Presidential Interim Election Bill, there we provided that any regulations made shall be, with the approval of the House.  So, I suggest that even here, Regulations made by the Minister should have the blessing and approval of this House.  

Mr Chairman, with those remarks, I beg to support this Bill, and to associate myself with the concern of the Minister that as far as possible, let us try to expedite the passing of this Bill but without really sacrificing the scrutiny which this House should give it.  

BRIG. KYALIGONZA: I thank you, Mr Chairman.  I rise to support the Bill.  Before I support the Bill there are a lot of observations I would like to make and which I think to the benefit of this House, it is important as hon. Kanyeihamba had put it, that it would be very prudent for this House to reconsider this Bill to undergo some surgery so that we receive a clean and healthy Bill.  Mr Chairman, as you may observe, some of the Clauses, there are a lot of shortcomings which we seem to have - maybe the draughtsmen seem to have forgotten.  Where you find by omission, they are authorising the voter to hold more than one voter’s card, only if it is authorised.  In my view I feel that one is a bit wrong.  The voter should hold one voter’s card.  

In Clause 26, 2, ‘No voter shall without lawful authority hold more than one valid voter’s card in the voter’s name.’  Why do we not say, ‘No voter shall hold more than one valid voter’s card in the voter’s name.’ Because if we start giving some lea way to the authorities to authorise, then we are going to disabuse the direct.  So, Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

AN HON MEMBER: Point of clarification.  Mr Chairman, I would like the Minister to clarify what the hon. Member has just said, that no voter will be allowed to hold more than one voter’s card, especially with respect the special Rules for the election of women representatives and representatives of special interest groups whereby Members of the UPDF are going to elect ten representatives to this House.  At the same time, they are going to elect Members of Parliament in their respective Constituencies.  Can he please, clarify on this.

AN HON MEMBER: Mr Chairman, I am also concerned about the expression of the Minister when he says there is little time.  It is true there is little.  But this time can also be substituted by causing for the Committee of this House to scrutinise and advise this House appropriately so that we pass a Bill that is reasonable and is going to be beneficial to both, the intending candidates and those who are going to benefit through this election.  

Mr Chairman, you will also observe that Clause 15, 2 - The Commission shall not accredit any citizen of Uganda, whether resident in Uganda or abroad to be an election observer. Yet we have citizens who maybe of substantial credit who would like to see that the elections of this is held fairly and maybe freely.  But when you start saying, that the Commission shall accredit any citizen of Uganda, we are now only allowing foreigners to bring the observers here without recognising our own persons that they have got the credence to observe these elections.  There are quite a number of our citizens who are actually capable of observing these elections effectively.  Now, that one I think Mr Chairman, I intend to move an amendment when it is appropriate and I will also propose to delete Clause 26, 2 - the word, ‘without lawful authority.’  

Mr Chairman, I also want to observe that the civic education  has not been given specific time because in the past elections we had a lot of problems where the civic education was so short that what the hon. Members have been expressing here is a result of really having very short time in civic education.  Okay, it is true that our country is some per cent illiterate, but if there is constant civic education, to show the portraits and the style under which people will vote, the boxes and so on, people will naturally recognise and do this, except of course the blind.  

But regarding the blind people, I would also go along with the hon. Member when he was saying, it is also not prudent for us to start using our agents even to come and determine on behalf of the blind man to assume that this blind man has been showing some signs of support during your campaigns that when he is voting he will therefore support you.  If we have got to be fair, I would propose that this blind person should come with his usual guide because this guide is the one who moves with him.  He directs him whether he should not fall into the ditch; and this ditch of not voting properly should also be guided by the same person.  So, I propose that the proposal as it is in the Bill is left as it is.  

Mr Chairman, we are also talking about the boundaries of the Constituencies.  We are talking about counties.  In our local Council Authority or Local Government Authority Bills, it is indicated that we have got Municipalities.  They have not been anywhere, and I do not whether these candidates who fall under the Municipalities will run back to their counties where they originated before the Municipalities came into being.  Then another one Mr Chairman, is concerning the returning officers.  These returning officers are not per se the appropriate persons who must not be questioned.  It is true the Commission might elect them, but these people are human beings, they are bound to have their political alliances, and convictions.  So, they should also be subjected to question, if a candidate complains about this person.  But it appears as it is here, he is behaving like a policeman when they pre-judge.  So, I am really concerned, Mr Chairman, that it would be prudent for this House to recommend that this Bill, first of all be scrutinised as hon. Kanyeihamba was proposing to be scrutinised by the Committee of this House.  I thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR PATRICK KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I thank you.  I stand to support the Bill and thank the Minister for presenting it eloquently.  I also subscribe to the proposal brought by hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba, that the Bill scrutinised and we come up with a well-refined law which is going to guide our people to come up with proper candidates or Parliamentarians.  

To go specifically to the Provisions in the Bill, I would like to start my comment on qualifications of the Members of Parliament.  You remember when we were debating the Presidential Elections Law, which we have passed, we provided for other the paper qualification, which I also agree that it should be versionalised to come up with the equivalent of this element of equivalence, I would like the deposit that a Member of Parliament is going to pay.  

Under Clause 40, sub-section 2, it says that the nomination paper shall be accompanied by a nomination fee of UShs 200,000 in legal tender or a Bank Draft for that amount payable to Uganda Administration.  It is in order, Mr Chairman, for Members of Parliament to pay a deposit.  But since we have already passed the Law for the Presidential candidates, that he pays a non-refundable contribution towards the election, we Members of Parliament should also do the same.  In fact I would like to say that since the Member of Parliament has the same qualification as a Presidential candidate because it has been stated that a Presidential candidate shall have the same qualification as a Member of Parliament.  I am saying let us look at this Figure which has been suggested, Mr Chairman, which is UShs 200,000 and then we ask ourselves, what is the ratio that we have multiplied Presidential fee which was suggested in the Presidential Bill.  So, I would like to suggest that since this one is UShs 20,000 that a Member of Parliament should also pay the same ratio.  Mr Chairman, I am very serious about this.  

MR OKWERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the position of the President cannot be acquitted with a position of a Member of Parliament.  Also, if you look at these people who are aspiring to be President, they are heavyweight in term of financial capacity.  My only fear is that the hon. Member on the Floor is talking as a tax collector, which position he should not bring in this House, Mr Chairman.  Thank you.

MR GASATURA: Point of information.   Mr Chairman, perhaps most Members here would, otherwise, not have had any problem with the multiplication factor except for the issue that already we are being accused of keeping out many would be a Presidential candidates, and we might be accused of keeping out opponents.  Secondly, whereas it was advanced that for Presidential candidates, it is imperative that the winner gets more than 50 per cent.  The requirement is not similar for the Parliamentary candidate.  Just the achiever of the highest number.  So, a candidate to Parliament could win with as little as 15 per cent if there are 20 candidates. 

Finally, Mr Chairman, by way of information, it maybe unrealistic to keep out all the intending candidates for Parliament after all some of them would like to have on their CV former Parliamentary candidate.  

MR KAIJA: Mr Chairman,  I thank the hon. Members who have given me the information.   I appreciate them.  But the point I would like to bring here, Mr Chairman, is a point of equity.  When we are making a Law we should be fair because if we have already made a law and we say, the Presidential candidate is going to pay a contribution toward election, why can we not also pay that contribution.  I am now saying that this contribution should be in the ratio which has already been suggested.

MR MAYENGO: Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor, first that I am surprised as to the decree on an awareness.  The Presidential candidate he is trying to compare with the ordinary candidate for a Parliamentary seat, are two things which should not be compared at all.  A Presidential candidate who is worthy of any sort would not even have much difficult in raising as much as UShs 50m if need be.  The Member should know that once a President is in office, he has a lot of economic influence he can bring about.  It is not difficult for a businessman to approach him and say, listen, my Company will pay UShs 50m, but when you win, all the vehicles from the Army should come from Toyota.  It is a very simple thing.  So, this comparison he is talking about is ridiculous, Mr Chairman.

PROF. KABWEGYERE:  Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to inform the hon. Member that contribution of the candidates for Parliament is very, very substantial.  If you look at the contribution that was made during the C.A. elections, when we had more than 1,000 candidates, the contribution was over 100 million.  So, if you are going to have two candidates for Presidency, or three, and you have 20 million, they are not comparable.  

MR KABUBI: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I would like to stand to say, first, I did disagree entirely with 80 million which was put for Presidential race.  I want to say this, the whole rationale of charging money, to me it was outrageous.  I cannot believe it.  Why are we denying people who have got the capability?  Because we are using money as a yardstick.  So, on that principle, I disagreed with it.  Even where you are going to beg member’s ability on money, whoever wants to come here, Mr Chairman, it is improper.  Thank you.

MR KASAIJJA: Mr Chairman I thank the hon. Members for the contribution they have made.  But I would like also to tell the Members that this is an error of cost sharing.  We have been cost sharing in many institutions.  We should also accept to cost-share in whatever activity we do in this country.  Otherwise, this country would not be where we are, if we were not cost sharing.  

Mr Chairman, -(Interruption)

MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman I appreciate the concerns of the hon. Member about the need for contenting for the candidates to contribute towards the coffers of the state.  But I think we should be careful principally and avoid the situation where we open up our laws delivering this country to the hands of potential mafia; money mafia.  I think we have to make a difference between the presidential conditions for contest and the ordinary Members of Parliament.  If we start with this kind of Presidency, when we are trying to build democracy, the danger is you are going to close out young men and women out there.  Never to think about coming to this House and yet the future of this country belongs to them.  I would find it even mathematically correct to think about multiplication by four because the state is going to provide for Presidential candidates, and not for Parliamentary candidates, even if some little assistance will come.  So, I think we should think about the candidates contribution totally different from the Presidential candidates contribution.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, the point I am making is the cost sharing and we should take it seriously.  

Mr Chairman, I would like to go the number of Constituencies.  I do agree with hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba that we need to have an efficient Parliament and in order to do that, we have to look at the State of the Economy.  I have done quite a research on some of the number of Parliamentarians in a number of countries in Africa and I have found out that proportionally the number that we have here, 278, compared to the population we have of about 17 million, is high.  I will start Kenya which has about 188 Parliamentarians and has a population of about 40 million.  Then Tanzania is about 200 Parliamentarians and it has the population of about 45 million.  Then South Africa with a population of about 56 million and they have a number of Parliamentarians also less than 200.  

So, Mr Chairman, if we can use those as examples on which we can base our forthcoming Parliament, you can really see that our Parliament here has been too high related to the economic situation in Uganda.  Therefore, we have been over-burdening a taxpayer and yet, as you are aware, the Constitution has given power to the local councils.  The District is going to be a little bit with more power and legislative powers.  So, we need to have at least a Parliament with a small number so that it can be well facilitated, research, paying allowances and so on.

Mr Chairman, I would like to go to the election of the women representatives which is provided for.  I have suggested the number which I be taking to the Committee if the Members agree to submit this Committee to the Committee I will just be the suggestion.  But of course a number of 200; Members of Parliament would be a visible number for this Economy.  

Under Schedule 1, which says that the woman representative for every District shall be elected by an Electoral College comprising all these councils.  That one I do not subscribe to.  We are going into an error of, adult universal suffrage.  I would like a woman who is going to be elected to come to the next Parliament to be one who is proud of having been elected by the universal suffrage but by the electoral colleges.  Mr Chairman, should be aware that this Constituency, is a Constituency for women because at the end of it, whether they are ten of five people participating in the election for a candidate, it will always be a woman who will come up as a winner.  Therefore, I do not see any problem of the affirmative action; still the person who will be coming up is a woman.

MR KALULE SENGO: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, I go along with what the hon. Member is proposing because if you are going to elect the LC III Chairmen by adult suffrage, in that particular sub-county, how can you subject a whole woman representative for a District to an Electoral College.  So, I think we need to look into this very seriously as the Member suggests.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KASAIJA: Mr Chairman, I thank the hon. Member for that information.  I would also like to add that if the hon. Women Representative that it will be too much, Members can even suggest further and say, that let only the women elect their fellow woman representative.  

I would like to request Members that the candidates meeting here should be passed the way they were at the CA election, because one beauty which I saw with the candidates meeting is that it checks people who shrive or deceits.  If you come up with lies, at least another person will be around who will counteract that lie as soon as you bring it.  So, the candidates meeting I think be taken as they were in the CA.

Mr Chairman, I would like to end by also proposing that in order for us to effectively come up with a good Law, I think this Bill should be referred to a Sectoral Committee to enable us to take our amendments.  I thank you very much.

MR GASATURA: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  This House and indeed the nation will be proud to reach this stage when we can go from the several transitions we have gone from, from the Government that took power by force and thereafter, we went gradually from grass-roots electing RC I Executives, RC II Executives up to the Council and then to this Parliament.  Only last week we passed a Bill after thorough debate for the election of the President.  After these ten years the people of Uganda have unquestionably been trained in art of democracy, and we continue to grow.  They have learnt how to remove their Chairmen in different RC II and RC III.  They have come a point now when they can change not only their Members of Parliament, but even the President.  

On this Bill, Mr Chairman, again to agree with several speakers who spoke before me, it would not do it justice for us to just stand here and speak and go onto the stage of amendments without proper scrutiny by a Committee for Legal and Security.  I raise just a couple of issues and leave the rest to others. I want to go back Article 66, ‘the assistance to illiterate voters and other voters with disability,’ we have over 50 per cent adult illiteracy in this country.  While we try to help them to vote, we must also take lessons from what we have learnt from the Constituent Assembly elections.  I know of at least two parishes in which a given candidate was going to win majority votes from women for having assisted them previously in their projects.  Having got wind of it, the men, two to three days, before the voting, go together in these two parishes and agreed that all women must be voted for by their husbands due to this very Article for other disability.  This included even the wife of the Deputy Headmaster of an A’ level school who herself held a grade III teachers certificate.  Suddenly those votes went elsewhere.  The women wanted to keep their marriage together.  

I have a suggestion that since a great number of these voters are illiterate, I want to deal with the illiterate group first, that first at every polling station, the presiding officer has a life size poster with all the candidates in the appropriate order and after every 15 voters or every 30 minutes, which ever comes first, the presiding officer repeats the voting procedure.  Two - that after Table 1 having picked the voting paper at Table 2 in the presence of all the agents, this voter is asked to deep the pointing finger in the ink and goes into the voting place which should also be shielded from public view and where there is extra ink should this one dry and he or she is told point and touch the man or woman you want.  Within that box, she or he should be able to touch with this ink the candidate of her choice.  There is no doubt that some votes will be destroyed or spoilt.  But there is no telling whether these votes are yours or mine.  We all stand or all candidates stand equal opportunity at losing spoilt votes.  As opposed, Mr Chairman, to Members of the public or even the presiding, misdirecting or buying the would be voter and the voter suddenly becomes blind or illiterate.  On the blind, Mr Chairman, I would suggest that first of all there are not too blind people in any given polling area or division.  

MR ONGOM: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, the statements that there are not too many blind people in any voting station may not necessarily be true.  In the last CA election, we actually discovered that those who are patently not blind, many are actually blind.  There are people in the villages who cannot actually identify pictures because they ordinarily do not have to look at papers. So, they do not even realise that they are actually blind until when you show them photographs, then they find that they cannot even identify the people.
  
MR GASATURA: Mr Chairman, I said, within the polling station, in a clearly visible place, the life size poster is their duplicate but extended duplicate of the voting paper with different pictures and images of these candidates and the presiding officer has to repeat every so often at the order and the pictures so that anybody who has difficult with identifying knows that at lease number one or three is his or her choice candidate.  

On the actual blinds; the blind as we ordinarily know them, I would suggest that these receive assistance.  But again to secure the integrity of their vote necessarily one has to compromise the integrity of their secrecy.  First of all the blind person comes with the person of her or his choice.  Secondly, in the presence of this person minus he might be, declares to the presiding officer for whom she or he would like to vote for.  The presiding officer then in the presence again of this person, takes the voter to the ink and deeps his or her finger into the ink and helps her to mark the person whom she has said she wants to.  So, at least there are two people to identify the declaration of the voter and the actual marking of the voter. I will be briefly with the hon. Minister responsible.  I would want to modify the authorised mark so that it becomes a pointing finger which all our people are aware of because holding a pen is a skill Mr Chairman.  But a pointing finger, everybody can afford that.  Secondly, that only the true blind are given assistance by the presiding officer in the presence of their person.  Thirdly that the presiding officer with a life size poster repeats every so often the procedure for marking the ballot.

Finally, I want again to agree with hon. Prof. Kanyeihamba that this Bill would be based given justice in a Committee where by the Committee could receive all the different recommendations after of course some debate here and that in this Committee interested Members would of course as usual be free to present their various Memorandum.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR DRANI DRADIGA: Mr Chairman, the passing of this Bill shall be yet another historical landmark and the process of full democratisation and modernisation of this country.  For this reason that I fully support the Bill.  However, as a general remark, I have been hearing about leveling of the ground.  Those who belong to that school of thought, I do not know whether they are talking of leveling of the ground.  Even experts say the top of the table may not necessarily be leveled. We cannot even talk about the because that one is really a perfect Law.  Democracy can only be aspired to.  In really world, there is no perfect democracy.  What is most important is the content.  Many countries chat their own democracy as long as there is legitimacy, there is acceptability, there is political stability, then the citizens can say, we have democracy.  So, what I am talking about is that we must do our best and try to provide the basics which are required of democracy in any election; free and fair elections, regular and unmanipulated elections; and if it is possible, adult universal suffrage principle should apply.  

Having said that, I would like to make general comments about a few Clauses. The first Clause I am talking about is Clause 4, which talks about the independence of the Commission. Mr Chairman, the electoral commission ought to be independent in accordance with the provisions of the constitution of 1995. But borrowing from what happened in the CA, I have to advise very strongly that the commission must adhere to what is required of it.  If there are some administrative matters which required to be instituted from time to time, I think it will be important for the commission to consult at all times with the Minister responsible for elections; and in the like manner, the Minister responsible for elections should restrain from any interference in the activities of the Commission. Unless we do that, at the end of the we shall be accused like in other countries where you find commissions have not lived up to their expectations. 

Mr Chairman, as I talk now, I want to inform the Minister, the Mover of the Bill that registration is still a problem in many parts of Uganda including Arua district. The up dating of registers has not gone on very smoothly.  There have been some abuses in registration. Over the weekend I wanted to discuss this matter with the respective authorities but they denied all the allegations. For instance, it was alleged that excess registration cards have been abused so that they have been issued to people whose names are on the voter’s register.  From the counties people have been transferred to municipality, I know my colleague of Arua Municipality he might deny but the truth is that voters have been transferred.  The previous cards have now been cancelled and new ones have been issued in different constituencies.  I would like the Minister to investigate this because I have a few cases in my county -(Interruption)

MRS KULANY: Additional information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.  What the Member is saying is very important.  Yesterday I was in Mbale and Kapchorwa, and we were inquiring about registration.  But now as we speak, in those areas there are no forms. So much as people may want to register the forms are not there.

MR KALULE SSENGO: Point of information.  We are also receiving report in my constituency in the southern parts of Gomba County that there are some forms which are just being filled without the actual people being there.  So, I do what they are intending to do whether they will issue blank cards to voters who are non existent.  I mean some people will come up and start voting.  So I would also request that an inquiry be carried out into these reports otherwise the whole exercise may turn to be sham. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KERIM: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman. I returned also from home yesterday.  During the weekend I made some inquiries with some chiefs and some RCs who have been responsible for registering people.  But what they told me is, the forms are not there in some places.  In some places where they are, they are too few given out.  Others have got lists of candidates to be registered, but because they are no forms they cannot register them.  So they need more forms Thank you.

MRS ALIYO: Further information.  Thank you, Mr Chairman. May I inform this House that the provision of voters’ transfer is being abused.  In Soroti almost 3 parishes of the county, the voters have been transferred into the municipality under this cover of transfer of voters, and I think that is rather unfair.  Because there have been cases of people transferring under other names not those they use for registering in the county.

MR KARUHANGA: Further information.  Mr Chairman, I was also over this weekend at home, and I found a very serious crisis there.  There officials have been going to Mbarara at great cost to look for forms, and these forms have not been availed to them, and there are many people who had not yet registered. So we appeal to the Minister now in light of what he has now heard that we extend at least for another one week the registration-(Interjections)-Mr Chairman, I am asking for one week because I am mindful of the fact that the time table for elections to be able to meet the constitutional requirement, the voters’ register must be displayed for at least one month before the election. 

So, we need at least one week for -one extra week for forms to be availed; and we also wanted to know whether we could duplicate these forms or photocopy them or use a cyclostyling machine to photocopy them. But I could give any advice on that.  Our appeal as Parliamentarians is the extension for another one week to the Minister.	

MR ELYAU: Additional information.  Mr Chairaman, I want to give additional information that, what the Members are arising is a very serious issue.  Just this morning before I came, those who might want to stand with us next time have made sure that the registers from our own parish are lost completely. Because if there is no register that means those people will not vote. So, there I will fail elections. Why don’t you extend and make sure these things are put perfectly. 

AN HON. MEMBER: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  One thing I have discovered is that, the law we ourselves put in place is responsible for the kind he is talking about.  Because the moment we say that someone can register from where they were, where they reside and where they were born, we made a very big loophole, the RCs cannot identify a person who is coming to Jinja municipal council to work from Mbiiko.  So, you find that, people especially from municipalities are ferrying people from all sorts of places to come and vote simply because they are going to say they work there.  Some of us have got border-border riders, and all sorts of people, and they are registering more than once.  So it is now very difficult to identify who works where.  I think this time when we make the law we should be strict, it should be either where somebody was born so that he can be identified; or where somebody resides.  But this business of working is what is causing the voter trafficking in the places.

MR DRADRIGA DRANI: Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  I thank the hon. members for the information and I want to appeal to the hon. Minister may be to consider the requests on behalf of the people of some short period of extension. Because unless we manage registration properly, then there are going to be a lot of complaints arising out of these elections.  First of all you investigate as fast as possible make sure there are papers in every district then that that is when you consider the extension.  Because I understand right now, aspiring candidates have found their way to the offices of Chief Administrator officers and have collected some forms and they are now moving around with them all over the country.  These are allegations which I want you to investigate, Mr Chairman. The second comment -(Interruption)

MR ROMANO: Point of clarification. Thank you very much, Mr Chairman.  The issue of transferring voters from rural areas to urban confuses me a bit.  I think this voting is going to be one person one vote.  Secondly, if one transfers himself or herself to a town, it is or his wish. So I do not know what is the fear.  Because even if a number of your voters are transferred to municipalities, yet the few will vote and the candidate who will win, will win.  So, I do not see any problem here otherwise, may be he can clarify on this.

MR DRADRIGA DRANI:  Mr Chairman, and hon. Minister I want to thank the hon. Member who is my neighbour.  But I want to advise him next time also to do his own investigation so that he find how the truth is.  

The second issue I want to emphasise is civic education.  I am surprised that up to now civic education has not commenced. It is the inadequacy of civic education that brought in a lot of problems during the CA elections.  One Member talked of illiteracy; I actually supported him fully.  An illiterate person intellectually is disabled.  So, you only need to give him that civic education to equip him or her with the basics of what is required.  There must be even some demonstration and this required at least two months.  So, I would like to call up on the Mover of the Bill to rise up to the challenges in this country now the outcry for civic education and ensures that civic education commences and it must be intensified.

 MR KARUSOKE: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that it is very important that we get civic education for our people, especially the illiterate.  But it is equally important that while we are civic educating society of our voters, we should bear in mind the fact that there are those with disabilities especially the deaf who cannot listen and hear the ordinary way, and they have what they call the sign language. Last CA election they complained very bitterly that they were left out, they were not educated about elections in their own language.  This time, I would like to request the Minister to consider this group or society and give them civic education in their own language known as sign language.  Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR KAHERU: Point of information.  I would like to inform the hon. Member on the Floor that, it is very difficult if not impossible to carry out civic education without having an electoral law that we are discussing.  Let us pass this, and the civic education will start.

MR DRADRIGA DRANI: I want to make a comment on other Clauses a bit faster.  Clause 48 talks about candidates’ meeting. Mr Chairman, while I appreciate the importance of holding joint candidates’ meetings, I have a fear, and I would like the hon, Minister to clarify to me.  Really in Parliamentary election of this year compared to the CA of 1994, really what is the essence of these candidates’ meetings? In the CA elections there was a draft of constitution which candidates were asked to interpret.  Now there is already a law in place which says there shall be no partisan campaigns. That is in Clause 51.  Now the Minister is providing for a free license for individuals to talk about themselves because now there is no draft.  There is no draft this time.  I would like the Minister to clarify to me what benefit it will be to allow candidates to come and travel together and talk about themselves.  Because Presidential candidates have Manifestos this is understandable. But for Parliamentary elections candidates - I do not know whether we want to have manifestos.  If it is manifestos -(Interruption)

MR KABUBI: Point of information. Mr Chairman, thank you very much. I would like to inform my hon. Colleague here who is on the Floor, the point he is raising is quite vital.  It is vital in a way that me, I have been looking at this law.  First of all you have provided for Presidential candidates to move and address the people individually.  Then, here you are saying, you will bundle all people together to go and have candidates’ meeting. What is the rationality; really is that making law? I do not believe it because people should be exposed, people want to exposed.  

I want to assure you that, last time when we had CA elections, people could not know the people they were electing.  They were denied chance because you go for a candidate meeting, you about 12 people in one constituency by the time you reach to speak, you have only five minutes.  People do not know you qualities, your abilities, we are saying, this time people should really be able to go and address people individually. So, that they tell the people their programme.  As my Colleague here has said that the Presidential candidates have a manifesto, including Parliamentary candidates, must have also a manifesto.  We need to have a programme; you need to have a statement of plan.  What do you have, what are you going to contribute to the people.  You must have a mission statement for that constituency. So, Mr Chairman, I thank you for allowing me to give this information.

MR DRADRIGA DRANI: Mr Chairman, I want to caution that I am not saying, people should go and display their colours that is not what I am saying.  I only want a clarification on what we intend to achieve this time.  Because in CA it was very clear, there was a draft.  I want to know what we intend to achieve by way of clarification.  Clause 59 talks about polling and polling procedure.  I do agree with hon. Gasatura when he talked about those stages, stage one - first table, there is a second table, there is a third table. What we saw in CA was such that, there was no secrecy at all.  There was simply no secrecy and yet Clause 36 is emphasizing secrecy of election officers and even the voters themselves. 

 So, I would like the Minister and the House as a whole to ensure that we emphasize secrecy so that when voting is going on, other people should have not an opportunity to influence whoever is voting in terms of distance, in terms of control.  I am aware of a provision here which talks about a polling constable. In fact where it is possible every polling station should have somebody who is not known to the area, who should come and exercise control in terms of security, and this should be -they should not be in the same place for two days, they should be circulated.  

Clause 61, we have not talked much on the provisions here about the role of an agent. I would like us to have an innovation over the CA provisions, CA statute. Where every candidate should an agent whose name should be given whose particulars should be given to the returning officer on the day of nomination.  I am saying this because, during the CA elections most agents had no role to play they were denied an opportunity of representing their candidates.  They were not educated, they did not know what to do and in many cases they were manipulated out.  Some returning officers had their own partisan interests, they had chosen their candidates, and along those lines they chose their own polling assistants to the extent that now it became very difficult for a candidate’s agent to represent him.  Because for me for instance I vote in my own station I cannot vote elsewhere at the same time. So I want us to give a specific role of a candidate’s agent.

 Clause 52 use of government resources. This has already been talked of, but I see that in practice it is very difficult to enforce it.  Because if I am a Cabinet Minister like the Mover of the Bill, I do not know when Cabinet is going to be dissolved.  In most cases Cabinet is never dissolved in effect until when a new Government takes over.  I mean in elections which I know even of recent, it is never announced that Cabinet is going to be dissolved may be until when it is one week to go.  So it means this one is going to be very difficult to enforce, and I think government should assist in enforcing this.  Because during the CA elections, - I mean the sessions of CA many government vehicles used to be parked in front of Conference Centre, therefore, denying an opportunity for those offices where these delegates came from, from using those vehicles.  In fact it is not provided for, but I would have wished that if you want to contest, if you are in a public office you should actually resign.  So that you do not have access to government facilities.  Because if you a politician you must be full time. You are not going to be a weekend politician; you must be a full-time politician.  So, if you think you will measure to the challenge, you resign.

Mr Chairman, there are two other Clauses which I want to comment on. Clause 102 talks about general penalty.  I fully support this provision.  Because in the previous Bill which we passed, I realized that there was no provision for election offences.  Provisions were made for criminal offences only.  Now this one covers any other offences which may have been committed which are not provided for in the Bill.   

The other issue is on Clause 67; voters.  Provision for voters in restricted areas to vote.  These are people like patients, institutions, soldiers and so forth.  My only worry here is that, voting by proxy could be impossible unless we institute a measure for taking care of this.  We must institute a measure for taking care of this. 

Finally, a lot has been said about photographs.  I saw in my own area during the CA elections that some people were actually unable to interpret photographs. For instance, somebody at the end of voting would say Ea- I did not know, I did not vote for Drani. It happens and it happened actually in CA.  Because there was a group of clicks who would tell people-you see they would stand before reaching the polling station because the villages are full of posts, then they say, vote for No.2 even before polling started people already knew who was holding what Number, people knew. So, with these photographs, I hope the photographs are going to be bigger and clearer this time. This might be a bit better.  Otherwise, many people were now suggesting symbols which personally I do not support. 

Let me end on this.  The qualifications of Members of Parliament. I think there should be a method of determining the qualification of a Member of Parliament.  It is extremely important.  Because if it not is properly done, and once somebody is nominated, it can bring a lot of election petitions.  In 1989 in many part of Uganda there were a lot of queried on some candidates. Somebody can claim I finished Junior two. Now when you try to tress since that programme was phased out, it is very difficult to get a certificate and somebody will tell you I did a course when actually the course was nothing but a workshop.  So it is very difficult to determine, and there should be a better method of determining this.  I thank you very much, Mr Chairman.

MR MARWAS: Thank you, Mr Chairman. One Member has just said, today is another turning point in the democratisation of this country. But I wish also to add that, today is also an important day because to me, when the electoral law of 1980 elections was made,- somebody has said the law had loophole, and if the elections were going to be rigged, some people were going to go to the bush.  In that vain, Mr Chairman, I am also saying, this time I think we are making a law that should live not that in anybody’s mind that we are making the law to rig  the elections.  Because the NRA and NRM is a creation of rigging elections. So, Mr Chairman, I pray that Members of this House should stand to their Honourable statures and surely come up with a law that should make everybody happy whether he wins or loses the next coming elections. 

I also want to observe that whereas Members have raised the issue of saying there is no time, I am saying there is time because even if we have Members here whom people have been saying they have never spoken, I think this is the right time now for everybody to say something because the law here interests all of us in this House.  I think it will not be fair for a few Members to stand up, and then we hear the Chairman saying Mr Minister may you wind up.  I think we should give maximum time for everybody who has something to say in this House to say it now. (Applause) I do not see any other time that you are going to give these Members to say what.  

Mr Chairman, I have problems in this statute especially with candidates’ meetings.  I should say the last elections I was one of the participants because I decided to stand down.  But not withstanding that, I was a very keen observer on what was happening.  Mr Chairman, I wish to observe that, the candidates’ meetings of that day did not do much.  Most of the candidates meetings were done in funerals, birth parties, call it anything.  Otherwise these candidates’ meetings were just a sure case.  There is nothing that was happening there.  But the real donkeywork was done behind the things; and also since we had that election through candidates’ meetings I think we are dynamic, we are moving. Ten years ago, to today, I think we have moved from bad leadership, call it anything.  But I think we should be able now to stand up and say Ugandans have known something that they should be able even to move out on their own.  Because the question of time earns to me should not come in because if we need candidates’ meetings let us say, we shall have candidates’ meetings either at some county level or what.  But then there should be a provision for any Member after giving the returning officer a programme of his campaigns, should be able to go out alone and campaign in these counties. (Applause) 

It is not fair time earns Members, Mr Chairman.  Because it does not achieve anything in these candidates’ meetings because the worst part is if I happen campaign together with hon. Zizinga whose name is Z and we are 15. By the time she stands up to speak, people have got tired others are thirsty, they start complaining please, we do not have water.  So by the time you are addressing people, you almost addressing less than-a very few number of the people who had come.  Therefore, they also do not have time, and since that is the time you have, people will not have the time to listen to you. So let us have other avenues where aspiring candidates can go out provided they make up a programme, present it to the Commission in the names of the returning officer and let him go ahead.  This question of fearing of saying you see, people are abusing.  We have got to leave this.  The question of saying you see we do not want people to go and deceive others, we do - and I think people who are restricting themselves also have something to hide from other people.

MR KANDOLE: Mr Chairman thank you, and I thank the hon. Member for giving way.  I would like him to make a clarification to this House.  In the CA we had the experience where we had  about 8 or 9, 10 to 11 candidates in a constituency. Now he his suggesting that we should provide for a candidate to go alone. Now, is he aware that Uganda is having only about 17,000 policemen and women.  How is he going to guarantee that there will be no chaos, you have 8 or 9, 10 meetings of different candidates taking place in just one constituency.  How is he going to guarantee security?

MR ELYAU: Point of information.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor that the advantages of having candidates meetings are two. One; it gives opportunity to a voter to see the candidate and hear him talk. Whereas if you say that people should go alone, some people will be misguided they cannot attend the rally.  Secondly, it is also dangerous last time I saw it in political parties.  If the people of the area hated Elyau for that matter because he is in DP, they will bring people to heckle the meeting so that the meeting does go on properly, and the voter will not know that man’s ability.  So it is to hinder the voter from getting the proper message from a candidate   properly until the meeting ends.  That is why I support the joint candidates’ meetings.

MR MARWAS: I will start with the last speaker.  I would like to inform him that, it is through these candidates’ meetings that heckling takes place.  Because some people are just brought up, they listen to their candidate and once that one has sat down anybody else who starts up, there is a lot of heckling taking place.  There is a lot of heckling. Get me right, I am not saying, we do not need candidates’ meetings, I am saying, we have them at certain levels of the county but let us also give room for those who are able to move alone provided they can have that, and secondly, Mr Chairman, for hon. Kandole, I am saying, to perceive that any Member who goes out to campaign in are in motives**. So when you that negative idea about-I think it is wise to assume that every candidate is out, a candidate’s meeting is going to cause chaos. Unless we do not trust ourselves, let us make sure that we all love this country, let us put aside the differences we have, we love this country and nobody is wishing to have chaos. So to perceive that it is only we who cannot cause chaos, but once the other one goes out, is going to cause chaos is really far fetched and uncalled for, Mr Chairman.

PROF. MONDO KAGONYERA: Point of information.  Mr Chairman, thank you.  I agree with hon. Marwas in his quest for as much freedom as possible.  But I think he totally hon. Kandole’s position.  It is not the candidates who are going to cause problems.  It is the fear that those opposed to these candidates are going to cause these candidates problems; and once the chaos has been caused, the candidates will not have ability to control the situation.        
                 
MR KERIM: Further information.  I would like to inform speaker holding the Floor that, going out alone to address people, I think it is a normal thing that we have been doing when we go out for a report.  There will not be much difference between that meeting or reporting as a representative and addressing the people when you go to campaign. Thank you.

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, that is I leave it there.

MR KARUHANGA: Mr Chairman, I thought that hon. Marwas made a brilliant contribution on this issue and as much information could come to him so that we see where we go from here. One of the advantages of joint candidates’ meeting is for the new candidates who have not been in the political field, they get a chance to come and measure themselves to the scale of those who are old politicians.  But if you deny this opportunity I find that, they will even find problems in finding audiences to address and can easily suffocate and be left behind when in fact the county could get a very brilliant person. 

The second point which I thought was good is mixing the candidates’ meeting with individual work where it is well publicised and the returning officer is aware of these programmes and the local LDUs are informed, and if the candidates finds that it is not helping him he will move back, and they can agree to have joint candidates’ meetings.  Because I know in one case of a friend of mine sitting not very far from me. He actually abandoned the candidates meetings at some stage, and yet elections went on, and he got a sizeable quantity of votes.  But he abandoned. So it is possible that the candidates meetings also have disadvantages, but they also have advantages; and may be we can find a formula where both of them could apply.  But the crucial point, Mr Chairman, is that politics as they say is a dirty game.  People go and heap insults and lies on their opponents in front of people when the other person is not there; and it is important that that person, when lies are being told of him, he defends or she defends herself in front of the liar**, and exposes the lie so that we can have clean politics. (Applause)  
   
MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, that is full for thought. In Clause 11 talks about the demarcation of constituencies.  First of all I wish to agree with hon. Butagira to the effect that, we cannot abandon a duty of this House and delegate it to the Commision of Mr Akabwai and say-because if you look at 11 (3) says subject to sub-section 2 of this section, the boundary of a constituency shall be such that a number of inhabitants in the constituency is as nearly as possible equal to the population quarter.  When you go to 11 (7), it says for the purposes of this section, population quarter means the Number obtained by dividing the number of inhabitants of Uganda by the Number of constituencies into which Uganda is to be divided under article 63 of the constitution.  But surely should Parliament abandon this and assign it to the commission, -(Interruption)
     
MR RWAKAKOOKO: Point of information. Mr Chairman we seem to be having a problem here. Because when you look at the constitution article 63, it seems that a decision has already been made. For example if you look at sub-article 2 when demarcating constituencies for the purpose of Clause 1 of this article, the electoral commission shall ensure that each county as approved by Parliament has at least one Member of Parliament, except that no constituency shall fall within more than one county. So we already have more less a technical definition of what a constituency should be-sorry yah, which will be a county.  The only thing that is lacking is for us to say, that we would like the multiples of 50 or 70,000 or 100,000. Now if you have constituencies which are below 1,000 like Kalangala’s constituencies constitutionally they are guaranteed.

MR MARWAS: This needs a lot of thought. Because whereas the constitution is providing for counties openly, but it is still quiet about numbers, about the municipalities; we need a lot of work to be done on this, Mr Chairman.  I am saying we cannot delegate this duty to the commission; and on top of that, I wish to say this.  We know what the economy is in this country, we have had retrenchment, we have reduction in forces we have had all these funny things.  But Mr Chairman, I pray to this House that let us not go with a feeling as if we want to create as many constituencies as we can provide by the law.  We seem to forget that in the first place we are so bulky already, and if tomorrow we are creating 310 constituencies as I saw somebody calculating, Mr Chairman, I hope we shall not be called irresponsible by the taxpayers. Because we seem to be so lavish, we seem not to take care of the economic hardships this country is undergoing.  Because if we are going to be paid this money and is less than 10 people; surely, Mr Chairman, let us come honourably and say no, there must be a stop to a certain number of constituencies. Because if we are going to collect 60 billion and it is consumed mainly by us and the tax payer has reason to complain.
  
Mr Chairman, women representatives.  That positive sectarian given to the groups in this country is welcome.  But at times we tend - I am saying the NRM government, I think should take credit now and say, I think we have moved the women of this country from point A, they should be somewhere in O or P or M before they reach X.  Because we seem to be treating these ladies at times we request them by always feeling that they are starting therefore, whatever we give them, this affirmative must be the same always.  We have already said every district must provide a woman and all those who will stand are women full stop no man.  So, we are saying again to go back and say, but we must collect these few to elect this woman.  

I am annoyed with this provision because, if you look at the sub-county it is 8 men and a number of women is less. You go to the parish, so it is the men who are dictating on these elections and yet the largest number of voters in this country are women.  But the people who dictate on  election of these women are men not the women.  Because they are always the majority in every college.  So I am saying, I think these women are moving with this affirmative action they are getting better.  So give them a chance  since they are-give them a chance let them go out canvas the district get the votes and come here honourably and tell me you are from the county but I am from a district. It is honourable.  (Applause) I think let us give these women the mandate to go out.  Because as already provided for -(Interruption)     

MRS KULANYA: Point of information. Mr Chairman, I would want to inform the hon. Member that actually the people who are going to elect these women, we must consider the affirmative action.  That means there is already a problem somewhere.  But we should not make the problem so difficult again for those people.  What we are saying, there will be RCs electing these women as well as women councils.  So everybody will be involved.  We can even include the youth, we can include the disabled.  But we shall not have made work very difficult for these women. Thank you, Mr Chairman.

MR MAYENGO: Further information.  I would like the hon. Lady who has just sat down, and some others who have been thinking about affirmative action in this respect of the election of the woman representative.  Affirmative action is only in respect of the fact that a woman stands without being in competition with men. That is the affirmative action. (Applause)

MR MARWAS: Mr Chairman, with due respect, what I know is , these electoral colleges -(Interruption)

MRS KULANYA: Point of information.  In that regard, then we should amend that, there should be a woman representative at every county then there will be a level as far as elections are concerned. That will be really leveling the ground.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information.  Can I inform the informer that already the ground is catered for.  The moment we have a secretary for women everywhere, then the women system has been catered for.  But when we think about the affirmative action here, we should not really make women appear as if they species out of nowhere. They are species that are walking on this Earth, they are first and fore most human beings before they are women and, therefore, they should be looking at themselves as human beings and not just women; and for that matter, they should compete even for the district chairmanship. (Applause)

MR MARWAS: As provided for by the Minister in the first Schedule, all councilors at RC 11 and 111- this means, every member of RC 1 to the top. In a way, you are already telling this lady to go to every village of this country to canvas for votes, but then you are only restricting her to move for so many miles for only 14 people. Instead of telling her to move 50 miles for everybody than going round for only one person; and some of these council chairmen are so bad that-what happened during the last elections -(Interruption)

MRS KIRYAPAWO: Point of information. I would like to inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and this House that, every candidate would like to be known by the voters.  How possible is it for this woman to be known by every woman in the district. It is impossible.  That is why we are saying, to enlarge the electoral college so that those who are going to vote for her, they know her, and they are representatives of the people.  The women councils are elected by the women.  So they are representatives of the women; and even the LC councils are also representatives of the people. That is why we are considering for this woman and even the period she will be given canvas the entire district.  Knowing that, these districts are not the same. Why should we burden this woman whereas - constituency. Even the counties are being divided. To make sure that those who are going to elect that person, they know their Member of Parliament.  So that is the information I am giving the hon. Member the floor.

AN HON. MEMBER: Point of information. Thank you, Mr Chairman.  May I inform the hon. Member holding the Floor and others who have tried to oppose these electoral colleges that affirmative action is not just a question of a woman standing unopposed by a man?  It goes much much deeper than that and much more involved.  The purpose of getting women in this House is not because of getting freely elected without opposition from men.  But what they are going to do for women from now on, on matters of policy and other sectors of life in this country, and that should be taken into consideration when you are trying to help women.  Because when you say let the woman be voted for, under adult suffrage, make it possible for them to get to these people so that-I want to know from those representing counties whether they are known by all their voters.

MR MARWAS: In the last Schedule of qualifications of Members of Parliament, the Minister has tried so much to light his candle and came out with lists up to (h) of the possible equivalents of A’ Level.  But, even if people were to take the list as it is, it will still remain ambiguous.  I think this house or the committee as somebody was saying, should sit down.  This equivalency of A’ Level, is it the time somebody sat in class for 6 years after Primary 7? What is it? Because if it is that, then there are people also who must stayed in certain classes minus being the formal ones in school for 6 years. So, I think this needs to be looked at, and a new format be brought into place.  As it is, it is ambiguous. 

Then, Mr Chairman, on the rules I beg the Minister. There is something memorable that took place during CA elections.  At the last hour, the then Chairman of the CA announced that everybody now can vote where he or she is, and that turned tables of so many people. I thought it was wrong, it, it was uncalled for, and if we are going to leave the rules again, to the Minister who may transfer them to the same people, we bound to have problems When came out to the police statute, the Minister wanted to preserve the powers of making regulations for the police who stood up and said no.  Bring us the regulations we incorporate them into the statute; and as I said, the NRM was a creation of rigged elections. No Ugandan wishes to have this repeated.  God forbid. So, let us have all that is connects elections be debated by this House, be passed by this House and nobody who is going to be snatched from election tomorrow should stand up and say no. You know Minister Kavuma was standing with me so he just told the commission to do certain things and that why I lost. So let us have everything that concerns elections be passed by this House.  Mr Chairman, I thank you for your indulgence, and I stop there.

(The Council rose at 5.10 p.m. and adjourned until Wednesday, 31 January 1996 at 2.30 p.m.)
