

Thursday, 28 January 2021

Parliament met at 2.49 p.m. in Parliament House, Kampala.

PRAYERS

(The Speaker, Ms Rebecca Kadaga, in the Chair.)

The House was called to order.

COMMUNICATION FROM THE CHAIR

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, I welcome you to this first sitting of the budget session of the Tenth Parliament. 

The Leader of Government Business, the Leader of the Opposition, Members of the House, welcome back from the recess. A number of us have been engaged in the electioneering process and regardless of the outcomes, we are proud that we have been able to participate and contribute to the growth of democracy in Uganda. I congratulate those who were victorious; for those who were not, this is an opportunity to take stock of the areas that need rectification in our careers.

It is also an opportunity for us to take cognisance of the reports of human rights violations during the electioneering process, characterised by disruption of some campaign activities, arbitrary arrests, detentions and destruction of property. Indeed, one of the presidential candidates, who is also a member of this House, hon. Kyagulanyi Ssentamu, had his freedom of movement curtailed by the security from the evening of the 14 January 2021 until a court order was issued on Monday, 25 January 2021, withdrawing the security personnel from his residence.

I would like to urge the administrative and security authorities to respect the rule of law and safeguard human rights. In the meantime, I direct the Committee on Human Rights to take stock of the human rights violations that marred the electoral process and report back to this House within one month.

I am also aware that owing to the election programme, the time for consideration of the National Budget Framework Paper for 2021-2026 has been severely shortened. However, we are guided by the timeframe stipulated in Section 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act and Rule 144(3) of the Rules of Procedure that require the House to approve the National Budget Framework Paper by the 1st day of February in any given year. As such, I urge Members to expeditiously consider the report by the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper in compliance with the requirements of the law and the Rules of Procedure.

As you may be aware, the tenure of the Tenth Parliament will end in May 2021. An examination of the status of business in committees and the House reveals that at least 26 Bills are still pending in various committees and three Bills are before the House. Among those that are ready, and I would like to give notice to the sector ministers, are the following: 

    1. The Succession (Amendment) Bill, 2018;
    2. The Administration of Estates (Small Estates) (Special Provisions) (Amendment) Bill, 2019; 
    3. the Administrator General’s (Amendment) Bill, 2019;
    4. The Estates of Missing Persons (Management) (Amendment) Bill, 2019; 
    5. The Probate Resealing (Amendment) Bill, 2019; and 
    6. The Uganda Red Cross Society Bill, 2019. 

I, therefore, implore chairpersons and Members to expeditiously handle that which has not yet been concluded. 

I have received a letter from the Minister of the Presidency, hon. Esther Mbayo, seeking the support of this House to assist in Uganda’s hosting of the 21st edition of the International Conference on AIDS and STIs in Africa (ICASA). “This request is premised on the decision by the Society for AIDS in Africa to revoke the right of Uganda to host the ICASA conference due to the riots in November 2020 and the resultant deaths. The rationale for your support is to join in solidarity with us, the stakeholders, in stressing the national HIV response.” 

On 23 October 2020, I received a petition from the National Union of Drivers, Cyclists and Allied Workers. On 18 November 2020, they wrote to me again seeking our support for the resumption of operations of interstate business that ply across border routes in the East African region. 

They pledged to observe the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) issued by the Ministry of Health. They also requested us to consider the plight of bus owners who have outstanding loan obligations and staff to maintain who have lost their income overtime.

I ask the national COVID taskforce to review all those areas that have not been released. It is possible that some areas may have been forgotten and people are suffering. We would like to ask the national taskforce to move quickly with that review and facilitate the resumption of normalcy within the economy. 

As the tenure of the Tenth Parliament draws near, I take cognisance of the need to expedite amendment of parts of our Rules of Procedure to improve the operations of the House. I, therefore, direct the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline to expedite the compilation of those proposals for amendment and report back within one month.

I would like to inform Members that His Excellency the President has returned the Landlord and Tenant Bill. It just concerns two areas; one was the interpretation section and another was clause 15 (1). The letter reads as follows:

“I have received the Landlord and Tenant Bill for my assent. I have, however, identified the following issues that Parliament needs to consider:

One, part of the Bill provides for the interpretation of the meaning of business premises and residential premises. In view of changes in the working environment as a result of COVID-19, the interpretations therein should factor in the emerging trend of home offices and homestay tourism. As more business professionals and ecommerce enterprises switched to home keeping on account of COVID-19, the definition of residential premises should be expanded to accommodate the mixed use of houses for residential and office businesses that do not require physical interface with customers.

Secondly, clause 15(1) of the Bill provides that tenants should not use rented premises or permit their use in a manner that causes a nuisance to any occupier of neighbouring premises. This clause presumes that physical planning by local government will adhere to the separation of residential and commercial areas and do the same in the issuing of trading licenses to avoid situations whereby one licensed commercial activity such as a bar ends up becoming a nuisance to another activity such as a residential house that is equally licensed by the same local government.

In addition, not enforcing noise pollution bylaws and standards is currently a major nuisance and public health concern for a majority of the urban dwellers.

I am, therefore, returning the said Bill to you for that purpose.” 

The minister should arrange to lay the Bill on the Table again so that those two clauses can be handled.

Honourable members, during the recess, we lost a number of people in the country - Members of Parliament, the clergy, spiritual leaders, cultural leaders and many senior citizens. I would like to ask you to observe a moment of silence in their honour. 

However, in the meantime, I am giving notice to the House that on Tuesday, 2 February 2021 at 10.00 a.m., we shall have a special sitting to pay tribute to two fallen Members, namely the Right Honourable Second Deputy Prime Minister and Minister without Portfolio, Al Hajji Ali Kirunda Kivejinja, and hon. Robinah Ssentongo, former District Woman MP for Kyotera. Thereafter, the House will resume its normal session at 2.00 p.m. Thank you.

Honourable members, there were a few matters of national importance. However, let us first stand for a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

3.00
THE CHIEF OPPOSITION WHIP (Mr Ibrahim Ssemujju): I would like to thank you very much, Madam Speaker, and to join you in congratulating colleagues who have made it back to the next Parliament. I feel sorry for colleagues who, on account of different reasons, were unable to go through.

Madam Speaker, in your communication, you have spoken about the violence and violation of rights, and you have given the Committee on Human Rights a month to investigate and report to Parliament. My concern is that there are violations for which we may not wait for even a month. 

Three days ago, military men came to Kireka Central Market and kidnapped one of the vendors. We have gone to every police station in the area; they do not know where this vendor is. I have also seen media reports about kidnappings taking place almost every now and then, using vehicles that have been baptised “Drone”. They simply pounce on an area, pick someone and take them away.

Madam Speaker, like you have instructed the committee, I beg you to instruct the Minister of Internal Affairs, first to help us identify where these people have been taken but also, to assure the country.

I watched one of the television stations in the evening and I heard that people are sleeping outside. Their relatives have been kidnapped and they are also under the threat of being kidnapped. They are living in extreme conditions that you do not know what to tell them. The police has also become helpless.

Madam Speaker, I beg you to instruct the minister to come and tell us whether we should migrate to Congo or seek refuge elsewhere. If you cannot sleep in your own house – in some cases, they have been breaking into houses and dragging out either husbands or children.

That is my prayer. Thank you very much.

THE SPEAKER: By any chance, do you have the name of the vendor so that it can help us trace him or her?

MR SSEMUJJU: Madam Speaker, I am going to bring his photographs and the name in about 20 minutes.

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, Madam Speaker, and I thank my colleague for raising this issue.

Yesterday on TV, we saw the minister also getting information from the media. He was asking Madam Akullo on one side and the Inspector General of Police on the other side. He was asking everybody when he was being asked about these people who are getting lost every hour and every day.

My honourable colleague has asked that the minister comes and explains, but the Prime Minister is here; let the Prime Minister pick interest in this because it is a very serious issue. We wish that the Prime Minister picks interest and helps Ugandans; otherwise, if we leave it to the minister – Yesterday, the minister seemed very ignorant about what was going on in this country. Thank you.

3.04
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. In the same vein, I saw in my constituency policemen wondering what was happening on polling day. 

The District Police Commander (DPC) and the Resident District Commissioner (RDC) were not aware of some security operatives in the constituency. They were telling the DPC, “You are not our commander”. People were being arrested and taken away by some people in Uganda Peoples Defence Forces (UPDF) uniforms but the DPC was not in charge. 

Whereas we are asking the Prime Minister to take interest in this, we also want the Inspector General of Police to tell us whether he is in charge of internal security in this country or whether he has given it up and somebody else is in charge. Otherwise, the police in Buhweju County seemed helpless as somebody else was saying, “I am the commander in this operation.”

THE SPEAKER: I do not know whether the Prime Minister wishes to say something about this issue.

3.05
THE PRIME MINISTER AND LEADER OF GOVERNMENT BUSINESS (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I note the points that have been raised by colleagues concerning the security issues. 

It is right that the responsible minister, and indeed Government, takes interest, and we always do anyway. It is the obligation of Government to protect Ugandans. When any Ugandan is affected, Government must get involved to know why and take appropriate action. Therefore, the minister responsible for internal affairs will be able –(Interruption) 

MR SSEWUNGU: Thank you, Rt Hon. Prime Minister. I would like to seek clarification from you. We have been having elections. The President was busy campaigning and the Speaker was not here, but you did not campaign. Are you getting this information for the first time or have you been unaware about what is taking place? 

That is the clarification I seek because from your response, you seem unaware of what is happening. We know you are the Prime Minister who should be following what is taking place in the country. Rt Hon. Prime Minister, are you hearing about this problem for the first time? Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Prime Minister, please conclude.

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, I am hearing the case raised by hon. Ssemujju for the first time. Nevertheless, Government has closely followed any case where the security of the people of Uganda has been affected.

Secondly, the question about the Minister of Internal Affairs consulting the IGP or heads of different departments is normal. It is perfectly in order that political leaders may, from time to time, as necessary, seek information from the officers that are technically responsible.

Finally, let us wait for a statement on the matter from the Minister of Internal Affairs and then if there is need, there can be further discussion on it. Nevertheless, as we all know, Government takes this matter of security for all Ugandans very seriously.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the Minister of Internal Affairs is directed to come to this House on Tuesday to give us a report on the issue of the missing vendor but also on the violation of human rights during the election period. I think for that one, you do not need time to consult; it is in the past, so Tuesday next week.

MR SSEMUJJU: The name of the vendor who was kidnapped is Sharif Kato, and he was kidnapped on Sunday.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you. That will now add to our records, for ease of the work of the Minister of Internal Affairs to establish the whereabouts of Sharif Kato. 

3.09
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you. In the same spirit, I would like to congratulate you, Madam Speaker, for winning the election in your district. I also congratulate all the other Members who made it back to the House. I thank God for bringing me back to Parliament. 

I am raising a matter of national importance. Schools were closed in March 2020 and indeed at that time it was necessary. However, there is a very big problem. Parents do not know the state of schools as we talk now. Some schools have reopened. They are teaching in hiding, yet there is no official communication from the Ministry of Education and Sports or Government. We would like to know – it is almost coming to a year when children are not going to school. For the candidates who were allowed to go back to school, we have not got any report concerning the effects of COVID-19 and how they are moving.

Madam Speaker, internet is not functioning well. Some institutions had resumed using Zoom. When you go to our neighbours in Rwanda, Kenya and Tanzania, children are learning. Children staying home is a very big problem and yet there is nothing being shown by Government to give us hope. (Interruption)

MR JOHNSON MUYANJA: Madam Speaker, the information I would like to give my colleague as a teacher and chairman of many private schools is that the Government of Uganda assured financial institutions that they would reschedule loans up to January, 2021. I called hon. Ssewungu over this matter today as I was still on my way here and that is why he has allowed me to give him information.

Many schools have now started receiving letters from banks and other financial institutions, telling them that they are not going to reschedule their loans because Government assured them that schools would reopen in January 2021. What is going to happen to the many institutions if the banks and directors of schools are not aware of what is happening? Parents do not know when schools will start. That is the information I wanted to give to hon. Ssewungu. 

MR MACHO: Madam Speaker, I was born at the border of Kenya and Uganda. Kenya has reopened schools. Every morning, more than five coasters and buses come to Busia in Uganda to pick children to go and study in Kenya. As this situation is going on, the parents who are Ugandans in Busia are wondering what is happening with Uganda. 

The National COVID-19 Taskforce is very silent on issues of education. For one year, parents have been left in the dark. Children have become child labourers while others are getting pregnant. Some children have become hawkers and business is just going on normally.

I would like to inform the whole country and my colleagues who are here that in Kenya, where education is going on, there are no COVID-19 cases at all that are being reported, because they are observing standard operating procedures. Why don’t we do the same so that we take our children back to school? Parents are fatigued staying home with their children. This is also going to bring educational gaps for our children. Thank you.

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, I think these ministers should be independent. 

Makerere University has already given a circular to students that they are going to get orientation online, but Zoom is not functioning. When you go to Makerere University Business School (MUBS), parents have already paid for hostel and admission fees for their children to start studying. The students, however, cannot access the institution. 

Some of us who are professionals in education cannot keep quiet with this kind of situation. Let us know the fate of our children because we are killing them. There is no indicator whatsoever in any district that there is anything taking place to prepare schools for reopening since they were closed. 

THE SPEAKER: Can we ask the Minister of Education and Sports – 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, the honourable member here has some information. This is a very serious matter for some of us because teachers are suffering. 

MR SEBAGGALA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Thank you, hon. Ssewungu, for giving way. What is really annoying us is that many international schools are operating. However, when it comes to local schools, the Government is silent yet, there are few Ugandans who can afford international schools. 

We know we are living in the era of COVID-19. However, we must find a way of living with this virus since we do not know when the cure will be found. Therefore, let us ensure that schools are reopened. 

The Government should also direct banks – if the Government is not sure that schools are going to reopen next month – to reschedule loans for the schools. 

MR SSEMUJJU: Thank you. Schools closed when parents had just paid fees. When we took back candidates, that money was never considered. In the case of MUBS, we have just paid tuition because the students have been admitted. They said they are starting on 1 February 2021. Parents have even paid for hostels. However, there is a statement in the newspapers that universities have been stopped from reopening. What will the fate of these students be? 

Each new student at MUBS pays Shs 2 million, which is separate from the hostel fees. People have borrowed money. We have already lost the money we paid before the term was interrupted. Again, we are paying more money. Can Government tell us what the fate of people’s money, which they are paying without guidance, is going to be? 

MR SSEWUNGU: Madam Speaker, as I conclude, let me read this message from where my daughter, who is in Primary One, is studying: “Dear Kampala Junior Academy parents, e-classes for third term are starting this Monday, 1 February 2021. Kindly, register to join the programme.” There is a contact number that is given.

If you are telling hon. Ssewungu, a professional teacher, that a child in Primary One is going to be attending third term classes through e-learning, then what kind of confusion are we facing? That is why we fought the Shs 320 billion for buying radios for learners. This money would have been sent out to help prepare schools for first term by this time. 

Madam Speaker, thank you for giving us this time. We are in a dire state and it seems Government is quiet. When you watch hon. Muyingo talking about education on television, he is not himself, yet he is a professional. I do not know why. I believe the answer will come here.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, I believe the country would like to know where we stand. Are we reopening schools or not? What are the circumstances? It is really urgent that Government makes a statement on this issue. 

3.16
THE PRIME MINISTER (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I agree with you. I would like to, however, correct a picture that has been presented here that a lot of things are happening in the education sector but Government is just keeping silent. That is not correct. 

What is the correct position? One, since the beginning of the pandemic, the education sector has been thoroughly monitored and assisted by Government. 

Two, it is true that schools were reopened for candidate classes that are due to sit their exams, while the rest of the students were at home, so that they could complete their syllabi in order to be adequately prepared for their final examinations.

Three, Government is monitoring the situation. By the way, one of the issues discussed in last Monday’s Cabinet meeting was the question of schools and when to reopen them. The matter is still under discussion. We are involving the scientific team that is handling and advising Government on COVID-19, so that the decision we take is a well-considered one and will be good for the students, parents and the country.

On the question of school fees and other related financial matters, the Ministry of Education and Sports together with parents will do their best to ensure that the matter is properly sorted out for the benefit of all of us. 

Mr okupa: Thank you, Madam Speaker. If this can help, I would like to propose that the Prime Minister comes back with a proper and comprehensive statement. Let him not say, “I am going to delegate this to the Ministry of Internal Affairs or Ministry of Education and Sports.” He is the Leader of Government Business. We have this weekend. 

On Tuesday, the Prime Minister can come back here with a statement on the issues that have been raised in education. We are hearing that students are supposed to go and register online yet the internet is off. He should come with all those details.

On the issue of masks, we read yesterday about what happened in the Ministry of Health. We passed Shs 89 billion for masks but the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Health was lamenting that there is a debt of Shs 35 billion. Only 71 districts got masks. What happened?

Madam Speaker, these are the issues which have raised here, including those on human rights. The Prime Minister should bring a statement on Tuesday on behalf of the Government covering these areas, so that we are able to raise supplementary questions thereafter and the country gets to know which way we are going. 

Otherwise, from the way we are moving, it is like we have left everything to God to handle yet for some of these things, you do not have to bother God. The Prime Minister can be in a better position to help bring this to the attention of the country, so that we get to know how to move in terms of education, health, human rights and any other business that Members have raised here. Thank you.

Mr kibalya: Madam Speaker, it is unfortunate that we are taking a lot of time on this issue. We request, in good spirit, that the Prime Minister understands where we are coming from.

I have a child I pay fees for, who studies in Busitema Hospital. We were forced to buy smart phones in November for these children. The communication was clear that if somebody could not access e-learning on smart phones, they would repeat the class, so we had to buy the phones. We would like the Prime Minister and Government, for areas where you do not have information, to take the information so that we make right the things that are wrong.  

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can insist the way you are doing now and so can everybody else, but things in this country as far as education is concerned are not right at all. Every school is doing whatever they want and so is everybody else. Private schools are doing their own things. They are managing maybe from another planet –(Interruption)

Mr ssewungu: Madam Speaker, I would like to inform the honourable member that what the Prime Minister is saying is not very true. It is this House again that fought to send back candidate classes for examinations. In education, at a district level, communication is done through circulars that come from the ministry. When you do not have communication coming from Government or lower sectors of education, there is no official communication at all.

Madam Speaker, the Prime Minister is here. He would have come to you first to ask to give us information about what is taking place. However, we are raising these as matters of national importance and he is putting up defences after we have given our problems.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, the issue is that you are not coming out very fast to handle issues that must be dealt with clearly. You are the Leader of Government Business. We are saying that there is nothing happening; there is no communication. Even the minister fears to tell us the truth on television but you are ever sitting in Cabinet. When you tell us about Cabinet now, what do we get from you? 

This matter is not about the Democratic Party (DP) or National Unity Platform (NUP); it is about our children and their future. It must be official from districts. However, if districts are doing different things and are not aware of what is taking place, then there is no communication. That is what we are saying, Rt Hon. Prime Minister.

3.24
Ms jane avur (NRM, Woman Representative, Pakwach): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate you for winning your elections and all other colleagues here for having participated in the recent elections.

I would like to appreciate Members who have raised this issue on reopening of schools. I would like to draw the attention of the House to the fact that we did not only go through COVID-19 in the last one year but also about half of the country was flooded. A number of Government institutions, including schools, have been submerged.

I would like to know from the Prime Minister what plans Government has for those schools that have been submerged as they plan to reopen schools. What plans do they have for our children? Where do they go to school?

Right now, in some parts of the country, even for candidate classes that have been reopened, our children have failed to go back to school because they have to cross a number of water bodies using boats, which parents cannot manage. I need to get that clearly from the Prime Minister. Thank you.

The Speaker: Honourable members, I remember some time back, I think it was in October, the Minister of Internal Affairs came to the Floor of this House and said that he was going to address issues of areas, which are flooded. However, the report has never come. We need it.

Rt Hon. Prime Minister, you can see there is another very important issue. I think we should have an official Government position so that you guide the country. Can it be done next Wednesday? - Okay, let us put it on Tuesday.

Dr rugunda: Madam Speaker, let us not congest Tuesday with too many things. Let us give time to the responsible Government ministers and ministries to thoroughly look at the issues. In the course of the week, we can agree on the actual timing, when they will come and give exhaustive information to honourable members and the country –(Interruption)

Mr ssemujju: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, there are parents who are paying fees right now. You are saying you will go to - Cabinet takes time; can you tell them if they should continue paying fees or should not?

Dr rugunda: I propose that Thursday would be an appropriate day for proper answers to these points raised.

3.26
The leader of the opposition (Ms Betty Aol): Madam Speaker, let me congratulate you and all the colleagues who went through in the elections.

I would like to inform the Prime Minister that Thursday will be 4 February. Why can’t we bring this up on 2 February so that you also help us? You must know that the quality of the population of a country is judged by its education. Therefore, let us prioritise it.

You cannot say that Tuesday is congested. That means that you are not prioritising education. Let us prioritise it. We can now see very clearly that appointing someone with very many schools a minister means that he can compromise certain things in education. This is now work for you to do. 

Let us prioritise education. We want the quality of our population to continuously improve instead of going backwards. We do not want to take steps backwards.

The Speaker: Honourable members, the statement on education should come on Wednesday. Thank you.

Mr nandala-mafabi: Thank you, Madam Speaker. On Wednesday, we shall have local council elections and all of us must vote. I would suggest that before you rule, if we have elections on Wednesday - The Minister of Education and Sports has been around since time immemorial and I am sure they have also been grappling with this matter. I am certain that by Tuesday morning or even tomorrow, they can be ready. 

What we are talking about is a very serious matter. That is why I feel hurt that we have ministers who have no school-going children, because they have passed that age. They are not concerned about the people of Uganda. If they had school-going children, they would have got concerned.

Madam Speaker, wouldn’t it be procedurally right that they come and brief us on Tuesday? They could even come tomorrow because it is a very serious issue. 

The Prime Minister went to Mwiri, which has been destroyed and paid for by the Government. All his children have finished school and they are abroad. However, the majority of us have children here and we are suffering. Wouldn’t it be procedurally right that on Tuesday or tomorrow, we have this report, Madam Speaker? 

THE SPEAKER: I have already ruled that we shall have it on Wednesday. 

3.30 
MR HENRY KIBALYA (NRM, Bugabula County South, Kamuli): Thank you, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance that I raise concerns the customer-funded electricity connection programme that was started by this Government in 2018. 

The Government, in a move to intensify electricity connectivity and have poor Ugandans from Bugabula South also enjoy what is enjoyed in Kampala, agreed to have free electricity connection for whoever had no long distance connection, to have power connected to his or her house. 

On 9 December 2020, the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) wrote to all departments in the country saying they had suspended the free connection programme and that whoever wanted to have power connected to their house was supposed to pay. If one did not require a pole, for example, then one had to pay Shs 720,883. If one had a pole that did not require insulation, one was to pay Shs 2,387,472. If one pole required insulation, then you were supposed to pay Shs 2,741,188. 

Madam Speaker, the COVID-19 situation has destroyed the country. People spent their little money wiring their houses expecting free connections but all of a sudden, the programme was stopped. The reason was simple; that the Government, since that programme was put in place as a result of a policy, had not paid ERA to fund the programme. That is why ERA had no option but to suspend the programme. This leaves –(Interruption)

MR KISA: Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The information I would like to give the House also concerns citizens who had previously paid for electricity connection and those that just paid for it recently. 

It is almost coming to a year but Umeme has failed to give them power. When they made such a pronouncement, those citizens were not considered in as far as getting electricity was concerned. That is the dilemma Ugandans are facing. Thank you. 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you. Madam Speaker, in the same spirit, the letter that was written had a clause concerning those that had applied and wished to do the self-funded connection. However, they said that they fall in the same category, whether they had applied or not. It did not matter whether you had paid the Shs 20,000 that was required or not. Even if you had applied three years ago, you were to pay the same amount of money like somebody applying now. That is what the letter says. 

Since the Prime Minister and most of the ministers are here, we need to get the Government's position as far as this is concerned. Before Parliament went on recess, there was a motion that had requested the Government to look into the situation of having Ugandans access free power and water but it collapsed. 

In this line –(Interruption) 

MR SSEBAGGALA: Thank you very much for giving way. This is all over the country. Many people have paid for electricity connection but up to now, they have not been connected. The reason for the delay is probably Umeme. 

We would like to know whether it is because of the Umeme contract that had some kind of confusion. The Government should come out and tell us what the position of Umeme is. Is Umeme still in control or they got another service provider? 

MR KIBALYA: Our prayer, Madam Speaker, is for the Government to come to the rescue of the consumers and live to the expectations of the 2018 policy so that consumers and Ugandans benefit. By getting free power, does the Government feel like this is too much? 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we went for elections, this matter had been raised and we expected the Minister of Energy and Mineral Development to come and give us an answer. It is even more urgent now because there seems to be no clear position on the way forward on free power connections.  

Therefore, the minister should come and update the House on this situation, on Thursday next week. 

3.36
MR GAFFA MBWATEKAMWA (NRM, Kasambya County, Mubende): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. The matter of national importance I am raising is about the Emyooga money. 

You are aware that the President promised Ugandans, mainly the vulnerable groups, access to the Emyooga money but it has become political. They only tell people that they are supposed to access the money – people have sold their land, goats, pigs, rabbits, dogs and much more because of this money. 

My concern is that in addition to being promised access to this money, people do not know how much they are supposed to benefit from it. They have also been told to open bank accounts with microfinance support centres to co-fund the project. Some are told to co-fund it with Shs 100,000 or even up to Shs 300,000. Therefore, one wonders if the Government really wants to get people out of poverty, when they tell people to save Shs 100,000. If they had the Shs 100,000, they would have got themselves out of poverty. 

My Government is trying to cheat my constituents. It is like previously when we had Caring for Orphans, Widows and Elderly Ltd (COWE) – if you remember the credit scheme, which was –(Interruption) 

MR KIBALYA: Thank you, honourable colleague, for giving way. What is very interesting in this Emyooga scenario is that they say it is at constituency level. 

I am the chairman of a constituency called Bugabula South but I do not know a single group supposed to benefit from this project. I have not been briefed of any step going on but I hear of Emyooga in the office of the RDC and the ministry in charge of microfinance. The minister in charge of microfinance also directs his things from Kyotera and governs in Kamuli. It is a very funny scenario. 

The President will announce on television that Emyooga money is coming and he will be clear but when you go to address the people, they will ask you about this money. They have spent money, as hon. Mbwatekamwa has said. Madam Speaker, people have invested and bribed to be in the Emyooga system.

MR MBWATEKAMWA: Thank you, colleagues, for giving me that information. Madam Speaker, what is more hurting is that in the constituencies of some ministers like that of hon. Haruna Kasolo, people were given Emyooga money because they are “special”. However, the rest of the Ugandans have not benefited from this money, including those in my constituency and Kamuli.

My prayer is that Government comes immediately and informs this House how much - (Interjection) - both Igara West and Kasambya. Government should tell this House how much each group is supposed to benefit and what the essence of co-funding is if they really want to get people out of poverty.

Secondly, when are we accessing money? Is Government going to keep singing Emyooga? It is too political. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: Rt Hon. Prime Minister, during the campaign period, I was asked many questions about Emyooga, so I invited the Minister of State for Microfinance to come to Kamuli to address our people. However, I see complications in the bureaucracy because you can only access it through an apex organisation at the top of the constituency. Therefore, a peasant in this sub-county must meet another peasant and another and then form a body. 

I thought this was really too bureaucratic. I do not know if you can review it but to me, it was very unsatisfactory that I must form a constituency association before I can get money. Perhaps you may want to look at it but the Minister of State for Microfinance should come and update the House on this issue on Thursday next week.

3.42
MR ABDULATIF SEBAGGALA (Independent, Kawempe Division North, Kampala): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also congratulate you and the honourable colleagues who made it to the Eleventh Parliament.

Madam Speaker, as you are aware, Uganda was supposed to participate in the Dubai Expo 2020. However, due to COVID-19, the expo was postponed. My greatest concern is that we were given one of the prime areas in Dubai for our stall simply because of our good relations with the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Madam Remmy.

Many countries displayed and decorated their stalls. The information we are currently getting is that Uganda’s stall is the only one that is not decorated and they are thinking about degrading us to areas farther away from the prime area that we had been given to market our products. We are just lucky that due to COVID-19, they postponed.

Madam Speaker, we are a country that is involved in agriculture and we were supposed to use this opportunity to export and display our potential in the Dubai Expo 2020. I would like to ask the Prime Minister about their preparedness and whether the stall that had been given to us is not going to be taken away because of our reluctance to decorate it and to ensure that we are ready - (Member timed out.)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the last time we discussed this issue, the House resolved that the Government should facilitate the funding for the establishment of this office. I think we have not had an update on whether the Government eventually got money. Maybe the Prime Minister could tell us where we stand with the Dubai Expo 2020.

3.44
THE PRIME MINISTER (Dr Ruhakana Rugunda): Madam Speaker, I agree with the general views given by the honourable member that Uganda has a prime location for the Dubai Expo 2020. I know that Government is fully committed to fulfilling its obligations to ensure that this prime place is properly developed and decorated. We will follow up this matter to ensure that indeed, Uganda performs as it has promised and as is expected.

MR SEBAGGALA: Madam Speaker, this is how we lose out on offers. You remember the Prime Minister of India’s offer to Uganda; up to now, we do not know where we are because of the reluctance that the Prime Minister is showing. 

We have said that they are contemplating degrading us from the prime area that was given to us to another area. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs just wanted Shs 1.6 billion to take it up but the finance ministry said it was the Uganda Export Promotion Board that must do it. Therefore, there is confusion about what is going on in as far as the Dubai Expo 2020 is concerned.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, as I had indicated earlier, we had resolved that the Government should find money for this facility. Can we get a report from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on whether you got the money or not?

3.46
MS ANIFA KAWOOYA (NRM, Woman Representative, Sembabule): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to add my voice to congratulate you and the rest of the colleagues who made it and to comfort those who did not make it that there is always a second or third chance.

This is exactly why I rose. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and our Government taking things for granted has made us lose many chances, as a country. Sometime back, the Government of India offered us space to build our embassy. I was the Chairperson of Equal Opportunities Committee then and I put a lot of effort through your office but we lost that prime land. The same thing happened in Denmark and France. Now, the honourable member has raised the issue of the Dubai Expo. What we wanted to hear from the Government is an assurance. 

When we come to this House, we pass resolutions and humbly request Government to find money so that we do not lose out on these prime offers. However, when you say that you will follow up on the matter about the Expo 2020 - we are now in 2021 - we wanted an assurance; did Government put aside this money so that once this money is there, this House can move on again to see the way forward? We cannot continue in this way. We are passing requests and resolutions for Government to look for funds and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs has never come here to explain to us its current foreign policy on COVID-19.

I would like to pray that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is compelled to come here and give us a comprehensive report. 

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, in 2018 when Prime Minister Narendra Modi was here, he gave a grant to Uganda to establish health facilities. I think the Government has an obligation to tell us whether we have rejected the grant or not. Don’t we want it? Why has nothing happened since 2018?

I would like answers from the foreign office and from you, Prime Minister, about the grant from India, the resource centre in Jinja at the source of the Nile and the convention centre. These are all grants. We would like to know about the Dubai Expo. Are we agreeing to be moved out for failure to showcase what we are? Prime Minister, we would like a statement on these two issues. 

DR RUGUNDA: Madam Speaker, the views of colleagues are well taken. It is true that there should be communication from Government on the issue of these grants and progress on Expo 2020. That information is going to be given by the relevant Government ministries. 

THE SPEAKER: Madam Clerk, please write to those ministries and invite them to come and report to us on Thursday next week. Let us have all those statements on that day. 

LAYING OF PAPERS

 REPORT OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL ON THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS OF – 

(I) THE DIVISIONS IN HOIMA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.51
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the divisions in Hoima Municipal Council for the year ended 30 June 2014. I beg to lay.

(II) KAHOORA DIVISION, HOIMA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.51
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Kahoora Division, Hoima Municipal Council, for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(III) BUJUMBURA DIVISION, HOIMA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Bujumbura Division, Hoima Municipal Council, for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(IV) THE DIVISIONS IN FORT PORTAL MUNICIPAL COUNCIL FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.52
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of the divisions in Fort Portal Municipal Council for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(V) ALITO SUB-COUNTY KOLE DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.53
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Alito Sub-County, Kole District, for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(VI) OKOLLO SUB-COUNTY ARUA DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.53
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Okollo Sub-County, Arua District, for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(VII) OMUGO SUB-COUNTY ARUA DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.54
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Omugo Sub-County Arua, District, for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(VIII) SUB-COUNTIES IN ARUA DISTRICT FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2014

3.54
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of sub-counties in Arua District for the year ended 30 June 2014.

(IX) VEGETABLE OIL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT PHASE 2 (VOPDP 2) IFAD LOAN NO.806-UG FOR THE YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE 2020

3.55
MR FRANCIS MWIJUKYE (FDC, Buhweju County, Buhweju): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the report of the Auditor-General on the financial statements of Vegetable Oil Development Project phase 2 (VOPDP 2) IFAD loan No.806-UG for the year ended 30 June 2020.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much. Honourable members, Item 3 (I -VIII) will be sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government). Item 3(IX) will be sent to the Committee on Public Accounts (Central Government).

LAYING OF PAPERS

TAX EXPENDITURE FOR THE PERIOD OCTOBER TO DECEMBER, 2020, FINANCIAL YEAR 2020/2021

3.56
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the tax expenditure for the period October to December 2020 for the Financial Year 2020/2021.

THE SPEAKER: It is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

LAYING OF PAPERS

ANNUAL REPORT OF THE PETROLEUM FUND FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2019/2020

3.57
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Madam Speaker, I beg to lay on the Table the Annual Report of the Petroleum Fund for the Financial Year 2019/2020.

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, the report is sent to the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development for perusal and report back.

Honourable members, we have not been able to discuss the reports of the agencies and they are very important. Maybe, as the Committee on Rules, Privileges and Discipline is reviewing the rules for the Eleventh Parliament, they could handle the issue of the agency reports. They are very important but we have not had time to discuss them. It is only the Committee on Public Accounts (Local Government) that has considered some of those reports. 

Honourable members, today we expected to handle the report of the Budget Committee on the National Budget Framework Paper for financial years 2020/2021-2025/2026. As you know, we have a deadline. This report must be in by the 1st of February. They are still working, so I would like to suspend the House for one hour. We shall reconvene at 5.00 p.m. when the committee has completed.

(The House was suspended at 3.58 p.m.)

(On resumption at 5.39 p.m., the Speaker presiding_)

THE SPEAKER: Honourable members, before we receive the National Budget Framework Paper, I have more sad news. We have received news of the death of hon. Gertrude Kulany. She was a Member of Parliament in the Seventh Parliament. She died this morning at Kampala Hospital. Hon. Kulany has been battling cancer.

She was in the National Resistance Council (NRC) from 1989 to 1996; a Constituent Assembly Delegate from 1993 to 1995; a board member of National Social Security Fund from 1995 to 1996; a member of the Seventh Parliament from 2001 to 2006; Deputy Director, Research, at the NRM Secretariat from 2005 to 2006; board member, National Enterprise Corporation from 2014 to 2015.

She will be laid to rest on Sunday, 31 January 2021 at Siron in Kapchorwa Town Council. I ask Members to stand up for a minute of silence.

(Members rose and observed a moment of silence.)

MOTION FOR ADOPTION OF THE REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON BUDGET ON THE NATIONAL BUDGET FRAMEWORK PAPER FOR THE FINANCIAL YEARS 2021/2022 – 2025/2026

5.42
THE VICE-CHAIRPERSON COMMITTEE ON BUDGET (Mr Patrick Isiagi): Madam Speaker, permit me to remove my mask so that Members can hear me better since there is enough distance; COVID-19 does not go beyond two metres, according to scientific evidence.

Madam Speaker, we have scrutinised and processed, together with sectoral committees, the National Budget Framework Paper in record scientific time and we can now lay the report on the Table for the Hansard. I beg to lay, Madam Speaker.

Sectoral committees worked right from Monday to yesterday and today, we are here to present the report.

According to Article 90 and Article 155(4) of the Constitution and sections 9(1) to 9(8) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as amended, and the Rules of Procedure of Parliament, the National Budget Framework Paper, through the Committee on Budget, is presented to the House for approval by 1st February of each year. We are hereby, today, presenting the report of the committee, which is in compliance with the existing provisions and regulations. 

The committee scrutinised the National Budget Framework Paper, together with the sectoral committees, and structured it in two parts.

Part one indicates the legal compliance, state of the economy, performance highlights and medium-term fiscal framework. Part two includes recommendations from the sectors on interventions the Executive is expected to make before they submit the policy statements.

Madam Speaker, we should take note that the National Budget Framework Paper of this year is done in the second year of operationalisation of the National Development Plan III (NDP III). However, it is the first year of the alignment of the National Budget Framework Paper and budget allocations to NDP III. You recall that it was last year around the same time when we passed the NDP III, which we are now following.  

According to Section 9(5) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, the minister shall, with the approval of Cabinet, submit the National Budget Framework Paper to Parliament by 31 December. This happened, so we passed that legal requirement.

We also assessed the alignment of the National Budget Framework Paper and the legal requirements. We assessed the alignment to the macro economy. We assessed the alignment to NDP III of the budget strategy. We also assessed the alignment of the National Budget Framework Paper allocations investment to the NDP III. 

In our assessment, the National Budget Framework Paper fully aligns to the legal requirements, it fully aligns to the macro-economic highlights, and it fully aligns to the strategy. However, the allocations are not well aligned, reason being that it is the first year of the alignment of the National Budget Framework Paper to the allocations and also because of the interference of COVID-19.

Honourable colleagues, you recall that the NDP III was laid on the Table last year before we had understood COVID-19. Therefore, the planning was done before COVID-19 came in. The envelope and all operations got affected by this pandemic. You can look at table 2 on the programme allocation alignment and see how it departs from the NDP III. There are those that depart adversely and others, for example the allocations on the Integrated Transport Infrastructure Services is departing by around 9.6 per cent. 

The NDP III had arranged our budget to be prepared in a programme based manner. In fact, now the programme for the Integrated Transport Infrastructure Services was meant to have 7.7 per cent of our budget if we are to do the allocations properly, but it rose to 17.3 per cent of the whole budget. Another area, which rose terribly, is governance and security. The plan was supposed to have 14 per cent of the budget allocations but in our Budget Framework Paper, we have 22.4 per cent. So, table 3, has a number of inconsistencies as far as allocations are concerned. 

I would like to straightaway cite the recommendations of the committee. The committee strongly recommends that separate programmes for the Legislature and Judiciary must be developed. In this alignment of the programmes, a number of sectors add up to a programme and there is a lead agency for each programme; for example, there are sectors like works and lands, which add up to housing. They link a number of sectors to one programme, with a lead agency.

Parliament and the Judiciary are concerned that they are linked to governance. That means the governance head supervises Parliament, which, according to the committee, is very inconsistent with separation of the different Arms of Government. 

The committee, therefore, has recommended that the Government should design different programmes for Parliament and the Judiciary. They should not be supervised by another sub-programme of the Government. 

The committee also recommends that in order to reduce duplication of roles and mandates, some authorities and agencies should be merged along with the new programmes with the view of increasing efficiency and rationalisation of resources.

 The committee also notes that in 2018, a Public Service restructuring report that aimed at stopping mushrooming of different agencies and duplication of mandates was produced but it has not been implemented up to now. So, Government must take it up.

State of the Economy and Budget Performance Highlights
We measure, in real GDP growth, poverty and unemployment. We measure inflation and public debt. Honourable colleagues, you will excuse me because the alignment of our document is not flowing; it is scientific. I am tracing some of the information from somewhere. 

For real GDP growth, the economy, in the Financial Year 2019/2020, grew by 2.9 per cent as opposed to what was recorded in the Financial Year 2018/2019, that was projected at 6.3 per cent. Madam Speaker, the growth of the economy fell in the last financial year due to the effects of COVID-19.

The industrial sector was most hit by the impact of the pandemic, growing by just 2.2 per cent, compared to the projected 10 per cent growth. This was very disastrous. The medium-term average GDP growth outlook has been revised because of the effects of COVID-19, from the 6.3 per cent to 4.3 per cent. As such, in the Financial Year 2021/2022, we have envisaged the growth to get back to 6.0 per cent, if all factors are constant. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that growth needs to become more inclusive. Interventions targeting 68.9 per cent households trapped in subsistence agriculture must be enforced to remove this population from that bracket. The committee urges the Government to invest resources as per the budget strategy such as growth, job creation and poverty eradication. Therefore, allocation must be invested in growth sectors.

Poverty and unemployment were measured in the Budget Framework Paper but the percentage of people living below the poverty line, who earn $1 per day, increased from 19.7 per cent in Financial Year 2012/2013 to 21.4 per cent in financial 2017/2018.  Again, this measure is disastrous. We have to therefore work towards improving. 

This poverty measure has been regionalised. The most hit regions include Bukedi at 43.7 per cent, Busoga at 37.5 per cent, Bugisu at 34.5 per cent, and Teso, which is the worst hit, at 25.1 per cent. Therefore, our people in Government must work hard to ensure that these poverty levels are reversed. It is very unacceptable to have an economy, where all those people can survive on less than $1 a day. 

In this regard, the committee recommends that Government prioritises the following interventions to strengthen the private sector for job creation:

1. 	Scale up the provision of affordable long-term financing by development financial institutions like Uganda Development Bank (UDB) and other Government banks like Pride Microfinance, Post Bank, among others.

2. 	The Government should promote Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) through well-developed industrial parks. In the past, we said we would develop 22 industrial parks but up to now, even Namanve Industrial Park, which we started with, is not well serviced and yet they have been in-flows of borrowing. Madam Speaker, Namanve has been fully financed for services like roads, water and electricity to be provided, but up to now, it is not yet done. 

3. 	We expect the Government to increase public contracts and subcontracts that are awarded to local firms. There are many awards, which are pegged to foreign companies. Government must support small and medium-term enterprises to access export markets and affordable credits.

4. 	Government should strengthen local economic development to accelerate transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial production in particular, by connecting smallholders with value chains.

Our agriculture sector has a lot of disconnect between research, inputs, value addition and marketing. The researchers do research and it stops there. Therefore, we urge Government to do linkages in the whole value-chain of agriculture. There is no country among the modern and most developed countries that developed before modernising their agriculture. If there is any, somebody can tell us and we benchmark.

Madam Speaker, we also urge Government to control and reduce the amount of domestic arrears by putting in place mechanisms that will control its creation. You remember that in the past, Government brought measures like controlling the expenditure purchase by commitment control system but domestic arrears are escalating. By domestic arrears escalating, we are holding on the money for our citizens. This means that we draw back the poverty right from the start, from the source of the goods to the middleman and the developer. Therefore, Government must stop creating domestic arrears and pay all she owes to the suppliers. 

Further, Government should expand retirement benefits to increase national savings. 

We also expect Government to enhance the provision of tax incentives to our key private sector players - of course, without abuse. If not, wrong characters can misuse this but we expect seriousness in controlling and scrutinising the priority areas.

Government should also support the private sector to provide apprenticeships and provision of seed capital in kind to young graduates, to enhance their take-off – Emyooga. We heard about it. Money was provided but in some areas it has never reached the wanainchi.

Madam Speaker, we must ensure that this money – of course, we do not expect Government to act like a conman. Once you provide money, it must reach people. We pray that after voting, the money will not disappear. We expect this flow to move up to the end. 

In addition, Government needs to build a critical mass of skilled and competent labour force to be able to take up job opportunities, mainly in the service and industry sectors. Therefore, Government must review the current Skilling Uganda strategy. 

Government should also build existing capacity of vocational and tertiary institutions to improve on the skills of our youth.

Another measure was inflation. The committee observes that annual headline inflation averaged at three per cent in the Financial Year 2019/2020. That is a slight decline from 3.1 per cent recorded in the previous financial year. This low inflation was largely due to lower food prices and low global oil prices. The subdued food prices were attributed to mainly stable food supplies in the market due to favourable weather conditions. 

On the other hand, core inflation, which excludes volatile prices of food and energy, averaged still at 3.1 per cent, lower than the 3.8 per cent recorded in the Financial Year 2018/2019. This outturn is attributed to low aggregate demand arising mainly from less economic activity in the second half of the financial year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Madam Speaker, we also checked the public debt, which stood at $15.27 billion - that is around Shs 56.959 trillion (of which Shs 38.9 trillion is external debt and Shs 17.9 trillion is domestic) - as at June 2020. This is equivalent to 41 per cent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in nominal terms and 31.8 per cent in present value terms.

The committee observes that for the period of one year, public debt increased from Shs 10.5 trillion – the public debt grew within one year, representing a growth of 23 per cent. The need for extra borrowing to cover for both the revenue and shortfalls of COVID-19 related expenditure was the main driver. Because of low collections due to low activity during the COVID-19 pandemic, the borrowing went high by 23 per cent within that year. 

As Government continues to support economic recovery through provision of the economic stimulus package to various sectors, debt is projected to increase further over the near term, amounting to 47.6 per cent of GDP in present value terms, and peaking up to 49.7 per cent. If we do not put in place control measures, we will run into trouble, Madam Speaker.

In this regard, the committee recommends that there is a critical need to scale up revenue mobilisation through effective operationalisation of domestic revenue mobilisation strategy, aimed at increasing domestic revenue by 0.5 per cent of GDP each year.

In addition, there is need to sequence borrowing towards projects with priority given to those generating bigger growth and dividends.

Madam Speaker, I bring you highlights of the medium fiscal framework. That is the budget strategy and allocations for 2020/2021, which we already completed and are in operation. However, our interest is the Financial Year 2021/2022, which we are heading to. 

Government has projected a resource envelope of Shs 45.658 trillion, which is an increase of Shs 163 billion when compared with the previous financial year. The projected increase in resource in-flows is mainly attributed to projected increase in domestic borrowing for domestic debt re-financing. Therefore, much as it increases, it does not mean that these funds are for operational activities; rather, it is refinancing debt. We shall be using debt to pay debt and as such, it remains in the same cycle.

Domestic revenues are expected to decline by Shs 117 billion. This is on account of decline of non-tax revenue by Shs 270 billion and appropriation in aid.

A summary of the resource envelope for the coming financial year is in table 4, on page 17 of the report. We compare the financial years 2019/2020, 2020/2021 and 2021/2022.

We expect domestic revenue among our resources at Shs 21,908.6 billion. That is broken down into tax revenue where we expect to collect taxes amounting to Shs 20.131 trillion this coming financial year and the non-tax revenue amounts to Shs 864 billion. 

There are agencies like local authorities that were allowed to retain the local revenue they collect. That amounts to Shs 913 billion. A sum of Shs 698 billion is for central Government and Shs 215.6 billion for local government. 

Madam Speaker, in the coming financial year, Government is not planning to draw any funds from the Petroleum Fund. In the past years, we drew Shs 197.7 billion in 2019/2020 and drew Shs 56 billion in 2020/2021. However, it is projected to be zero shillings this coming year. When we interrogated further, we were informed that in our coffers of the Petroleum Fund, there is Shs 60 billion. We expect that by the end of this financial year, the money should have grown to about Shs 200 billion. It was decided that that money should not be drawn. 

We expect grants, amounting to Shs 1.908 trillion, and they will flow in. Part of it is budget support, which is Shs 77 billion, and project support, which is tied to particular projects, will be Shs 1.831 trillion. 

Domestic borrowing is expected to grow higher and will be Shs 11.512 trillion. Domestic financing, which is the money coming in to run the new activities, will be Shs 2.483 trillion. The refinancing debt to pay debt is Shs 8.547 trillion. That is money you do not expect to allocate to other activities. It is not discretionary.  

In the National Budget Framework Paper, it was projected to recapitalise Bank of Uganda with Shs 481.7 billion (Refer to table 4). The committee scrutinised this amount and interfaced with all the stakeholders; neither the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development nor Bank of Uganda could defend this amount. 

The committee, therefore, recommends that there is nothing to be approved for recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda this coming financial year. (Applause) 

There has been an argument that recapitalising Bank of Uganda is mopping up excess liquidity but it is not a budgetary issue here. It is a monetary issue – an instrument that Bank of Uganda can apply. It does not require for it to come into the budget. Therefore, it is tantamount to confusion. 

The committee recommends that that money should be cleared off but if this money was to come from our coffers - taxes and other sources - but not borrowing, we would have recommended reallocating it to other sectors. Domestically, it is still borrowed money and so, we believe that we must go down in borrowing and go for concessional loans because domestic borrowing crowds the lenders and raises interest rates. Our private sector gets a problem with high interest rates because Government is borrowing from our local banks and other rich organisations. 

External Borrowing

We expect to borrow Shs 10.329 trillion externally the next financial year. This is broken down into budget support and project support. The amount of Shs 3.585 trillion is for budget support and Shs 6.743 trillion for project support. Thus, a total envelope of Shs 45,658,100,000,000, which is rising from last year’s projection of Shs 45,494,700,000,000. 

The committee observed that in the resource envelope of Shs 45.658 trillion, only Shs 29.538 trillion is discretionary. That is money, which you can transfer from one allocation to another. Most of this balance (about Shs 16 trillion) is for debt repayment. Only Shs 170 billion is for wage, pension and gratuity shortfall and Shs 215 billion appropriation in aid. 

Therefore, after a comprehensive scrutiny, the committee observed that resources for the capitalisation of the Bank of Uganda were not required as the Bank of Uganda's operational capital is not impaired at all. It is in this regard that the committee recommends that the resource envelope is revised downwards given this development. We recommend that we revise the resource envelope and subtract the Shs 481 billion. 

Madam Speaker, as we have that resource envelope, we can now go and look at the allocations/investment of this money. As I mentioned, for most of this money, only Shs 29.538 trillion is discretionary and the rest is fixed to particulars like – 

1. 	Domestic refinancing will take Shs 8.54 trillion; that is debt to clear debt. 

2. 	Interest on debt will take Shs 4.96 trillion. 

3. 	External debt repayments amortisation – we shall pay these debts (interest on capital) in bits. We are going to pay Shs 1.826 trillion this year. Therefore, the interest is even more than the capital we are paying. This shows that the debt will continue accumulating and will take us many years to clear, unless we tighten our belt to stop borrowing. 

4. 	Domestic arrears has been allocated Shs 400 billion this year, out of around Shs 2 trillion. 

The committee observed that the resource allocation has been structured along the programme approach primed on the 18 development programmes identified in NDP III, which is okay, using the resource allocations. It is evident that about 34.46 per cent is fixed and that leaves us with a balance for our programmes.

Madam Speaker, the real money allocations for these programmes is in table 4. In the interest of time, Members can look through that record –(Interjections)- It is uploaded on the intranet but it is not opening because of the internet. The minister in charge of ICT is around and he is most likely to sort that out. 
The committee observes that the current resource allocation indicates that our fiscal operations are in distress, as debt related payments continue to rise. As of now, it is at 34.46 per cent of the indicative budget. 

The committee has identified priority areas that need additional funding. This is captured in part two of the report, which came after our sector committees interrogated the Budget Framework Paper. They reported and had recommendations that Government should invest more funds especially in the growth sectors of agriculture, manufacturing, human capital development and skilling. I would like to lay on the Table the details of the recommendations and the summary, which is attached. 

I am sorry, Madam Speaker, time could not allow us to upload this one but I can lay it on Table. 

The committee recommends that Government goes back and observes those recommendations and puts them into practice, not by exploding the envelope but by re-organising from within so that these areas are improved. This is where investment must be done for us to realise growth.

Madam Speaker, going through this annex will take us a lot of time. The Members can refer to it from their iPads. I heard a Member whisper to me that she is preparing a minority report but up to now I have not seen it. It seems the Member gave up on the idea –(Interjections)- Hon. Ogwal says that she has prepared and uploaded it already; may I have a copy for the committee? 

Madam Speaker, allow me thank the committee members whom we summoned from their fatigue without any additional facilitation and they were able to report for committee work. I also thank our sector committees that were busy even over the weekend handling this matter and preparing reports.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable chairperson and members of the Budget Committee. I, too, would like to thank the honourable members for hitting the ground running and ensuring that they present this report before we are caught by the deadline. Thank you so much. Where is the minority report?

6.22
MS CECILIA OGWAL (FDC, Woman Representative, Dokolo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Being my maiden speech since the hectic electoral exercises, I would like to congratulate you and the Members who have made it to the Eleventh Parliament. I would like to encourage those who lost that when God closes one door, He opens double doors.

Madam Speaker, the chairperson of the committee said that the minority report is signed by an individual, but the record shows that it is signed by two members - hon. Muwanga Kivumbi and myself.

I would like to go through the main points only and leave the preliminaries, which are the legal requirements for the presentation of a minority report.

I wish to point out that the areas of dissent are the following:

1. 	The failure of the Budget Framework Paper to comply with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility.
2. 	Failure to cater for productive sectors of the economy as envisaged in NDP III.
3. 	Underfunding of the health sector for proper management of the COVID-19 pandemic.
4. 	Lack of alignment to NDP III.
5. 	Credibility of the resource envelope and inconsistency with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended.

Madam Speaker, the document the chairperson has just unveiled to Parliament has failed to comply with the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, yet compliance is very important. You note that the Government has been increasing its expenditure through the creation of additional administrative units, eroding the gains of additional revenues as a consequence.

Currently, the fiscal deficit for financial year 2021/2022 is projected to reach 10.7 per cent and decline to seven per cent, which is all above the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility (CFR) threshold of three per cent of GDP. This implies that the target set for fiscal deficit in the CFR has not been met, making the Budget Framework Paper for financial year 2021/2022 and the medium term inconsistent with the CFR. This is completely against section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, 2015 as amended.

Inconsistency with the CFR implies that additional debt has to be raised to finance the excesses created in the budget that were not envisaged in the CFR. Section 7 of the Public Finance Management (Amendment) Act, 2015 provides for incidences of deviations from the charter. In this regard, Government must prove that economic shocks that resulted from the COVID-19 led to an increase in the fiscal deficit of 7.7 per cent of GDP in financial year 2020/2021 by 10.7 per cent, and that is a gap of about 7.7 per cent of GDP.

Hence, the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2021/2022 in the medium term should not be approved under the current Charter of Fiscal Responsibility, which limits fiscal policy to a deficit of only three per cent of the GDP, because it has been contravened already.

Alternatively, Government may opt for fiscal consolidation and reduce spending significantly to attain a fiscal deficit outturn of three per cent of the GDP in the Financial Year 2020/2021.

The second area of concern is the failure to cater for the productive sector of the economy in preparing the document we have just received. The area of serious concern is agro-industrialisation. The agro-industrialisation programme under the Budget Framework Paper for the financial years 2021-2026 will receive Shs 1.5 trillion, representing 5.1 per cent from the three per cent from the Financial Year 2019/2020.

Agriculture, as you know, remains Uganda’s most important sector, employing almost 34 million Ugandans. We propose, in this minority report, that effective policy and funding in plantation agriculture must be undertaken in order to effectively address the crisis being experienced in the sugar industry at the moment. 

Therefore, we urge the Government to increase spending on agriculture by up to 15 per cent, as demanded by the African Union Maputo Protocol.

It should also be noted that the processes for the preparation for the National Irrigation Master Plan for Uganda were not provided for in this Budget Framework Paper. Therefore, we recommend that an allocation be made to this programme to cater for this particular item since it promotes production in the agricultural sector and also promotes industrialisation. 

Madam Speaker, we further recommend increased funding to tourism and trade, which are both sectors in the production sector, to balance off excesses in the expenditure. 

We also observed underfunding in the health sector. In this particular sector, however, although we have observed the funding gap, we demand that there must be an audit of the monies that were received through public donation, development partners and the budget line. Before we can accurately come up with the gap in the budget, we need to know how much was received in cash, how much in kind and what the gap is. Right now, nobody has been able to tell us how much was received through that avenue of donations and through the partners. 

Finally, I would like to highlight non-compliance to NDP III. The Budget Framework Paper, in its presentation before the committee, noted the following in regard to non-compliance:

1. 	Lower target of the GDP in the Financial Year 2021/2022 by 4.3 per cent.

2. 	Deviation of the programme allocation as presented in the table in the document of the Budget Framework Paper.

3. 	Increment in the nominal public debt and levels of domestic financing in the Budget Framework Paper are higher than those in the NDP III. 

Therefore, failure to align resources with the NDP is centrally inconsistent with the provision of the Public Finance Management Act, Section 9(3). The section mandates the minister to present a Budget Framework Paper which is consistent with the NDP III. 

Therefore, if the National Planning Authority, which is mandated to produce the plan, shows that it is unsatisfactory, then the committee cannot gloss over this inconsistency. Moreover, the plan is in the second year of its implementation. The Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, in his brief to the committee, also acknowledged this inconsistency, which is very serious. The question is: when is this matter going to be addressed before NDP III comes to a close next year?

Credibility of the Resource Envelope and Inconsistencies with the Public Finance Management Act, 2015, as Amended 

While we agree with the majority on the issue of the Shs 481 billion for the recapitalisation of the Bank of Uganda, we feel that this is a matter, which was disowned by a very senior officer in that institution - the Deputy Governor. This implies that this matter should not be abandoned. It must be followed up and investigated because it raises the issue of integrity. 

According to Section 9(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, Schedule 3, Section 5, Parliament must approve the total resource envelope ceiling to be used in preparation of the annual budget, which right now we do not have because of those discrepancies we have just highlighted. 

The implication of having the recapitalisation of the Bank of Uganda from the resource envelope is:
    1. The interest cost on the budget;
    2. The resource envelope is overstated; therefore, the resource envelope and the budget should be readjusted to attain a balanced budget. 

The basis of inclusion or recapitalisation funds to the central bank without any justification questions the integrity of the budget intervention in totality. The fiscal authority needs to merit Government’s intervention based on properly articulated plans guided by the NDP III.

I beg to submit and hope that the Leader of Government Business has taken note. During the presentation by the Chairman of the Budget Committee, I observed that there was no Leader of Government Business present and I also observed that the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development was not available. He has just appeared because I took trouble to search around. I am happy that the minister has finally appeared because this document is very important and they should take interest in it. 

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, hon. Ogwal, for the minority report. Honourable members, you have received both reports. Do you have any comments? 

6.36
MS JACQUILINE AMONGIN (NRM, Woman Representative, Ngora): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to commend the chairperson of the Committee on Budget for the report and also thank Members for the minority report that has been presented. I take cognisance of the two reports. 

We are still in a situation of COVID-19 and the drama all over the world is, “Wash your hands with soap”. That means accessibility to water should have been top priority in the coming budget. As you realise, allocation to water, as read by the chairperson has not doubled. 

I would have expected in a situation whereby we are looking at re-opening schools, we would ask, “Does every school have access to a water point?” And what budget allocation has been added to the water sector and environment? That is my key area of focus.

Whereas I appreciate the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget for allocating money to a programme, which was recently initiated – Emyooga_- it is very imperative that we take audit of what the previous money has done. As it is, the Emyooga programme is not going very well. I am looking at the majority of the people in Uganda, who are committed, being women, and sharing the Shs 30 million given to a whole constituency is a complication. Whereas Government initiates programmes, which are meant to benefit the people, as we appropriate resources in Parliament it is very imperative that we audit some of these projects.

Lastly, I would like to congratulate my colleagues who have won. We salute you because it was not an easy election. To those who lost, hon. Cecilia Ogwal has told us that when a door closes, another one opens; we are looking forward.

When you look at the poverty levels, the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget comes from a region where poverty levels are very alarming in Uganda. The allocation for particular sub regions like Busoga and Teso is wanting. Parliament should look at a situation where affirmative action places are given special focus and the money is doubled. What is Shs 49 billion for over 70 districts? That is very little money when you divide it. Let us look at the wasteful expenditure, which we can save, and focus the money to those regions. Thank you.

6.40
MR MICHAEL TIMUZIGU (NRM, Kajara County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the committee for this report because it was not easy. I concur with the committee as far as most of the recommendations are concerned. 

The committee recommends that Ugandans should access the export market but as a member of the Committee on Trade, Industry and Tourism, we discovered that the Uganda Export Promotion Board was not given enough money. We should recommend that the Uganda Export Promotion Board be given more funds. I agree with you hon. Cecilia Ogwal on the issue of other countries that have ministries for exports.

Secondly, public debt is going higher and higher every year, which means that at a certain point, we shall lose this country to opportunists. I observed that the borrowed money this year will be 114 per cent of the tax revenue. Where are we going to collect this money from? It means we are going to borrow more than we are going to collect from our business. That means we are running a business, which has already collapsed. For us who know that business runs and has got to survive know that if we run Government business like that, at a certain point, it will collapse.

On the recapitalisation of Bank of Uganda, I do not understand why we are recapitalising the Bank of Uganda, which earns interest from commercial banks every year. How do we now recapitalise a bank, which has profits? Does that mean that at a certain point, it decapitalised?? Who decapitalised the central bank such that we can know why we are recapitalising it? 

Lastly, this report shows that we need to be efficient as we budget for the country. If we keep on expanding the envelope - Someone said we should not over expand. When you budget for Shs 45 trillion when you have Shs 21 trillion from tax revenue, that means the envelope is empty and there is no way of expanding it. 

We have to work towards efficiency and make sure that all the budgets we are making, from this one to the coming ones, are sustainable, so that we keep our economy instead of losing it to other countries. I thank you.

6.43
MS ELIZABETH KARUNGI (NRM, Woman Representative, Kanungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to thank the chairperson for working tirelessly with other colleagues to come out with this report to us. 

Madam Speaker, I thank God that you are back and we shall keep on. I know what it means to us women. I also congratulate those who made it. To those of us who are going into other issues, we also thank God.

I would like to talk about the understaffing we have in our schools. In this Budget Framework Paper, I have not seen anything concerning that. 

I have visited many schools in my district, and I believe what I saw is the same thing happening in other schools in other districts. You find a Government primary school that has three teachers on the payroll and all the others are being catered for by the parents. In most cases, parents fail and these teachers end up being disappointed; they do not do what they were supposed to. I pray that when we are further scrutinising this budget, we look into this because it is very important.

Recapitalising Bank of Uganda has always been brought up every financial year. I am happy that they looked at it and found that weakness. I believe that money is much. 

I also found out the same issues on local government in the Budget Framework Paper. They were bringing items, which were supposed to be under other ministries into the Ministry of Local Government and the Ministry of Public Service. I do not know why, but I think it is may be meant to misuse this money. 

We need to analyse this budget very well and make sure that we look for money. I believe if we are to sit down and take enough time, we would get money, which would fund most of our programmes without further borrowing. 

However, one of the habits I have seen with us Ugandans is that we like eating too much and some of us do not care where we are leaving the nation. Going into debts every year – in and out – shows that we are not thinking about our country.

Madam Speaker, I would like to implore every Member here to sit down and scrutinise this budget very well. We can see where we can cut and add. Otherwise, the money which we have would even be enough to cater for all our projects.

I would like to thank you, Madam Speaker.

THE SPEAKER: I invite hon. Akurut. However, I have three questions for the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I wonder whether you have been able to find the Shs 5 billion to add to the higher education financing scheme. We were looking for this money last financial year to support another 1,000 children to get the loan. I hope you can find that money because the situation is dire. 

I also would like to know whether the provision for a sugar mill in Busoga has been done. It is a very dire situation and our people are asking where the stimulus package is. Where did it go? How do you access it?

6.48
MS VIOLET AKURUT (NRM, Woman MP, Katakwi): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to add my voice to colleagues who have congratulated you for making it back to the House and also those members who made it back. 

Madam Speaker, I have two concerns in the report of the Committee on Budget. I would like to thank the chairperson of the committee, specifically addressing myself to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. When we looked at the NDP III, we realised that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was placed under regional development. As it has been highlighted here, regional development concerns affirmative action specifically for the regions that were left behind in terms of economic development and the rest of it. When we looked at the details and the objectives under regional development, there is no linkage whatsoever to the objectives of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. There is actually a very big mismatch. I thought the Ministry of Foreign Affairs had been misplaced. 

We are talking of a goal of implementation and management of Uganda’s foreign policy as the key mandate of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, yet on the other hand under regional development, the goal is to accelerate equitable regional economic growth and development, given the background that the chairperson of the committee gave on the consequences of underdevelopment, unemployment and the rest of it all.

As a committee, we made a recommendation that although the NDP III has 18 programme areas, when we scrutinised all these areas, we realised that we cut across 12 of them. More so, we thought we would fit into the programme area of governance and security. We thought that we play a very key role in this area - both the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of East African Community Affairs. 

We therefore thought that it would be imperative for the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development or the committee to make this a stand-alone programme - that is Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of East African Community Affairs. Otherwise, we feel left out as the Ministry of Foreign Affairs because of our core mandate of foreign policy. 

This morning, I remember the issue of the trade expo was brought up. Those are some of the issues we realised. Even when the ministry had come up with a budget of Shs 1.6 billion for this, it was not allowed. This morning, we realised that it was quite important that as Uganda, we market ourselves. We have been given this opportunity but we are not taking it up and it is causing a lot of problems. It looks like we may end up losing out in the Dubai Expo 20. It was actually pushed to October 2021.

Therefore, unless –(Member timed out)- Please, give me a minute to finish. I was recommending to the committee that unless we find money to be able to remain with the space that we were allocated for the Dubai Expo, then we are bound to lose it.

We also made quite a number of recommendations about establishment of foreign missions in strategic countries but still, monies have not been allocated for these.

Madam Speaker, I think it is high time the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development recognised the contribution of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As long as we continue having it as an administrative sector and not a productive sector, we shall not give it much attention. We would recommend that we transfer the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to a productive sector because we know what we contribute in terms of the diaspora, investments that we do, and export promotion. We know how much resources we generate for the country. Therefore, it is high time we shifted the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to a productive sector, not administrative. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.52
MR MOSES KAHIMA (NRM, Ruhaama County, Ntungamo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would also like to add my voice to congratulate those who made it to the Eleventh Parliament, particularly you, Madam Speaker. To my colleagues who did not make it, like I did not, I think there are very many areas, both private and otherwise, where we can continue serving our communities.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank the committee chairperson for the presentation of the report. I was particularly aroused by the presentation of hon. Cecilia Ogwal, when she hinted on the new administrative units that are being made. I would like to implore this House to appreciate that it is a fact that we created new administrative units. Indeed, in the recent elections, all those new administrative units have been able to elect leaders. Unfortunately, these new administrative units were not funded in the last two or three financial years.

I would like to request this House, as we scrutinise the budget for the next financial year, that this is the time we need to consider these new administrative units. When we talk of new administrative units, the finance ministry normally talks of salaries and costs of administration. However, I want to put it to your attention that these people in the new administrative units have been discriminated on service delivery. 

I happen to come from a constituency – Ruhaama constituency – where I have four new town councils which have not been funded in any area of service delivery - talk of roads, water or any Government service in these new town councils. Therefore, I would like to ask this House that as we scrutinize this budget, we need to give serious consideration to these new administrative units, so that we extend services to the people living in these new units. 

I beg to move, Madam Speaker.

6.56
MR FREDRICK ANGURA (NRM, Tororo County South, Tororo): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. Allow me to also take this opportunity to congratulate you and all honourable colleagues who have been elected to the Eleventh Parliament. Like hon. Cecilia Ogwal said, there are other doors that will be opened for those who did not make it.

I also want to take this opportunity to thank the chairperson and committee members of the Committee on Budget and all the sectoral committees that worked around the clock to ensure that we fix this.

Madam Speaker, the chairperson talked of support to the programmes that Government started, especially during the last elections. There is the Emyooga project. How I wish the chairperson had told us that we are going to increase the money being offered for Emyooga, from the Shs 560 million that we are yet to see in the constituencies, to something that will be handy for the various groups that have expressed interest in it. The money should be increased to at least more than Shs 1 billion per constituency. 

Since you have talked of reallocations, this should be put into consideration for this money to move. It is unfortunate that many of our people got interested in these groups. They were even lured to pay money to join and be beneficiaries but the money seems to have delayed to come. I hope it will be increased when the reallocations start. 

I would also like to thank my colleague who raised a concern about the funding of administrative units. It is true that we created these units but I am also waiting for a bigger one, when we will be giving West Budama their own district. However, let us also fund these ones that have started. The Shs 200 million that has been provided is little. I hope we can get more money for the sub-counties and town councils that have taken off. 

We have already started electing leaders and, definitely, they will need to get more resources. This will also help Government to take services nearer to the people. We need that funding to be considered and maybe revised to something better. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

6.59
MR JOSEPH KOLUO (NRM, Toroma County, Katakwi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I would also like to congratulate you and all other Members who have made it to the Eleventh Parliament. 

I have two issues. One, I happen to be a member of the Committee on Tourism, Trade and Industry. I know that there is an agency called Uganda Tourism Board. In order for us to revive the tourism sector of our country, which has been affected by COVID-19, Uganda Tourism Board needs to be given enough money. This is because, according to the budget, they have a deficit of about Shs 9 billion, so they cannot do anything to market and promote our country.

Two, I am happy with the chairman about his point on Skilling Uganda. The problem, however, is that in some areas - for example, in my constituency, Toroma, we do not have a vocational school where the youth can access these skills, yet they are interested in doing courses such as catering, bakery, carpentry and joinery, woodwork and so on. On top of that, money should be given to these youth as start-up capital for them to start working. Thank you very much.

7.00
MR LAWRENCE BIYIKA (NRM, Ora County, Zombo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. First of all, I would like to congratulate you and all other Members who have made it back to the Eleventh Parliament. I thank the chairperson of the committee and his members for the report. However, I listened to the report with a lot of pain. 

First of all, I have known few countries that have developed because they have addressed the backbones to their economies. In any budget, they would give priority to those sectors, the first one being energy. Without strong, cheap and reliable energy, no country can move to the next level of the economy. So, priority should be given to that sector so that people can have access to energy which is strong, reliable and cheap. 

The second issue is transport, especially the roads. Being an agricultural country, farmers can neither sell their agricultural produce at the farm gate or take it to distant markets if the road transport system is okay. Therefore, priority should be given to the transport sector and in areas where we have productive resources that can boost our economy.

The third issue is industrialisation. We need to industrialise but we cannot do it if we do not have strong industrial energy. We cannot industrialise if we do not have a reliable transport system. Our industries are mostly going to be agro-based. That means we must double production in agriculture so that part of the produce can go to power the industries. Otherwise, we shall have food insecurity. Therefore, the agro-based sectors need to be supported. 

We have left out a very lucrative sector, which can develop Uganda more than the oil we are talking about - the mineral sector. If we develop the mineral sector, there will be no need to borrow money from anybody. We shall use our minerals to boost our economy because the money to develop Uganda must come from Uganda, not from outside.

Also, the education sector should be more about skilling people - turning a mango into juice and keeping it for one year, not writing essays about mangoes. We also need value addition. 

We need to address the issue of mortality. Addressing mortality does not mean building hospitals with no drugs and nurses. Addressing mortality means we must address the issue of water, sanitation, hygiene, nutrition and energy access, especially for cooking and lighting. This is because most mothers are dying because of indoor air pollution. They are spending all the little money they got from agriculture in hospital. Such an economy cannot grow. We must address these preventable diseases instead of building big hospitals with no drugs. 

There is also the issue of making money available cheaply to the population that wants to – Once we have energy and transport, people can borrow money to start their businesses but the interest rate should be low. 

We must also address corruption. We are borrowing money but is the money being spent properly in the economy or corruption is taking it away? All those areas need to be checked. 

Our efforts in addressing the challenges of our economy are scattered. Let me take irrigation, for example. You get irrigation money in the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Water and Environment and others. Why don’t we consolidate the money so that these efforts can be used to address the challenges to the economy?

These are my concerns. The question is: how do you generate money from taxes from the population that is not working? What happens if the 68 per cent smallholder farmers are spending all their money on medical bills? 

Concerning the trade that we are talking about, – the Uganda Export Promotion Board - have we identified our priority products, the ones we have comparative advantage in, that we can trade in? If you take coffee, for example, we have Arabica Coffee here and in Ethiopia; which one do we have comparative advantage in? Those are things that should be addressed. 

Finally, like the higher education and the sugar situation in Busoga that the Speaker talked about, there is also the issue of the roads in Zombo. I hope roads will be catered for in this budget. Zombo is a food basket which can help the population to generate income and pay taxes to power the economy. That road from Nebbi to Vurra should be a priority in this budget. Thank you very much.

7.09
Mr Elijah okupa (FDC, Kasilo County, Serere): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Allow me to make a few comments on the Budget Framework Paper. 

A number of colleagues have raised the issue of the new administrative units. Before we broke off for the campaigns, hon. Bahati and the Minister of Local Government promised to bring a law for the establishment of the cities. You may recall that at one time, we delayed the passing of money for the cities. When is the law for these administrative units coming? There is still a problem. We need that to be done first before we allocate money to them. 

The issue of compensation needs to be captured here because it was a very hot issue during campaigns. Therefore, I would like to request the Government to be organised. I saw a team come from nowhere to do verification. I have a court ruling regarding Teso specifically, where the court directed that there should be joint verification. What we saw during campaigns was only a few officials from the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs and the Attorney-General’s Chambers going alone, with a list different from what was submitted in the court, upon which the ruling was given. 

Madam Speaker, if we are to solve this matter, we do not want a situation where year in and year out, we are asking for money for compensation, just like what is happening in Luwero Triangle. It has not ended at all. If we do things in an ad hoc manner, we shall fail to have the correct information. Why can’t the Government deal with the matter, which had been decided in court, instead of working with the ad hoc groups? The money for verification and compensation should be provided this financial year.

On the issue of domestic arrears – this is taxpayers’ money. Why can’t the Government pay that money? How can you only provide Shs 400 billion out of the Shs 2 trillion? When this money is injected into the economy, it will multiply and you will be able to tax it and generate more money. I really do not know what type of economics we are applying to deal with this matter. The Government is holding the money yet our businessmen are stuck and they cannot pay back the loans they acquired. No wonder sometimes our contract price for roads per kilometre is very expensive. 

I have looked at the Committee of Legal and Parliamentary Affairs’ report here but I do not know at what point this will be handled. We are going to have an increase in the number of Members of Parliament by 99, yet our building may take another two years to be completed. Are we providing office accommodation for the 99 new Members who are coming? This must be captured and taken seriously in the next budget, so that we avoid the issue of Members hanging around. Even up to now, there are three or four Members who share offices. Therefore, I think this should be captured and provided for in the budget.

On the issue of Emyooga, we provided Shs 500 billion. It is supposed to be about Shs 30 million per group, not Shs 30 million per constituency like a Member said. It is Shs 30 million per group. What did I see during that time? There were just a few groups selected and they were given cash. I found a pastor with Shs 25 million in his gumboots. I thought this money would go to the accounts since these are supposed to be organised groups? I think the minister responsible must handle this properly, otherwise we are going to mess it up –(Interjections)– Yes, it was thuggery.

On the issue of the Shs 481 billion, I would like to thank the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development and the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget. How on earth can someone smuggle this amount of money into the budget? We recapitalised Bank of Uganda twice in the last financial years. Now, the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development asks for Shs 481 billion. 

I would like to thank and congratulate the Deputy Governor of Bank of Uganda because he came and said, “We do not need that money.” Can the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development tell us where they picked this figure from, which they put in the budget? Who wanted to steal this money? I think Parliament deserves an answer. Who smuggled that money into the Budget Framework Paper?

On the issue of export promotion, it was surprising to find that they cut the budget of the Uganda Export Promotion Board and the Uganda Tourism Board. They are cutting money across the board for workshops, seminars and travels. What are the core activities of the Uganda Tourism Board? It is promotion, advertising, travelling and public relations. Now, how can you cut their budget because you think those are non-core activities? Therefore, money must be provided for them so that we can earn more from those areas. 

As I conclude, I would like to say that the President, for the last three campaigns, has pledged to build a road from Kumi to Serere, Kasilo, Soroti, and connecting Kamuli to Buyende and to Bukungu. I would like to thank the Government because the construction of the ferry landing site has started. 

Driving from Kampala to Kamuli, the road is good. However, I think we must be coordinated because as you head to the ferry, it is a murrum road. In 2011, 2016, 2020 and 2021, the President kept on saying, “We are going to tarmac this road.” It has now been 15 years. I would be happy if this this road is constructed when Museveni is still in power. 

Therefore, I would like to implore the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to provide resources for this road starting from Kamuli-Bukungu-Kagwara-Serere-Soroti to Kumi. We shall be very appreciative of the role of Government if that road is constructed when Museveni is still in power.

The issue of the Social Assistance Grant for Empowerment (SAGE) was also a big problem during campaigns. In our areas, they started with people at the age of 80 years while in other areas, they started with those at 65 years old and they have continued with them. How can we discriminate the elderly in terms of payment?  I think the Government needs to harmonise the age for SAGE. Our Constitution does not allow discrimination. We shall go to the Constitutional Court for a ruling on this matter. We cannot allow a situation where old people from one region are paid at 65 years old and others are paid at 80 years old. That should not be allowed. 

Once again, I would like to thank the two committees for the work well done. However, I would like to request that we address the recommendations that the committees have put forward. 

Lastly, the public must stop harassing Parliament. Madam Speaker, on the first day when you called us back from recess, it was short notice and most of the committee members did not show up. It was all over the media that Parliament failed to work. They did not know that we had to travel from the constituencies. Now, haven’t we accomplished the work? We know our role and we have done it. Thank you.

The Speaker: The press asked me why Members had not come. I told them, “It was short notice. It is a one-off; you are going to see them,” and here they are.

7. 14
Mr tom alero (NRM, West Moyo County, Moyo): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to congratulate those who have made it back to Parliament. Those who have not, please take it easy. I also thank the committee for the report.

The committee talked about income for the budget support and money coming from taxes, grants, loans, donations and other development partners for infrastructure development as well as other social services. However, I would like to emphasise the issue of corruption. 

Very often, when we pass loan requests and the money is given to the responsible officers to use for development, it is misappropriated, embezzled and stolen. We would be very happy if the money that which is borrowed or given for development is put to proper use. Otherwise, we may not develop and poverty will continue wrecking our societies. 

Madam Speaker, once again, I would like to emphasise the issue of corruption and also re-echo what my colleague had talked about - the issue of compensation for cattle raids. I remember that there was a time we brought a petition here on cattle that was raided by the people from South Sudan. There were some hooligans - armed men - who came from South Sudan and they raided over 1000 cattle from Metu, Moyo and Dufile sub counties. I would be very happy if there is also compensation for those cattle that were raided from Barr, Arapi and Padibe. It should be included in our budget for this season. 

Therefore, I would like to request the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development to also include Moyo District in the compensation for cattle raids. Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. 

7.18 
MR SILAS AOGON (Independent, Kumi Municipality, Kumi): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. For the last 35 years, the road that runs from Kumi via Ngora to Serere over to Agwara and back to Soroti has been in a very bad shape. I would like to reiterate what my colleague has just said here - Government, where are you? We need our road constructed. Government, where are you?

The problem we have here is regional imbalance. We borrow money and we pay back together but when we are spending, we do not spend together. Development is not equitable; it is not balanced. Where is the Government? We deserve our portion. We would love to see a situation where this road is tarmacked by a credible company, not just any company. 

Secondly, we have problems in the health service sector. We have a health centre IV with a building which is supposed to house a theatre for operating women giving birth by caesarean section. However, for more than 10 years, it has not been equipped. Government, where are you? I think it is very pertinent for you to attend to our matters. 

If we are talking about a discretionary budget of around Shs 29 trillion and the rest is borrowed money, why are we borrowing? I thought that we should be putting money into the health sector because that is where we have realised problems arising out of COVID-19. Why are we diverting the money to the military and other issues? If you have a wound and you are not treating it but you are instead treating the back that is normal, what is the problem? The Government should come and do something for us. 

I would like to comment on the Bank of Uganda. If we are talking about Shs 481 billion being money that we are to allocate for purposes of recapitalisation on the basis of impairment, I would like to ask a question: who audits this impairment of reserves in Bank of Uganda? Where is the report for the last five years or so, so that we get to know how impaired it has been? Why do we take money to a place we do not know about? 

Madam Speaker, we need answers concerning this impairment that we are talking about. Where does it arise from? How do we get to know that it is serious? Who audits the impairment in Bank of Uganda? This is because Shs 481 billion is not small money. If it goes there, that money probably risks getting lost. 

Madam Speaker, we have issues in agriculture. In Teso, we have been relying on animals such as oxen but Government has refused to compensate our people. Who bewitched the Government so that they never compensate the Iteso? Government, where are you? Please, compensate us. Give the Iteso what they deserve. If you gave back this money to the people of Teso, it would help to lift the economy, which is technically defeated now. Where is Government? We need answers. I thank you. 

7.21
MR BENARD ATIKU (Independent, Ayivu County, Arua): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I join the rest of the colleagues in congratulating those who have made it through to the Eleventh Parliament. I thank the Chairperson of the Committee on Budget for the report and also my senior, hon. Cecilia Ogwal, for the minority report. 

Going straight to matters of concern from the report, I would like to comment on the issue of the rising debt burden. I have been a member of the Committee on National Economy since the Ninth Parliament. I keep sitting in that committee and approving loan requests but when you come to audit or evaluate what the loan money has done on the ground, honourable members, I think it is time we became concerned. 

I would like to pick one example of a loan facility that we passed in the Ninth Parliament called Project for Financial Inclusion in Rural Areas (PROFIRA) that was meant to build capacity of SACCOs. I am sorry to report that this money has been swindled without any traceable impact on the ground. 

In Arua or West Nile, an implementing partner was identified but some elements within the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, especially the Microfinance Department, colluded with these agencies. Money was loaded into an individual’s account. It was accounted for by that individual and shared. When you go on the ground to find the would-be beneficiary SACCOs, you do not find any traces.

For the particular case in Arua, the individual on whose account money was loaded disappeared with it. That is how it ended. That is borrowed money accruing interest to the tune of Shs 4 trillion and is supposed to be paid back by tax payers. 

Madam Speaker, the issue of our debt burden and these loans that Government keeps bringing before Parliament to be processed needs to be addressed. Otherwise, we are borrowing money that has no impact and is being swindled by a few individuals in the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. 

Added to the above, the issue on compensation of animals that have been lost has been discussed here severally. The Kony war victims in the greater North have not been addressed squarely. I am speaking this with bitterness and particular interest in the people from West Nile. Something has been done in Acholi, Lango and Teso sub regions, but nothing is being done for the people of West Nile. 

The Kony war affected very many people, myself inclusive, when I was still a student, travelling from Kampala to St Joseph’s College Omabaci in Arua, where I was studying. Up to now, the whereabouts of the remains of my classmate are unknown. We have business men that have lost their buses, trucks, goods and lives but nothing is being mentioned. 

In this recently concluded general elections, the Kony war victims gathered in Arua. They mobilised themselves and threatened to boycott the elections. This is because in every election, people use the plight of these people as a campaign tool. It is high time we started including some of these issues for actual implementation in the National Budget Framework Paper. This is in order for us to heal the wounds of the Kony war in the northern region. 

Lastly, Madam Speaker, allow me to re-echo the issue of SAGE. I am sure honourable colleagues here got that feedback. Particularly, from my constituency, our people feel cheated that at the time when SAGE is being rolled out across the country, the age of the beneficiaries is raised to 80, leaving out most of the people who are hopeful of getting this money. 

Madam Speaker, if you remember very well, in the general election campaigns of 2015/2016, this concern was raised. In addition, with our forum for SAGE in this Parliament, we kept pushing to have this facility rolled out across the country so that all districts benefit. However, when the time came for rolling out across the country, the issue of segregation along age was brought on board. This is something that we must consider –(Member timed out.) 

7.27
MR CHARLES ABACACON (FDC, Erute County North, Lira): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I have been touched by the committee chairperson’s report and the minority report as well. I thank them for the presentations. Let me also join those who have congratulated you for making it and those who have made it to the Eleventh Parliament - I missed it.

My concern is that if the World Bank was serious, Uganda should have been declared a bankrupt country. It is unfortunate that we are borrowing from John to pay Peter’s debt and more or less at a higher rate because the interest rate is involved, yet when we borrow, we do not see real work being carried out.

I think the issue of roads has been overemphasised. We have been talking about Lira to Kamdini Road for the last 5 to 10 years. At night, it takes you five hours on that road but three during the day. Maybe today, if the ministers of works and finance are listening to us, they should take it up immediately. Otherwise, unless they are going to put another law, which does not allow people to demonstrate, and when they demonstrate they can be killed and no compensation can be made, I think that is going to be the only option.

You can imagine that when we are talking about this very important subject - One thing that we have been witnessing is that ministers are always absent and nothing is done about it. They walk away with it thus things are not being implemented.

The second issue I want to comment about is that we are not serious about production. When you look at this country, farmers do not produce for six months and are just there eating what they have already produced in April, May, June, July and August. What has happened to the irrigation systems? We have been endowed with water in this country but we are not making the best use of this water. 

When you go to offices, the best they are doing is corruption; nothing is done about it and they get away with it. I therefore pray that irrigation schemes are emphasised and money should be borrowed to do this because most of our youth are just idle.

We were talking about Emyooga because campaigns were about to start and when they are done, the programme disappears. In my constituency, I did not see the Shs 30 million they were talking about. I was told of the Shs 3 million which was put on some group’s account. Is that what we resolved here?

You can imagine when we resolved here that Shs 10 billion be given to Teso, Lango and Acholi for compensation of the lost property, the President went around saying he was going to give Shs 50 billion; but where has it gone? Why did he make that statement? Of course, he got all the votes in the North this time because of that big lie but is he going to implement it? If not, I tell you that the worst thing we have witnessed which has destroyed the democracy of this country is that we must – I do not know when we are going to stop teargas in this country and then we should ensure that military does not interfere in the elections.

In my constituency, that is what they did in one of the sub-counties. Therefore, what is the meaning of democracy and what is the meaning of UPDF in this country? Is it to protect one person? If we investigated the polling stations where the military voted, we would get wonderful results but we cannot do that because we have no power. That is why they say the Tenth Parliament was not powerful enough to ensure that development takes place throughout the country, and they are right. If you look at it critically, I think you cannot dismiss that. 

Therefore, I pray that for those who are coming here, they should put their foot down to ensure that there is balanced development in this country. Some parts of this country cannot be developed because the interest is vested somewhere. That must be broken. Thank you very much.

7.33
MR JOSEPH SSEWUNGU (DP, Kalungu County West, Kalungu): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like the hon. Isiagi for this good report. The reason why parliamentary records indicate Ssewungu as a backbencher and ministers as frontbenchers is that they have that high level, so that they do work for this country. However, it is very painful that we handle such a serious matter but the ministers concerned do not appear, yet some of them went through unopposed.

As we leave here, we shall find some of them with lead cars hooting everywhere to clear roads for them yet they have no right of way because there is traffic jam in the whole of Kampala and they have done nothing. I do not know what they tell their wives when they go back after a hectic day.

I would like to observe that both the majority and the minority reports did not hit on the issue of agencies. When you talk about Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) and the Uganda Road Fund (URF), we have failed to understand what both of them do. 

Some of us only have murram roads in our areas - for example, I have a road going to Gomba from Bukalasa, Masaka and you will find UNRA with seven vehicles coming to inspect a murram road, and people are there redundant. When you read the URF Act, its duties are not being performed. Now there is Ministry of Works and Uganda Road Fund who are paid very well.

Secondly, you have talked about the Higher Education Student Financing Board; how does Government fail to raise money to lend students who would pay that money after they have studied? I am a member of the Committee on Education; most of these students who applied last year, and I raised this matter on the floor - 15,000 students applied but they were able to take only 3,000. However, reports indicate that those who have completed are paying back very well. That means Government should give this board more money to help those underprivileged students to study. The law we made does not discriminate but the lending process discriminates; they have made it for only science students.

Madam Speaker, you are talking about recapitalisation and decapitalisation of Bank of Uganda; what is Mr Mutebile still doing in Bank of Uganda? He is never there, he cannot walk there, he is carried to the bank and anything can happen. Those of us who attended COSASE meetings saw and learnt the weaknesses of the Governor. Some people have to retire. This man has been given a reappointment but he is almost doing nothing. That is why money is disappearing. Is he put there as a scarecrow or a puppet? People are bypassing him to do what they want. That is why the Deputy Governor, whom we vetted, is coming in to say that they do not need recapitalisation. That is going to be a battle in Bank of Uganda. You will tell me. 

As I conclude, when you visit Kalungu, our roads are better than city roads but go to Kamuli, Madam Speaker, you have murram roads. When you visit Salama Road or Mukwano Road – Let me talk about Skilling Uganda. 

Madam Speaker, you gave us an opportunity to visit India as the Committee on Education and Sports. This is what is happening in India: establishing a factory to manufacture plastic bottles for mineral water or sanitizers needs only US$20,000 and to establish a small toilet paper factory, you need only US$10,000. However, up to now, this country is allowing foreigners to come and establish toilet paper factories. 

A young man in Kamuli or Kalungu, if they are organized, would be able to establish that small factory that makes plastic bottles for mineral water. However, we are still allowing Indians to come into this country to establish such small companies at the cost of our Ugandans. How will you skill your students, if everything, even a washing bay, is established by foreigners? Do you need any skill to learn how to wash a car?

As I conclude, I would like to thank the committee. Commitment to implement all this should be shown by having the bench back there full of officials from finance but none of them is there. After everything, they are going to share the money. We see the houses on social media that people have constructed for themselves –(Interruption) 

This is from the bottom of my heart. I do not know what would be happening if you were not in finance. I am not campaigning for you to be minister again but your colleagues like hon. Kasolo are always on the radio saying funny things about Emyooga and how there is no evaluation of Entandikwa, Boona Bagagawale and others. Thank you for keeping the spirit. You are saving the others by trying your best. Thank you, Madam Speaker.

7.39
MR NATHAN NANDALA-MAFABI (FDC, Budadiri County West, Sironko): Thank you, Madam Speaker. Under Section 13(4) of the Public Finance Management Act, it is clear that when the proposed budget comes to Parliament, the Speaker will commit it to sectoral committees. Section 13(6) says that the annual budget shall be consistent with the National Development Plan. 

Madam Speaker, you are aware the NDP was brought to Parliament at a crisis time. I do not think we read through it and understood it very well when we passed it. Now, we are trying to implement it. There is a reason as to why some ministries are coming up and saying that they have been put the wrong programme and that they were supposed to remain in a sector.

My first proposal would be that for purposes of this budget, we should go back to sectors until the next budget when everybody has understood the NDP III very well. If we go by programmes, it means even ministries should be reduced from the number they are now to 18, because the political head would be the minister and the administrative head the Permanent Secretary (PS), and everything must be curtailed in that line. If we go by that, it looks good to me. 

You remember when the candidate of the NRM was declared elected by the Electoral Commission, Mzee Museveni said that he is going to fight the budget issues and eliminate the thieves. I hope he can start with this one where there are glaring facts that this budget is only aimed at distorting and stealing from Ugandans. Madam Speaker, I can take you through and you will see that this budget is designed for theft.

If he is very serious, why doesn’t he start with the person who budgeted Shs 481 billion for Bank of Uganda? If I want to capitalise my company, I ask myself; it is not you to think for me. Where did the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development get the idea that Bank of Uganda needed capital yet the bank never needed capitalisation? If the President is serious, the persons who included that Shs 481 billion should be the first culprits. That is when we shall prove that he is going to fight corruption and theft in this country.

Madam Speaker, this budget is Shs 46 trillion. We are collecting Shs 17 trillion. It means Shs 29 trillion, which the chairman of the Committee on Budget was making reference to, that it can be moved around – he was not telling us that that is borrowed money. It means that from our collections, we are going to fund the budget by Shs 17 trillion. So, out of Shs 46 trillion, we must borrow Shs 29 trillion to fund it.

We are already servicing debt. I heard the chairperson talking about Shs 6 trillion; no, you forgot the Shs 5 trillion of treasury bills which have matured. That Shs 5 trillion is being rolled over. Therefore, it should be Shs 6 trillion plus Shs 5 trillion, which comes to Shs 11 trillion. This means, Shs 17 trillion minus Shs 11 trillion gives us a balance of Shs 6 trillion. That is for the debt.

On administration, you talked about Shs 16 trillion. This means that from day one, as soon as we approve the budget, we are approving borrowing. I have run through the numbers for borrowing but I am not sure that these are the correct numbers you are mentioning. We are borrowing more every year yet we have remained at Shs 55 trillion for a long time. Where are the other trillions we are borrowing, which hon. Bahati brings here every day? 

We must interrogate this budget seriously, in my view. It will be better for all of us if we did so. Madam Speaker, I saw you crying that Kamuli and Busoga have not developed; that should not be your cry because we are the ones to develop this country. The Constitution of Uganda says that the country shall be developed equally by taking into consideration the underdeveloped places. If we have powers to determine the resources, why do we cry in the public? It is us here to decide today that this road will not be done and we shall do the other instead. 

Hon. Okupa talked about segregation of age; civil servants retire at 60 years. It means that at 60, you are no longer useful; you go home and eat. Why should you retire old men, who have dug their entire lives, at 80 years old? Isn’t that madness? Why retire the ones who sit in chairs, drive good cars and enjoy life at 60 and those who dig from 5.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. are retired at 80? Are we serious? This Parliament should determine that the old people should also retire at 60 years old as the other ones retire because the law says that we retire at 60.

Given these facts, for purposes of adhering to the time, we could go on and pass this but at an appropriate time, we should interrogate this budget. 

These supplementaries have caused us headaches and one of the causes of headache is this: Recently, we passed Shs 86 billion to buy masks. We added Shs 30 billion. If you divide by Shs 2000, those are 59.5 million masks. That means an average Ugandan should get a minimum of three masks. I, Nandala, have never got one. If I did not get, who got mine? I went to my village and villagers do not have masks. Who “ate” the masks? Is this God sleeping? Why doesn’t He take COVID-19 to those who “ate” the masks instead of bringing it to us who never did so? God, do not sleep; wake up! 

Madam Speaker, I am raising this with a heavy heart. Parliament is the one destroying our country and it is important that we come up to speak. Today, I heard people speaking here. I did not know that when you lose elections, you speak better. We should continue speaking here. Never wait to lose an election because Uganda belongs to all of us. 

The Public Finance Management Act, under section 42(3), is very clear and states that the report on management of public debt shall be aligned according to the NDP programme. It is very clear and the chairperson should have told us that according to the NDP programme, this is how the debt was aligned. He is only talking about the 18 programmes but has also left out debt.

A colleague said, we are selling our country and any time, the Chinese will take the airport, they will come and take Parliament, the Ministry of Education, State House and we shall be here; even the police will be taken.

As Parliament, we should look at this budget in totality. Give us some time and we will do it. Let us not be in a hurry, and that is why I would like to agree with what hon. Cecilia Ogwal raised. Instead of taking Emyooga to villagers, it should be taken to the education loan scheme because getting a degree or diploma is also my investment for tomorrow. Why don’t we invest more in the education loan scheme so that boys and girls can borrow instead of having only 3,000 Ugandans out of 15,000 borrow? Where do the 12,000 go? They will end up in the villages smoking weed and becoming destitute yet they are intelligent children who can build this country. 

They asked Indira Gandhi what he could do for his people and one of the things he said was education. Mao Tse Tung was asked what he could do for China and he said, “if you want a forest, plant trees but if you want a country to develop, provide education”. For Uganda to develop, we need education. Thank you.

7.49
THE LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION (Ms Betty Aol): Thank you, Madam Speaker. I would like to start with education. We are just from campaigns but education in Uganda is suffering also because of COVID-19. We need to plan better. A lot of teachers rely on Parents Teachers Association (PTA) contributions but this is not possible with COVID-19. Parents are suffering. Even right now, taking children of primary 7, senior 4 and upward to school is a big challenge to parents. 

I do not know about your areas but it was very unfortunate that when they mentioned poor areas, they never mentioned the Acholi sub-region. It seems to be the poorest because their savings, which were in animals, were removed and never compensated. To date, this has left Acholi sub-region very poor. Members of Parliament and leaders are facing a lot of challenges in trying to see that children go back to school. Therefore, education needs better planning.

Regarding health, go to any hospital or health facility that is Government owned. Our people are referred from Gulu Regional Referral Hospital to clinics. How do you refer people to clinics? Yesterday, I asked them, “do you mean clinics have better laboratories and x-ray facilities?” 

You know, it is mainly children with sickle cell disease - I had gone for a sickle cell disease check-up. They told me that the reagents are never there. I asked my chairperson of the Committee on Health today how we should help our poor people since sickle cell disease is mainly found among poor people. What can we do? He told me that in the Budget Framework Paper, they even lowered the health budget. 

How can we lower the health budget? When you go to a health facility, you find that even the doctors and medical workers do not work well because they are not properly paid. They relax and say, “we were not paid when we worked there”.

For us to be serious, there is need to scrutinise this National Budget Framework Paper better because this was done in a rush. Since it was done under pressure to meet the deadline of 1st February, there is need for us to work more.

When we talk about gender and equity, I do not think that these certificates should be ceremonial. It should be critical work done to make sure that they meet the gender equity requirements so that we serve our people better. We are not serving our people and they are complaining; 35 years but you are still saying, “we are going to.” After 35 years? No way!

They also complained to me about SAGE. I did not know that in some areas, they were taking people of 65 years old. I thought the 80 years requirement was across the board and I kept on telling my people that we would find out. We need to treat all Ugandans equally and fairly.

Madam Speaker, I would like to thank you very much but in trying to scrutinise this budget, allow us to give our comments to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. They should be more serious. How do you talk about recapitalisation of the Bank of Uganda when the Governor has not asked for it? It means that you people are thieves and you steal from poor people. If you were stealing from rich people who are able to meet their basic needs of life, it would be okay. You do not love Ugandans. The Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should style up. Thank you.

7.54
THE MINISTER OF STATE FOR FINANCE, PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (PLANNING) (Mr David Bahati): Thank you very much, Madam Speaker. I also join the rest of the House to congratulate you and our colleagues who were victorious in the elections. For those who did not make it, we wish you the best during this sabbatical leave and we assure you that we are going to work with you in this House to make sure that we move the agenda of this country forward.

I first want to thank the chairperson of the committee and the members for the wonderful report that you have presented to this House. I thank hon. Cecilia Ogwal for the minority report. Unlike the previous minority reports, this has a lot of sense and I can assure you that we are going to pay attention to the issues raised in the minority report.

Hon. Nandala-Mafabi raised an important point of moving from rhetoric to making sure that as a House, when Government brings proposals here, we look at them critically. I would like to begin with him. I wish he was there in the meeting of the Committee on Finance, Planning and Economic Development when committee members were debating this report; he would have made a better contribution here on this Floor. Therefore, Members should also attend these committee sittings and make contributions there so that when a report comes, we have consensus on them.

On the issue of capitalisation of Bank of Uganda. Many Members have raised it and I pray that - The minister, hon. Matia Kasaija, and the Deputy Governor were in the committee and they responded to this issue. However, I think it was not captured well in the report. I wanted to beg that at an appropriate time, the Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development comes and explains properly so that we put this behind us.

On the issue of debt, honourable colleagues, we are running a cash budget. We are not able to collect the resources needed to finance our development plan domestically. Because of that, we have a gap that can only be financed by borrowing. 

Therefore, the focus should be that there is no one who should now say that we cannot borrow. That is not going to be possible. The issue should be that when we borrow, we should make sure that we apply it to areas that grow our economy and in a balanced manner. That is what we are trying to do.

I would like to thank the Committee on National Economy. They have done a great job in ensuring that they came up with guidelines that the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development should follow. On the things that were delaying the implementation of these loans, I can now assure you that we are moving very fast on the implementation.

We need money. We need to borrow to grow the economy. At the same time, we need – The agenda is big and the appetite for services by Ugandans is big. Madam Speaker, as you know, during campaigns, people want roads and schools. It is the duty of all of us, including Parliament, to synthesise these priorities, and that is the purpose of the Budget Framework Paper.

We want to pray and pledge here, Madam Speaker, that when we go back, we will ensure that when we are coming back with the final detailed budget, all these comments that have been made by Parliament - including the three issues that you raised and we have noted - will be captured. They will be reported on during the detailed budget consideration, which will come in April.

However, I would like to thank you for enduring all this time to make sure that we hit the deadline and thank the Members for your input. We want to assure you that we are going to make sure that your comments this time around are implemented, as you have recommended. I thank you.

THE SPEAKER: Thank you very much, honourable minister. I would like to add that I hope that in future, you will be able to tell this House that you have complied with the national objective and directive principle No. XII on balancing equitable development. I want to read it: “The State shall take necessary measures to bring about balanced development of the different areas of Uganda and between the rural and urban areas.”

We want to see more equity.

I would like to assure the Leader of the Opposition that she can pass on her comments to the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development. I would like to say that this has been quick work to beat the deadline but during the detailed consideration of the budget, we shall create time for Members to speak to the issues that would not have been captured. Otherwise, we cannot extend this any further. I now put the question that the question be put.

(Question put and agreed to.)

THE SPEAKER: I put the question that this House adopt the report of the Committee on Budget on the National Budget Framework Paper for Financial Year 2021/2022 to Financial Year 2025/2026.

(Question put and agreed to.)

Report adopted.

THE SPEAKER: House is adjourned to 10 o’clock on Tuesday.

(The House rose at 8.00 p.m. and adjourned until Tuesday, 2 February 2021 at 10.00 a.m.)
